Story_ID: 508215
Speaker 1: My name is Adrienne Jones and I am the interviewer, Neculai Burghelea is the videographer and there are two observers.  Sir, may I get you to state your name and to spell it?
Speaker 2: Absolutely. [HistoryMaker] Etu Evans, E-T-U, E-V-A-N-S.
Speaker 1: What is your date of birth and where were you born?
Speaker 2: Two, two, six, nine [February 2, 1969] Orangeburg, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August 30, 2007.
Speaker 1: And what is the address and location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Well, you're at Harlem Heritage [Harlem Heritage Tours and Cultural Center] located between 115th [Street] and 116th Street.
Speaker 1: On--we're on the 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Malcolm X.
Speaker 2: Malcolm X.
Speaker 1: Oh, we're on Malcolm X Boulevard, pardon me.  What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a celebrity shoe designer, motivational speaker and I run a foundation entitled Solesville: The Etu Evans Foundation [Solesville: Etu Evans Foundation, New York, New York].
Story_ID: 508216
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you five People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'll just ask a quick question and you just respond with whatever comes to mind.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?  My favorite food is broccoli.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year would be Christmas.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is the poets' color, purple.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, Paris [France] is my favorite destination but I love Rio [Rio de Janeiro, Brazil].
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase and, if so, may we hear it?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I would say my favorite phrase is: since greatness is achievable then excellence is not an option.
Story_ID: 508217
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start off by talking about your family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to start with your mom, so it would be fantastic if you could start by stating and spelling her name and telling us when she was born and where she grew up?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  My mother's name is Rosa Evans [Rosa Johnson Evans], R-O-S-A E-V-A-N-S, she was born in Orangeburg, South Carolina.  She is a teacher and consultant.
Speaker 1: And did you learn any stories about your mother's upbringing as you've grown up, and if so can you tell us a little bit about what you know about your mother's youth?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, my mother was a fighter growing up.  I heard many stories of how she would beat up her siblings, she was her father's [McKinley Johnson] favorite girl, she loved to express herself creatively and I tapped into that gene.  She would make me sit still, she would say, "Hold still." And she would draw a picture of me.  And I was always fascinated by that, how she would capture me didn't matter what position, pose or angle and she would manifest a photograph of me.  She loves children and she talked about her love for kids as she was being reared by her parents, and wanting to make a difference in their lives.  And today she's still very much committed to that cause and mission.
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters did your mother have?
Speaker 2: I have one brother, Gregory [Gregory Evans].
Speaker 1: No, no, your mother.  How many brothers and sisters did your mother have?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Does your mother have?
Speaker 2: Okay, she has three sisters and one brother.
Speaker 1: And did they all grow up--were they all about the same age?
Speaker 2: Fairly so, yes.
Speaker 1: And so, have you heard any stories from them about what it was like for them to grow up together as children?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say, what I do recall her saying (laughter) is how she would wait for her father to come home.  No matter what he was doing, she would be sitting by the door waiting for him because sometimes he would have seizures so she was very concerned about him.  And one time he actually had a seizure and she took a spoon, if I recall correctly, and saved his life to prevent that seizure from really taking toll.
Speaker 1: Did you know your mother's parents?
Speaker 2: Actually, not really.  (Laughter) I saw--I visited the house a few times.
Speaker 1: In South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I didn't know them.  You know, everyone just tells me I have my grandfather's mustache.  He had thick features, hair features.
Speaker 1: So did you get a chance to meet them or were they just--did they pass away when you were young?
Speaker 2: Passed away when I was younger.
Speaker 1: I see.  How would you describe your mom if you had to describe her to someone?
Speaker 2: My mother is Grand Central in the South.  There's always someone coming in, I mean, to see her.  She's very jovial, courageous in spirit, she's committed to excellence, she's creative, she's vibrant.  If I had to paint her a color, it would be fuchsia.  She has a special touch with people.  It's hard to come in contact with my mother and not know that she has done something to impact you whether it's her mannerisms.  She looks so conservative, she proclaims to be shy (gesture) but she's more like a firecracker (laughter) and she's just waiting for the right strike of a match and she's all laughs.  A great cook, the best tea in the world, I love my mother but we are completely opposites yet very much the same.  She would always say to me, "I knew I bumped my head when I had you, Etu [HistoryMaker Etu Evans], I just didn't know how hard."
Speaker 1: You said your mother was a teacher?
Speaker 2: She is a teacher and a consultant (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, she's still teaching.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What does she teach?
Speaker 2: She's taught everything from third grade to compensatory math.
Story_ID: 508218
Speaker 1: So let's talk some about your father.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What's his name and where was he from, and when was he born?
Speaker 2: Same area [Orangeburg, South Carolina], my father's name is Frederick, F-R-E-D-E-R-I-C-K, last name Evans, E-V-A-N-S [Frederick Evans, Jr.], and he is a pressman.  He's a professional printer.  I've gone through several photographs of him as a youngster playing basketball, and that's where my sister [Ami Evans Gibson] got it from.  Everyone talks about what a great dresser he was and still is.  His ability to tell a joke, very gregarious in character, and an excellent printer.
Speaker 1: And has he told you any stories about when he was a child, you know, any anecdotes about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, other than--I've heard from his friends, going there was the ultimate--to his house, that was the ultimate white Christmas.  He was the only child so he had everything, so everybody wanted to be around him obviously because of the resources that were made available to him.
Story_ID: 508219
Speaker 1: And did you know his parents?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  My [paternal] grandmother is my muse, she's my favorite person in the world.  Queen Esther Evans, Q-U-E-E-N, E-S-T-H-E-R, Evans, E-V-A-N-S.
Speaker 1: And do you know much about Queen Esther's background (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh absolutely.
Speaker 1: Has she told you some stories about when she was being raised?
Speaker 2: Many.
Speaker 1: Can we hear a few?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  My grandmother, she's absolutely striking.  Red mane, so you visually capture it automatically, high pitched voice.  When she goes outside, the dogs run toward her, everything comes to her.  She has that type of a magnetic energy.  A prolific singer and speaker, growing up as a child--she has a huge family, in fact, they were selected as family of the year in South Carolina sometime back.  I can't recall the exact year, but the white families would actually hire my grandmother to train their, to train their kids how to speak correctly.  And, naturally, she passed that onto me and I grew up having a learning disability so they said.  So I kind of started off with a 0.4 and God blessed me to graduate with Columbia University [New York, New York] with a 4.0 [grade point average].  So my grandmother is the ultimate cheerleader in my life no matter what circumstances or obstacles or labels that people tried to attach to me, she removed them by instilling courage, faith, and tapping into my inner voice.  I would practice with her white brush and she would say, "Speak with distinction, speak with clarity, you can't sing and talk.  Are you gonna speak, are you gonna talk, what are you gonna do?  Open your mouth, stand up straight and speak."  And today (background noise)--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: You were speaking about Queen Esther.  You were speaking about Queen Esther and her encouragement to you to speak with distinction.
Speaker 1: Yes.  I mean, growing up in the rural South, you know, there were a lot of racial barriers.  But in spite of the barriers, my grandmother was such an excellent teacher and speaker that white families from afar would actually solicit her services so she also had a means of income.  Then, in turn, what she gathered not only from her ability to speak but being close to learn- you know, having access to books.  Back during that time, most people of color weren't granted books.  Education was kind of taboo, so she was a big proponent of education.  And I remember just countless hours her putting that white brush in my hand as my microphone for me to really tap into my inner voice and to speak.  So, it's created the best of both worlds, I get to combine I think--living a life without passion is not living at, at all.  It's the difference between living and existing, so by her placing that brush in my hand not only have I become an international motivational speaker to help people create high heel success if you will, but it's also allowed me to use speaking as a net.  It's the difference between having a net and a hook, so I get to sell thousands of shoes 'cause I educate people on what I do as an entrepreneur and also through my foundation Solesville [Solesville: Etu Evans Foundation, New York, New York], which is a shoe focused foundation.  And our motto is: "Savings soles one step at a time.  Helping people get on their feet."
Speaker 2: Now, you said that you knew more stories about Queen Esther--
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: --than you knew about your parents [Rosa Johnson Evans and Frederick Evans, Jr.], so I've gotta insist that you tell us some tales about when Queen Esther was a youth or a teenager, perhaps some of those challenges she had with dealing with racism?
Speaker 1: Well, my grandmother always used the Bible, and her general philosophy in life is she could do anything as long as she believes in God and she believes in herself, so my grandmother was very much a go-getter.  So, in spite of racism, she said nothing was gonna stop her from doing for what she had to do.  And I think that's what slavery was really about when you look in terms of that diaspora and people of color.  In spite of the physical challenge, the spirit was always free and willing and was insurmountable to escape any odds or labels, opposition that came its way and my grandmother was very much that way in character.  She was strong, still is, still running around on her stilettos, speaking at the top of her voice, still singing in the choir, still active in Sunday school.
Story_ID: 508220
Speaker 1: I recall her [Evans' paternal grandmother, Queen Esther Evans] telling me when she met my grandfather in high school, and how important education was.  And that she and my grandfather were the top of the class academically.  So, even though my grandfather was a little more demure in character, he made the perfect backdrop for my grandmother's star to shine.
Speaker 2: What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 1: His name was Frederick as well, F-R-E-D-E-R-I-C-K, Evans, E-V-A-N-S [Frederick Evans, Sr.].
Speaker 2: And what did he do, and do you know any stories about him and his growth?
Speaker 1: Well, he had (laughter)--he's from a very large family as well.  And my grandfather actually worked for Ethyl chemical plant [Ethyl Gasoline Corporation; Ethyl Corporation], so he was the transport guy but his favorite mainstay was to come home and to watch my grandmother.  I remember, as a kid no matter what time of day it was, he would be in awe just like he first met her and he would be kind of around the corner watching her.  And I would say, "Gramps, what are you doing?"  And he said, "I'm watching my babyface, she's beautiful."  So his favorite pastime, his dessert, his existence was really being encapsulated by my grandmother and she's really that dynamic.  I feel the same way.
Speaker 2: And what was your relation- what was the relationship of your grandmother and your grandfather to your father [Frederick Evans, Jr.]?
Speaker 1: Parents.  They were his parents.
Speaker 2: No, I know they were his parents but, I mean, like how did they get along, did your father take on some of your grandmother's traits, how did they interact?
Speaker 1: He's a jokester.  (Laughter) My father's a jokester.  My grandmother is the life of the party, but very distinct personalities.  My grandfather was really subdued, he would always say, "I will kill a dead snake about my grandkids," that was his phrase.  He was committed to his family, family life and his favorite brother, B.E.  So they would meet, work, watch my grandmother, see his brother B.E. on the weekends, and that was his life and playing with his grandkids.
Story_ID: 508221
Speaker 1: And then, your father [Frederick Evans, Jr.], how would you describe your father if you had to describe him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gregarious, very outgoing, very talented printer, everyone comes to him for his printing services.  And when I look at all of his pictures, very sophisticated dresser for his--for the times.
Speaker 1: What, what kind of elements were included in your father's style?
Speaker 2: He had a--I remember a picture of him in high school with a white dinner jacket on, some really nicely tailored black slacks, a great black bowtie, kind of sleek European in its silhouette, and a red carnation.  Great mock neck sweaters, he just had impeccable taste.
Speaker 1: And what about your mother [Rosa Johnson Evans].  Was she fashionable?
Speaker 2: My mother is (laughter) fashionable and anything that has color in it, it has her name on it.  I had to actually a few years ago pull her back from the metallic.  I said, "Mom, we're not doing--that's no longer the trend, need to let that go," and I gave her some neutral pointier shoes.  But she loves fashion
Speaker 1: And then, of course, your grandmother [Queen Esther Evans] you said is still wearing stilettos--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) can you just describe her fashion for us a bit?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, my mom borrows my grandmother's shoes still to date.  She's very fashion forward when it comes to shoes, very pointy, very feminine.  And she would sit me on her canopy bed--first of all her room is the ultimate jewelry chest.
Speaker 1: This is your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's a treasure chest, it's congested but it's certainly purposeful (laughter). The shoeboxes connected like trains around the top of the ceiling, there are beads of every color cascading off of the dresser, and in another corner there is a, a some archtectrical high-rise of hats, so she loves fashion.  Everywhere you move you see something to wear.
Speaker 1: And so did you get an opportunity to observe your grandmother dressing and--
Speaker 2: That's how I got into shoes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) do you think that influenced your--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, she would sit me in her emporium of fashion and she would say, "Etu [HistoryMaker Etu Evans], what shoes should I wear?"  And then I would always select the shoes that she should wear to church.  And then I began--that's probably why I'm in behaviorism, 'cause I believe kids become who they are before they're age seven, that's just my personal philosophy, based on what they are exposed to.  So, she would sit me on that, on that canopy bed and then I noticed that her body would change, so then I moved from you should wear that shoe or I like that toe or I like this bow to what's making your body change.  And I realized the magic of shoes, and ever since then I was smitten, I began tearing my grandfather's shoes apart, running around through the house wearing his shoes.  And I discovered how to take his dress shoe and, if I took the sole off of it, it became a driving shoe so that's really what--
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) sparked my interest.
Story_ID: 508222
Speaker 1: In footwear (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So were you doing repairs at that point also, or you were just deconstructing shoes?
Speaker 1: Oh, I was, I was a kid, I was just a kid (laughter) deconstructing shoes.  But shoes have always been my passion, and when I look at culture of African American people and from whence we've come, I realize the importance of shoes, footwear.  Because shoes for our people of color, slaves, were dessert.  I remember my [paternal] grandmother [Queen Esther Evans] and grandfather [Frederick Evans, Sr.] telling me how they would have to put cardboard in their shoes so that their feet would not get wet or their socks wouldn't be torn, because they would have to walk, you know, against these muddy roads.  There were no pave- there wasn't pavement there or briars or that kind of thing so the foot could get injured.  Another reason I created Solesville [Solesville: Etu Evans Foundation, New York, New York], still based out of that premise, as a child my grandmother once told me in her favorite pair of school shoes, she had to put linoleum.  And that was the best thing because it was imporous, it didn't get wet.  So it was actually like having a sole, but not under but placed inside, sort of as an insert.
Speaker 2: And so the shoes that your grandparents were telling you about, what were the soles that were actually on the shoe made of?
Speaker 1: They were leather but they didn't have that many unlike today where we can just go and get shoes, now we are truly in a, in a space of liberation to express ourselves in terms of fashion.  But the average slave, even at the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], when you look at those pictures everybody talks about shoes, having a pair of shoes, that was the ultimate statement that you made it.  It's what these, I would say entertainers now, would be their Bentley.  Because we did not have shoes and the shoes that we had were so--in such worn and poor condition that it caused other effects anatomically that would affect us 'cause the foot really is the keyboard of the body, of our computer.  When you look at reflexology, the sciatic nerve is in the back of the heel, the lungs, everything is right in the foot.
Speaker 2: And so, what kind of sicknesses or disease or injuries were caused by lack of sole?
Speaker 1: Well, my grandfather is diabetic for one.  Most of his family is so, if anything were to puncture the foot, there could be an amputation.  And when you look at the obesity rate and what's happening now a lot of it has to do with shoes.  At first, I had all of these high fashion clients but now I have a lot a clients who have a lot of foot problems.  A woman who stepped on a nail, soft shoes, had to have part of her flesh shaved down to the bone, who needed something.  I mean, there are just so many things, that's why I created Solesville, the Etu Evans Foundation to really prevent infectious diseases that can be acquired through cracks in the skin of the foot.  I mean, you can take in germs and parasites and die just because your foot is exposed.  I mean, we do a lot of work in Africa as well as the U.S. and the Pacific Islands, as well as the Caribbean.  And a lot of times you don't know what you're stepping on; there are exposed needles even in this city, New York [New York], 2007.  Look at the amount of people who are walking around with no shoes or socks, or shoes that don't fit.  So you are getting exposed to all types of parasites, germs, diseases, nails, you know, drug dealers' needles.  It's, it's a serious thing.
Story_ID: 508223
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Wow.  My earliest memory of growing up, I would probably say is hearing my [paternal] grandmother's [Queen Esther Evans] voice.
Speaker 1: So, can you tell us what your daily life was like when you were a kid?  Where were you, where were you--you start off by describing where you lived?
Speaker 2: Lived with my mother [Rosa Johnson Evans], we lived a few places when I was younger in Orangeburg, South Carolina.  And what I do remember growing up as a child is that I was very different.  My mother would always say to me--and I never knew what that meant, and I think I was just luxury conscious even at a very early age.  I can take anything and made it look like it costs thousands of dollars, it didn't matter.  So I would say--I remember buying my first pair of Pierre Cardin shoes, and this is middle school, and everyone said you can't do that those are too expensive, those are adult shoes.  And I remember selling flower bulbs, I remember selling my grandmother's sock-it-to-me cake slices for a dollar.  And I, I remember making floral arrangements, that's how I put myself through undergrad [at South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].  So I was always an entrepreneur I do remember that quite vividly and still am.  And that stemmed from childhood.  I remember people looking at me quite often, I always stood out even though I was never seeking attention but I enjoyed expressing myself as myself and not trying to fit in.  I never sought to fit in with other kids.  Either you liked me or you didn't.  I was an individual and I really took pride in being who I believe God had called me to be.
Speaker 1: You spoke just now about selling your grandmother's cake and having an entrepreneurial spirit as a kid.  Can you tell us just a little bit about that, that business and perhaps some others that you dabbled in?  Where did you sell the cake (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, sure.
Speaker 1: --and how did you--was it like the lemonade stand?
Speaker 2: Well actually, my grandmother made an awesome sock-it-to-me cake and lemon cake.  So I taste the--and I said, hm, I need to sell this.  We can make money on this.  I was always a businessperson so I had always threw my mother off because she thought that I would be doing sort of what might be perceived as adult (laughter) behavior, things adults should be doing.  And I was very focused once I made my mind up, I wasn't looking for approval.  So I met with my grandmother, had my little conference with her in private, she said, "Well, I'm gonna make you a cake."  And she made it just for me to sell.  I sliced it up, I packaged it, I put it all in brown bags.  I even understood marketing at an early age and presentation, had a little ribbon.  I would take them throughout high school [Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and like eighth grade, I would sell it to teachers, I would sell it to students, and anyone who would listen.
Speaker 1: So did you have the cakes with you or did you take orders (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I had a separate bag.  I took orders and I was able to purchase everything.  And what the kids are doing now on the, the tube and A train selling M&M's, I found all the pretty girls 'cause I believe where there are pretty women, men follow and I gave them a commission on sales so I had the whole big M&M ring (background noise) going.
Speaker 1: You had an M&M--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a whole M&M ring going. So I made money off M&M's.  I sold flower bulbs.  And then one day I noticed that my mother, her countenance, had changed and she looked quite despondent.  And I'm quite emotionally attached to my mother so I said, what could I do to cheer her up?  So I made her a floral arrangement and once I saw the reinforcement from her friends then immediately three days later I was in the floral business. (Laughter) And I started selling those floral arrangements for twelve, ninety-nine up into five thousand and that's what put me actually through college.
Speaker 1: This is when you were an older student?
Speaker 2: Oh, this is pre-high school.
Speaker 1: Pre-high school.
Speaker 2: And I did it also when I would sell me accessories, I would also have a room just for flowers that people could come--even the projects of Manhattanville [New York, New York], they would win every year because I would go and do the flowers in front of the building--in front of the projects.
Story_ID: 508224
Speaker 1: What were holidays like with your family when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, on my [paternal] grandmother's [Queen Esther Evans] side, they're very excellent singers so everyone sings.  So, I mean, you're gonna get the best 'Jingle Bells.'  I mean, your 'Jingle Bells' is really gonna jingle, you know, LL Cool J said, "They're jingling baby."  Well, they are wonderful singers from the old school of music, what they call the notes, where they're actually singing notes instead of words to their, you know, classic twists on traditionals.  On my mother's [Rosa Johnson Evans] side, as well, just great food, a lot of jokes and a lot of games.
Speaker 1: And where would you gather for holidays?  Would it be your home or would you go to your grandparents?
Speaker 2: We would just go around, but my mother loves to decorate as well so, I mean, you know, I just flew down to actually decorate her new dining room so she could continue her Grand Central in the South theme.
Speaker 1: And what were the most important holidays when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I would say Christmas.  I was always eager to get up and see what would be under the tree, everyone smiling, family could come together.  I didn't see a lot of my family and I still don't.  I see my immediate family, you know, so.
Story_ID: 508225
Speaker 1: Who's included in your immediate family?
Speaker 2: My mother [Rosa Johnson Evans], my father [Frederick Evans, Jr.], my brother, my sister.  You know, I now have a nephew, Raekwon, R-A-E-K-W-O-N, Evans, E-V-A-N-S [Raekwon Evans], and a little niece, Amia [Amia Gibson], she's two and she's amazing, A-M-I-A, and her last name is Gibson.
Speaker 1: And what are your brother and sister's names?
Speaker 2: My sister's name is a takeoff of Amia, it's Ami, A-M-I, last name Gibson, G-I-B-S-O-N [Ami Evans Gibson].  And my brother's name is Gregory, G-R-E-G-O-R-Y, Evans, E-V-A-N-S [Gregory Evans].
Speaker 1: And when you were growing up were you all in the house together?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And do you have any anecdotes about growing up with your brother and your sister?
Speaker 2: We're so remotely different.  I'm creative, Gregory is very mechanical and technical, you know.  He can take a test and make 98 [percent] on it and never look at a book (laughter), so can Ami, but I am the 4.0 [grade point average] student from Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] because I was committed and dedicated.  I would apply myself and my favorite book, and still is, is 'The Little Engine That Could' [Watty Piper].  And I just always would say to myself, "I think I can, I think I can.  I have that kind of power because God is I Am, I can, I must, I will," so that's been my general rule of thumb.  So very different with those two.  Ami has an incredible prowess when it comes to being athletic.  She excelled in softball, she excelled in volleyball, she excelled in basketball.  I was on the swimming team; I was an excellent swimmer and a soccer player.  Gregory didn't play--he wasn't that much into sports.  He could play basketball but, you know, he was the lady's man, a little quicker than, than I was.  You know, I was caught up into creating so then when the young ladies would come to me then, that's when it would happen.  Very different personalities though.
Story_ID: 508226
Speaker 1: Now you said you lived in several different places, but if you could sort of choose the main place that you lived when you were growing up, if you could describe where you lived and the community that you lived in?
Speaker 2: Well, we moved around several places in Orangeburg [South Carolina].  One house actually--growing up initially we were in what would be considered the projects by city living.  It was called the reservation.  So it was very neighborly, the houses were pretty much contiguous but land space.  Those memories were interesting to me, I wanted out. (Laughter) But, you know, I wouldn't trade them in because it's made me who I am today.  Now where my mother [Rosa Johnson Evans] currently resides, you know, it's spacious and she has her deck and she can do all of her entertaining.  But I, interestingly, was kind of an outcast because all of my friends were from the city and I was always looked upon as the city guy.  So I was very much in but out, if you follow me, to the point that even during college [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] I was elected as the New York [New York] alumni president because I knew everyone in the city and had been quite active through selling.  You know, whether it be shoes, jewelry, or speaking, or modeling.  'Cause I actually started off doing commercial print work when I was a kid, that's what really sparked me to go full throttle into the fashion arena.
Story_ID: 508227
Speaker 1: So, tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Smells, the smells that remind me of growing up would be my [paternal] grandmother's [Queen Esther Evans] sock-it-to-me cake, my mother's [Rosa Johnson Evans] greens, and the taste of her tea.  I also vividly remember my grandmother's floral bed, and that's how I actually got into flowers.  She would actually have me walk around with her and she would always point out the names of them.  And I use a lot of floral silhouettes in my designs.  They may not look like flowers, but they're parts of flowers actually.
Story_ID: 508228
Speaker 1: Where'd you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: Marshall Elementary School in Orangeburg, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And did you have any special teachers who influenced you while you were in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Elementary school was very difficult for me.  My mother was a superstar teacher and I was a terrible student, and labeled as having a learning disability.  And that's really hard when you have a mother who's a genius.  So everyone's always looking at you like, I'm gonna tell your mother.
Speaker 1: And how did your family respond to that label of learning disabled?  I mean, what, what happened at home (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my mother, I mean, everyone's bringing--my mother not only taught at school but she had just as many pupils waiting for her after school at her home.  She had a big tutorial business and still does.  But it was very hard to compete with everyone else, so in middle school when they really started placing the labels that were most punitive and stigmas, my [paternal] grandmother [Queen Esther Evans] said, "You're not gonna label him."  I remember one of my teachers putting me in the corner, turning the chair around, trying to hit me with a ruler, saying some very derogatory name, names to me.  I mean, she called me everything, stupid, dumb, the things that really hurt and that could really cripple a child.  'Cause what you label you limit.  But my grandmother said, "You're not stupid, you're gonna get it."
Speaker 1: So, before we continue talking about your education, how close in physically did you live with your grandmother, did you--did y'all live in the same place (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the middle, the, the middle--no, we stayed about twenty minutes away from my grandmother.  But the middle school was actually less than a mile from her home, so she could dash right over.
Speaker 1: And so, as a child you would split your time between your grandmother's and your--where your mom was?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and were your parents both there where your mom was?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, your mom was teaching, was she teaching in the same school where you were attending as an elementary school student (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, my mother, she was at Marshall Elementary School.  So I was at Marshall but when it was time for middle school at Brookdale [Brookdale Middle School, Orangeburg, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Right, but as an elementary school student at Marshall your mother was teaching in the same school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, that probably added a bit of pressure also.
Speaker 2: Lots of pressure.  And everyone knew that anyone who attended or was enrolled in Mrs. Evans' [Rosa Johnson Evans] class was pretty much gonna be an academic superstar.  And I was not performing well at all.
Speaker 1: And when you say performing well, were you well behaved?
Speaker 2: I was well behaved, it's just academically.
Speaker 1: So did you have difficulty with reading and you were having difficulty with speech (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Reading, math, I was always a good speaker because of my grandmother and just countless hours of practicing with her hairbrush.  But, that reading and math, you know, really impeded my progress.
Speaker 1: So that sounds like it lasted through the elementary school and then when you were in middle school, the labels really became problematic.
Speaker 2: Oh, it definitely carried over 'case now there's peer pressure on top of it.
Speaker 1: And where did you go to middle school?
Speaker 2: Brookdale Middle School.
Speaker 1: And it was at that time that your grandmother said, we're not gonna--
Speaker 2: Enough's enough.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what kind of action did she take in order to make sure that you gained the discipline and the rigor that you ultimately used?
Speaker 2: She actually met with the principal, she met with that teacher who was saying all the punitive things to me, and she says, "No, I know that he can learn, he will learn."  She was committed to helping me and encouraging me and, you know, it got better.  The best was yet to come.
Speaker 1: And how did your parents respond to that?  Was that very difficult for your mom being that she was superstar teacher of her superstar students?
Speaker 2: Well, it's my mother and my Aunt Vernelle [ph.].  And she was perceived to be (gesture) very mean and she was really together.  My mom was always together but my aunt, her demeanor, she didn't smile a lot so it made her appear that she was this evil person sometime.  But she was an excellent teacher and I had a cousin, Curtis [ph.], and we had a committee to shoot spitballs at her and to just try to assassinate her.  'Cause I mean it was really rough, so we became--it's like, wow, everyone is doing well, we're related, and we just can't get it.  But like my favorite book, 'The Little Engine That Could' [Watty Piper], I just kept saying, "I think I can, I think I can."
Story_ID: 508229
Speaker 1: So while you were in middle school [Brookdale Middle School, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and things start to improve for you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --do you have a favorite subject?  Are you becoming interested in school?
Speaker 2: I loved science, and did well in science, I won several science awards and ribbons.  I was very environmentally conscious, so I was creating greenhouses, doing a lot of experimental plant--I did one thing that I remember for the state fair [South Carolina State Fair] and I won, Cossack asparagus, which are the cattails.  I said, what happens if the world becomes destroyed?  What would we eat?  And I found that the Indians [Native American], that was one of the things that they did, so I created this whole healthy menu.  So I was green ahead of my time.
Speaker 1: So were there teachers, at that point as you became interested in school, who influenced you or that you particularly appreciated (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Rosa Twiggs, grade school, very poised, upper middle-class.  Actually, her husband, Dr. Leo Twiggs, was a professor at South Carolina State University [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].  But she would--
Speaker 1: What did she teach?
Speaker 2: She taught science, and she was very encouraging.  She said, "You have it Evans [HistoryMaker Etu Evans], and you're gonna do it, I believe in you," and that was just so reinforcing.  And what I really discovered was some of those other teachers, I don't think they were really committed to teaching.  I wasn't learning, I wasn't stimulated, it wasn't exciting to me.  So I started adding color to my pages with markers and highlighters, and I would remember things so I could put a symbol and I would create acronyms.
Story_ID: 508230
Speaker 1: And the other half of that is my parents [Rosa Johnson Evans and Frederick Evans, Jr.] getting divorced and that was kind of catastrophic for me emotionally.  As a kid, I would hide under my bunk bed, I would have my peanut butter and jelly sandwiches, I would have different insect that I'd caught, and flowers in jars, and I would work under my bed.
Speaker 2: And you were doing that because your parents were having a lot of tension and--
Speaker 1: A lot of tension--I had tension at home, I had tension, you know, with school, you know, very different personalities from my brother [Gregory Evans] and sister [Ami Evans Gibson].  And so I would write in my Bible 'cause my grandmother [Queen Esther Evans] is avid--an avid goer for Sunday school, so my logic as a kid was that, if I were to write on top of God's words, he made me he would understand me.  And that's what I would do.  I would write how I felt and, you know, I just read of course but it got me through it to where I am.
Speaker 2: So when--how old were you when your parents separated?
Speaker 1: This was actually I would say pre-high school, yeah.
Speaker 2: We're in middle school [Brookdale Middle School, Orangeburg, South Carolina] now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, middle school.
Speaker 2: And did that affect your grades or did that make things easier, how did that affect you?
Speaker 1: Well, at that point, I just kind of wanted peace.  (Laughter) I just wanted my mother to be happy.  That's why I originally started creating the floral arrangements, was to actually bring a smile to her face.
Story_ID: 508231
Speaker 1: So, you already had a cake business--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that you have been operating since you were in elementary school [Marshall Elementary School, Orangeburg, South Carolina].  Were you selling cakes and then you added the flowers when you were in middle school [Brookdale Middle School, Orangeburg, South Carolina] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, actually, in elementary school, I was selling flower bulbs, you know, and then you leap and then you can win more money and I was the top leaper at the time.  And then by the time I got to middle school, I had taken on my cake business and that was like in eighth grade.  And then as I went to Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School [Orangeburg, South Carolina], I took the cake business and expanded that because I also--they had a vocational program at the--believe it's called COVEC [Calhoun-Orangeburg Vocational Education Center, Orangeburg, South Carolina], so they teach fashion merchandising and all that kind of thing, so I had 250 clock hours.  So I would sell lots of slices during that time, and then I added on the M&M business.
Speaker 1: And then what about the flower arrangements, you said you started those in middle school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you maintain those--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --through high school?
Speaker 2: That was the big, the big wait for the big bang.
Story_ID: 508232
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in middle school [Brookdale Middle School, Orangeburg, South Carolina], did you have a sense of what you thought you might do in the future?
Speaker 2: Yes, impact lives through design and speaking.
Speaker 1: And then you went on to high school, where did you attend high school?
Speaker 2: Where did I attend high school?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School [Orangeburg, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: And what subjects and what teachers inspired you when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: I would say Miss Gillium [ph.], she was very influential to me.  There was a Flossie Mack, who was an excellent teacher as well.  Those are the two that stand out to me.  You know, what I remember about high school was selling.  I just wanted to sell, I loved nice things, you know, my moniker for my company is: "Etu Evans is the DNA of Luxocrats, a long French kiss with the massage of American mystique, the mark of the fashion cognoscenti."  So even then, that was my means being an entrepreneur to create the lifestyle that I wanted.
Speaker 1: Now you mention that you bought some Pierre Cardin shoes--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --while in middle school.  What other kind of purchases were you making that were luxurious while you were in middle and high school?
Speaker 2: I loved expensive footwear and I love expensive suits.  And I told my mom [Rosa Johnson Evans]--I remember when--even when she bought me Toughskins I said, "Those aren't for me."  And she said, "You have a big mind."  And that would irritate her even to today, I mean, she asks me, "What are you eating?"  I said, "Oh, I love white cherries."  And she said, "There are no such things," and she said, "Oh, I forgot, what are you eating now?  Oh, it's French lamb, right?"  So she still makes those kind of jokes.  And then when I expose her to it, then, you know, she goes, "Oh, this is excellent."  So I always have an opportunity to help her grow as a person and then she enjoys it, but it comes with a cost at my expense initially.
Story_ID: 508233
Speaker 1: So, you're in high school [Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina] now--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you've got quite a business going.  What do you think that you're gonna do? Do you plan to go to college after high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Like, what are your future plans at that time?
Speaker 2: At that time, I always wanted to go to an Ivy League school just because of all the stigmas and the labels that they had placed on me.  But my main goal was actually to do the three things that I loved the most, and that's design, to speak, and to help other people through my designs.
Speaker 1: Now, we've also talked about design a little bit.  I have in my notes that you were doing interior design.  Is that what you mean by design?  And, if it includes other things, can you tell us about that and about the interior design?
Speaker 2: Sure, well, actually when I started designing the flowers, my uncle moved from Brooklyn [New York] to Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].  So, the woman that he married Celeste [ph.], her brother Willie [ph.], owned--he owned an upholstery shop there.  And that's where all the stars came, and Michael Jordon lived at Wexford [Wexford Plantation, Hilton Head Island, South Carolina].  So I started getting hired to coordinate flower--floral arrangements with the actual fabrics, and that's how it started.  And then I think I had an opportunity--you took a peek at some of my work in my portfolio.  But I think interiors, I mean, they really inspire me.  I'm really moved by furniture design and I did a lot of sculpted heels and that kind of thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so is that similar to your look at the garden flowers?  Like, you said--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --your shoes were like flowers and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I would agree, I mean, I feel like a lot of the heel--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --heel cups and the toes are--they look like flowers.  So are you doing the same things with furniture as influence on your shoes?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, furniture floral design, huge influences.
Speaker 1: And did you or do you now have any particular furniture designers that you particularly like that might come into mind?
Speaker 2: I love antiques, I love the originals so I spend lots of time--I'm a collector and I spend a lot of time just going through antique shops, thrift shops.  I love design.  I spent a lot of time in Harlem [New York, New York] just looking at architecture, and doors.  I've taken the metal railings where it actually latches and I've used them as hardware for shoes and for designs.
Story_ID: 508234
Speaker 1: So when you get out of high school [Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina], what do you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, I know I wanna--I, I know I have to come back to New York [New York] that's first and foremost because I was always in the city every break, I knew everybody, and it's where I felt most at home.  That's why everybody knows me from Harlem [New York, New York].  So I, I said at first I'm out, I have to get to New York.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about that a little bit, because we've kind of skipped it.  So you're living in South Carolina and you're going to school there, but when are you going to New York and who are you staying with, and what are you doing when you come to the city?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother's [Rosa Johnson Evans] sisters lived in the city.  That's on her side of the family, and then my father [Frederick Evans, Jr.], you know, his aunts, they all lived here like in Manhattanville [New York, New York], up and down Broadway.  Then I have some other relatives in the Bronx [New York], but I would stay primarily with my mother's sister, Maggie [ph.], in Queens [New York].  And then I had other cousins that I would come and stay with in Manhattan [New York].
Speaker 1: And when you came and stayed what would you do?
Speaker 2: I was selling, I was modeling, I was having a great time and looking to create my career.  I knew I wanted to go to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] so I had my eye on that early, and I also wanted to actually explore being an artist and what that meant.  Because if you can survive here, you can survive anywhere.  And I know that I've been in the city, it's home for me so long I really knew what my capabilities and my limitations were, and I was more capable than limited.
Speaker 1: So, I'm assuming that you spent most of your summers here and then--
Speaker 2: Yes, every holiday (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) school breaks?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I would assume that your sister [Ami Evans Gibson] and brother [Gregory Evans] did not make a similar pilgrimage with you--
Speaker 2: Well, my, my sister--
Speaker 1: --or did they?
Speaker 2: --she--they would go to Maryland a lot, I would be in the city more so.  And my brother's, he just moved from Maryland, I think he's getting ready to move to Charlotte [North Carolina].  And my sister's in Morrisville [North Carolina].
Story_ID: 508235
Speaker 1: So, where do you attend college?
Speaker 2: Undergrad, South Carolina State University [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and then in--and that was actually--
Speaker 1: Well, let, let's stay there for a minute (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: How did you choose South Carolina State and what did you major in?
Speaker 2: I majored in--actually I started off as a marketing major, a business major minoring in marketing.  And then I did not like the way that some of the professors were handling themselves and the athletes, and they were doing some unethical things.  And so, I had to remove myself and not compromise my integrity.  And one of the chairpersons, who was one of my fraternity brothers, said, "Man, you're a great speaker and you've been helping a lot of people, you should come take a look at our program in social work."  So they put me up before the state and I ended up working on a psychiatric team, and so I graduated minoring in marketing and actually with a major in social work.
Speaker 1: So, were they passing athletes without having the athletes complete the work?
Speaker 2: They were--
Speaker 1: How were you implicated in--
Speaker 2: Well, they were doing a lot of interesting things to certain individuals, more so to males and I, I was not for that.  (Laughter) So I said I'm out of here.  I mean, 'cause, I, I knew that I could write well, you know, even though all those years of not being able to write, I really learned how to write because I was feeling so many things inside of me.
Speaker 1: So how long were you a marketing major before you switched to social work?
Speaker 2: Well I--that was probably my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: And had you already pledged Que Psi Phi Fraternity [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I was on line, you know, it's a little different than it is now.  I was on line a few times, not because I dropped but, you know, politics (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had a big brother essentially who was a Que and then he led you into social work.  Was he someone who was in social work?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I knew the gentleman who--he was my classmate, I knew his father.  So, he said, "You should talk to my dad," and then my uncle who was an Omega as well, and so, just a fraternal network.
Speaker 1: And what interested you about social work?
Speaker 2: Helping people.  And I know the pain that I endured with my parents' [Rosa Johnson Evans and Frederick Evans, Jr.] separation, I knew how it made my mother's countenance change and her disposition.  And I didn't want anyone to experience that type of pain or the emotional turmoil that I felt, or that my brother [Gregory Evans] and sister [Ami Evans Gibson] had to endure.  So I had to be the son, the husband, the brother and the businessman.
Story_ID: 508236
Speaker 1: And, can you tell me a little bit about studying social work?  Did you have a specialty, did you do field work?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was that study like and what was it about?
Speaker 2: I was always, as I mentioned, interested in behavior so working on a psychiatric team, that was a really powerful experience for me.  And what I realized is that, yes, to talk and to implement the dynamics of social work to impact the lives of people and to chronicle what their cases were, I deeply saw a more quantifiable way, if you will, because a lot of it can be subjective.  He said, she said, jot, jot, jot, so I was really excited to get on that psychiatric team but when I got there I realized that the medication that they had been placing a lot of the actual clients on was causing them to lose hair, to gain weight, and that didn't appeal to me.  And then I also noticed a lot of people who are perceived to be normal, such as lawyers, were really manic depressant.  You don't know who you're really talking to.  So a lot of the people that I would normally go to, to get help were actually clients to people having trouble in intimate situations.  And so, it was really a rewarding experience and really expanded my mind, 'cause so oftentimes we think people are fine just because of position but it has nothing really to do with character and what's really going on inside of them kind of like the clown syndrome.
Speaker 1: So were you seeing people that you knew professionally?  Would they end up--
Speaker 2: I didn't know them directly but I knew their professions and I would always go, wow, you gotta be kidding.  But you are, but you do, you know, other people are entrusting their lives to you.  And then out of that I worked in a living skills home.  Very interesting, teaching them how to count money, become entrepreneurs, become autonomous, if you will, so that was very interesting.  Because you have people, when the medication runs out, it's not pretty.  (Laughter) Yeah.
Story_ID: 508237
Speaker 1: One thing that I did not ask you about, which we should talk about, is your background in church.  When you were growing up and through college, where did you attend church, did you go with your mother [Rosa Johnson Evans] or your [paternal] grandmother [Queen Esther Evans]?  You said that you had a close relationship with the Bible, could you just talk to us a little bit about what your religious background is?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Growing up I believed that the Bible has been the cornerstone of my success, and it's really fortified me in character and spirit emotionally, particularly, with all the turmoil that happened within the household.  It's funny, you know, I couldn't read some of the things that the teachers were giving me to read but then I could read the Bible because my grandmother would always drive me--we called it the lizard at that time.  It was a huge green Buick which really looks like it shouldn't be on land, it should be on water.  And she would make me read these stories, these biblical stories over and over until there was no stuttering, there were no inadequate pauses, and that my shoulders were up and that I was really ready to get in front of, you know, the Sunday school church committee.  So I went from presenting for not only the members who were in Sunday school but to the annual reports that were needed at other churches to represent the church.  So I grew up with a very solid spiritual background and platform.  Today I'm a member at--well, I was a long time member for many, many years at Convent Avenue Baptist Church here in Harlem [New York, New York] on 145th [Street] and Convent Avenue.  But currently I'm a member of First Corinthians [First Corinthian Baptist Church, New York, New York], which is just on the corner of 116th Street and Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard].
Speaker 1: And where did you attend when you were growing up in Orangeburg [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Bull Swamp Baptist Church [Orangeburg, South Carolina].  What a name.
Speaker 1: And you--my understanding is that you attended with your grandmother.  Did your mother and your siblings [Gregory Evans and Ami Evans Gibson] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She would show up but see the, the catch is for Sunday school, you have to be up very early.  So my grandmother was up and, you know, she had to drop us off.  If she didn't, my grandmother was there, you heard the car running and no matter what we were doing we had to finish it inside of that green Buick.
Speaker 1: And be there for Sunday school. Did you attend Sunday school, did you attend church and perhaps Sunday school when you were at South Carolina State University [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Never missed church, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you do that right on campus?
Speaker 2: Actually I continued going to Bull Swamp and then sometimes with the fraternity [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], we would visit different churches as well.
Speaker 1: And did that connect with your social studies, your studies of social work is really what I wanna communicate?
Speaker 2: I think that when you're in a position to help someone, to really be affective it takes an understanding of the spiritual, the emotional, as well as the physical.  You have to meet people where they are and that's what Christ did.  So I would say, yes.
Story_ID: 508238
Speaker 1: So you've talked a little bit about the, the work that you did in college and the psychiatric ward.  You said you lived in a home where you were helping people to become autonomous.  Did you have some kind of a final project or a thesis that you completed when you were an undergraduate [at South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I've done a few projects.  I've done some tracking kind of behavioral studies on medication and how it affects the clients.  I just recently was interviewed for My Two Cents [ph.] and we talked about mental illness and people not wanting to address mental illness to actually shed light on mental illness.  And sometimes we think people are just inebriated but it's deeper than that and it's a stigma in communities of color.  And people are hurting and they are committing crimes, and they're killing people.  It's stress on top of the illness, and it leads to unfavorable results.
Speaker 1: So you're saying in the black community a lot of times that so the drugs and alcohol are mistaken or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --seen or observed but what's not observed is actual mental problems, mental illness?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's not just people talking out of their heads, you can just walk around the corner and you're gonna see somebody doing something deranged.  But it's also despondency, depression, that deep private pain that throws the body off kilter.
Story_ID: 508239
Speaker 1: So, when you finish at South Carolina State University [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], what do you decide to do?  Do you decide to become a social worker?
Speaker 2: Well, I never wanted to become a social worker.  But I've always been interested in behavior and I was more so interested in behavior that ties into what I do in terms of footwear, like what do shoes make you do.  And like I'm gonna do a book on--in the future talking about secrets of shoes, you know, it's over a hundred steps involved in making shoe.  How does this shoe make you feel?  Just a lot of things centered around the foot.  I mean, when you look in terms of Asian culture, the foot, they did binding.  When you look in terms of African or other cultures from the diaspora, they beautify the foot--with henna even in Indian cultures.  And when you look in terms of Europe, the foot--the soles were painted a certain color to denote social economic strata.  So, there's just so many--and when you look in terms of S&M, you note that the shoes are in Lucite 'cause that's generally what the prostitutes wore or people who had these deviant behaviors and they preferred patent leather.  So, shoes really affect society.  I like to say that shoes tell everything about one's style, status and sex.  They are the barometer of culture.
Story_ID: 508240
Speaker 1: So do you begin a shoe business when you graduate from college [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you have your private book.  (Laughter) But when you look around you don't see anyone designing shoes per se.  It's one of those industries where you go, you wear it but you don't know how to do it.  Most people seem to have a firmer grip on making a dress or making vest or something, or a coat, or a hat because where do you get shoe lasts, which are the molds that shoes are made on?  Where do you go to get started?  How are shoes made?  But you can take your shirt off or your jacket off and take it apart and create it.  Not so much the same with shoes, you need special equipment, sanders, all of those types of things.
Speaker 1: So could you just give us sort of a very short basic tutorial on what needs to be thought about when you're creating a shoe?  I mean, you need these special equipment but when you sort of begin, for those of us who are ignorant who can pull apart our clothes, how do you make a shoe?
Speaker 2: Well, there are a hundred steps involved.  Of course you need to make a pattern but you need--the key thing for making a shoe is really the last, having an exquisite well-crafted last.  And the last is actually the mold that you make the shoe on.  So, it's kind of like when you're making cookies.  If you have a triangle, you're gonna have a triangle cookie versus a circle.  So in the last, you wanna make sure that the last is balanced, and you wanna make sure that you're, you're creating shoes that have leather bottoms because leather goes with the foot and it like our skin, it's the skin.  It's breathable.  And a lot of the shoes that you see, 'cause I specialize in a luxury market, coming out of Asia, they are made from cardboard.  So you get what I call the Etu [HistoryMaker Etu Evans] vegetable medley, corns, onions and bunions because you getting the abrasion.  And as soon as it gets wet, it breaks.  So, also--and material, materials are equally as important as the actual last that you are molding the leather to.
Speaker 1: What are some of your favorite materials to use, or types of leather if you're using leather?
Speaker 2: I, I use--well, actually I do a lot of my sourcing in Italy so I, I particularly love luxurious skins, lambskin, Italian calf, I, I do some croc [crocodile], lizard, anything--I like experimenting as well so I use a lotta experimental designs that I do here in Harlem [New York, New York] and have them replicated, whether it's burning it but making it elegant.  Taking something that's unanticipated and making it desirable.
Story_ID: 508241
Speaker 1: Can you talk about establishing your, your business especially initially Etu Evans, LLC [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Actually, while attending South Carolina State University [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] I actually started my business to--where it actually included floral design as well as accessories.  So I would do t-shirts, caps, and I would kind of doodle with jewelry but I didn't go full steam until actually after graduation.
Speaker 1: Where did you have things manufactured?  Were you designing the clothes and the t-shirts and caps that you were making?  Who were you sourcing, outsourcing to?
Speaker 2: Just the local screen printing shop initially.  But some stuff I painted and then I had a friend, Marvin Johnson [ph.], he would assist me in painting some of the designs as well.  Trying to stay on your questions.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  So you begin your business or continued your business as an undergraduate at South Carolina State.  Once you graduated, where did you take the business?
Speaker 2: To 619 West 145th Street, Harlem [New York, New York], USA.
Speaker 1: What are your cross streets there?
Speaker 2: Riverside [Drive] and Broadway.
Speaker 1: I know exactly where that is.  And what was that business and how did you do your retail from that address?
Speaker 2: Actually I came up with a very clever way to market myself.  I had a duplex there and I had a nectarine tree.  And I don't know anyone in Harlem who had a nectarine tree, so I would have garden parties because I had the top terrace as well as downstairs, and I would have many fashion shows scheduled at various points in the afternoon.  You could pick nectarines, we would juice them and then on the inside we also had hats available to your liking, high end jewelry.  A lot of the pieces were vintage pieces from my [paternal] grandmother [Queen Esther Evans] that she gave to me and I cut up and revamped with modern materials.  And then we had in another room a--just a vivid display of floral designed, dried silk and some live.
Speaker 1: And did you have like a sign outside that, that had your business company name or were you doing your sales by word of mouth?  Were you marketing the parties?  How were you drawing your customers?
Speaker 2: Because I write well, I created EPR, and people initially didn't know that EPR was me.  And I would invite a lot of magazine editors and they would show up so that got the word out.
Speaker 1: And by EPR you mean Etu public relations (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Public relations. Yes.
Speaker 1: So you were doing press releases?
Speaker 2: Press releases, every--the magazines came out then, you know, it got to some of the celebrities.  I would spend commission to do jewelry for Iman for a birthday party and to do a show, shortly thereafter at Sardi's [New York, New York] for Ben Vereen and Max Roach, may he rest in peace.  And then it just continued from there, to the Essence catalog.  Some of the hats that I actually designed for Doors [ph.], two publicists started fighting over them at a show in Midtown [Midtown Manhattan, New York, New York].  And then I got offered, you know, stores to carry the hats and it just continued from there.  My passion was footwear, but to master the footwear and accessory business, I didn't know a lot of people in--of color, particularly, in this industry.  Particularly footwear, so to master that, 'cause when you look at America's greats, Calvin Klein, Ralph Lauren and Donna Karan, they lag behind the European counterparts because they focused on apparel.  So my strategy is to do it in reverse.
Speaker 1: Accessories first and then--
Speaker 2: Accessories, footwear, footwear accessories first and then move into apparel.  'Cause when you look at a Gucci, you know, over half of their sales are in leather goods.  So my goal is to do in my boutique, which we're working on now, signature flagship stores in Paris [France] and Tokyo [Japan], you know, they are major fashion capitals is to carry luggage, footwear, small leather goods and accessories.
Story_ID: 508242
Speaker 1: When did you establish the Sole Kitchen [New York, New York], was that the same--at the same address of 619 145th [Street] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, Sole Kitchen I actually had two spaces on 135th Street between Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard], right between 7th [Avenue] actually and Frederick Douglass [Boulevard], and they were pretty much contiguous.  So in one I had Solesville, the Etu Evans Foundation shoe repair shop [Solesville: Etu Evans Foundation, New York, New York] and then two doors down was the Sole Kitchen, which was comprised of several antique stoves that featured my work.  Because I didn't wanna turn off the high end retailers but I needed a way to have income to service clients, so I knew that one, one of those ways to actually achieve my goal was to provide the foot massages which I'm very good at because I'm using my hands all the time and I love serving people.  That's what my mother [Rosa Johnson Evans] does.  So we had exotic teas.  I remember once the London Times [The Times], they came and they were taking pictures and everybody just started coming.  And there was a time where the power went out and we had like twenty Asian girls, so we bought flashlights and people continued to shop.  And then we outgrew the shop because I could not do the foot massages with everyone barging in.  So then I moved to 127th Street.
Speaker 1: Now tell me about the transition in between your duplex on 145th Street and the Sole Kitchen?  Like, how did you develop from one into the other?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, the problem started to--the building started to have a lot of problems.
Speaker 1: 619?
Speaker 2: No, 236 West 135th Street.  There was the Sole Kitchen and then two doors down from the Sole Kitchen was the Solesville shoe repair shop.
Speaker 1: Right, I understand but I'm saying, when you were on 145th Street, how did you develop from there into these two stand-alone shops that you eventually had on 135th (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, I see what you're saying.  Well, actually I went to Europe to work as a private behavioral therapist after the 619 address.  I was in grad school [Columbia University, New York, New York] and I'd graduated in '96 [1996].  So when I came back I started saving money to acquire space, I wanted retail space.  I wanted to move it out of my living space.
Story_ID: 508243
Speaker 1: I gotta slow you down a little bit.  So you're on 145th Street at 619--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and then what do you do, you decide you're gonna go to graduate school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And where do you attend graduate school?
Speaker 2: Columbia University [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And what do you study there?
Speaker 2: Applied behavior science.
Speaker 1: So this is a continuation of the behavior studies that you were doing in undergrad [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because you're still very interested in behavior studies.  Can you tell us a little bit about your studies at Columbia?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: What you were focused on and how you developed your course load?
Speaker 2: Actually, I said--I told one of my good friends that I'm going to Columbia University.  I say, "You know, it's always been my goal to go to Columbia and to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And I'm in New York [New York] so I'm definitely going to Columbia."  And they said, "Well, you know, they don't take a lot of black guys.  They only take one a year."  So, I said, "It doesn't matter, I'm still going."  "You're just gonna go up there without an appointment?"  I said, "Sure I am."  So I went up, knocked on Doug Greer's [R. Douglas Greer] door, said, "Hi, I'm [HistoryMaker] Etu Evans and I'm very interested in behavior, behavioral studies and I would like to talk to you if you have a moment, or should I schedule an appointment with someone?"  He said, "Yeah, where'd you go to school?"  (Laughter) Nice guy but very direct.  So long story short, he gave me a pile of books and said, "Well, why don't you read these and I'll come back in the hour and I'll ask you some questions?"  And he liked me, we formed a relationship, said I did good in terms of answering the questions I was quick on my feet, and he would love to have me in his program, to fill out the paperwork.  So I was accepted.  I thought I would go to Columbia and meet this very astute woman of color and, you know, she would be driving my Mercedes-Benz station wagon with my two kids.  But everything but that happened.  (Laughter) It was such a shock. I remember Ennis Cosby stopping me in the hallway and saying, "What's wrong little brother, it's gonna be all right."  And it was real- I never knew he was Ennis Cosby because the financial aid department would always say to me, "Etu, you and Ennis are the men, the two Es."  So I kept saying, who is this Ennis? And later I found out that it was Ennis Cosby, because everyone is different, you know, I went from being called stupid and dumb to being in an arena, a playing field where everyone was exceptionally brilliant.  And so at this point, I said, I can't--this ship cannot sink.  So I remember attending one of my classes and the teacher gave me a C, and I said, I remember going back to her after class and said, "You see this?  I don't wanna see it again or we're gonna see the president.  I don't do Cs.  That was middle school, I do A's.  And, if this is not an A or not to your expectation, you need to tell me because this cannot happen again."  And every since then I was making A's so it was great.
Story_ID: 508244
Speaker 1: And did you--what was your--what kind of projects did you work on while you were at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, its applied behavioral science, it's the CABAS [Comprehensive Application of Behavior Analysis to Schooling] model which uses positive reinforcement.  If the kid or adult is hitting you, you can't hit them.  You have to do a probe or form a baseline to find out what's actually in the repertoire of the individual that you're trying to help.  Find out what their primary reinforcers are, what they need for you to get what you need.  So you learn about the free operate setting versus the instructional setting.  It's very effective; it's cured populations in Switzerland.   And, Columbia has the number one program and got them re-institutionalized back into the workplace.  I have--we worked with some kids who had propionic acidemia, which is an eating disorder, you know, creating programs and interventions to keep kids to keep the tube down 'cause when they pull it up, they're really tearing up their insides and intestines.  To just behavioral problems, you know, screaming, biting, also getting them on task to be able to sit, instructional types of things and to look.  That's a skill set because you can't learn if you aren't looking at the person.  If you're looking over here and you've been taught over here, clearly that's gonna be a problem.  So one of my internships took place at Mother Cabrini High School [New York, New York], which is up in The Cloisters [The Met Cloisters, New York, New York], a beautiful area, and we had kids actually two to six.  And we worked in conjunction with Columbia Presbyterian Hospital [New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York] and that's where most of our kids came from, and most of them were Latino.
Story_ID: 508245
Speaker 1: Now, it sounded like you went to Europe after your studies--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) which is where you applied some of this applied behavioral--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --studies, but my notes also say that you studied marketing and fashion at Parsons School of Design [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you do that before you went to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes, in 1993.
Speaker 1: Okay, so let's step back before we go to Europe and talk about your career there and talk about Howard Davis in particular, and what you were doing at Parsons and what that, what that study was like?
Speaker 2: Well, Howard Davis is a genius.  He's the only person that I know who is a person of color, who teaches footwear and at the level of proficiency that he does.  He's given me wonderful quotes in the media; he's been like an uncle.  He actually would bring his shoes for us to design and to actually enhance as well as the students.  We've done a lot of projects through Solesville [Solesville: Etu Evans Foundation, New York, New York] to enhance the work of students at Parsons.
Speaker 1: So, while you were at Parsons, tell us about--a little bit about a shoemaking curriculum because, you know, most of us are not making shoes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So what kind of classes do you take and what kind of things are you learning?  Is there anything that you're learning that you hadn't really realized about shoes before?  Just give us sort of a sense.
Speaker 2: Well, that was I would say the first foretaste of the complexities (laughter) involved in shoemaking.  All of the patterns, looking for lasts, and it's really problematic when you're trying to make shoes in this country because the lasts aren't very high.  And I wanna create a stiletto.  So, if you tilt it, you can tell by holding the, the front of the last by tilting it down.  The amount of space that you have under it will determine how high the heel can be, well, they weren't very high.  It's hard to get a shoe last in the U.S. that's over three inches.
Speaker 1: Where do shoe lasts come from?  Who makes them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most of them are made in Italy and China, and like South America.
Speaker 1: So, when you're beginning a shoe it's something that you order, it's not something that you make yourself?
Speaker 2: Yes.  You choose the, the height and you also choose the toe box, the shape that you want.  And whether that's gonna be, you know, a triple E or it's gonna be a narrow, an A, all of those kinds of things are involved.
Story_ID: 508246
Speaker 1: So that's one thing you're studying at Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York], what else, what other kinds of classes and information did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, the reason I actually switched to get the degree from the Fashion Institute of Technology [New York, New York], FIT, was that Parsons only has one course.  So I was repeating the same course and you didn't get a degree, it was continuing education.  Though it was rich, beneficial, and Parsons certainly has more resources because it's a private institution, it's 'Project Runway' and everything else that's coming out of Parsons, excellent resources.  But FIT actually had an associate's degree where you can actually not only get the degree but you are going more in-depthly into making several, I would say, more pairs of shoes.
Speaker 1: So, you were at Parsons repeating the same course?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then what year did you transfer into FIT?
Speaker 2: I actually attended FIT during--because I had a master's [degree] from Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], I only had to do a year for the associate's versus the two years.  So I went there in '99 [1999] and graduated in 2000 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You did that afterwards.  So, while you're at Parsons, how many times did you repeat the same course?
Speaker 2: Twice.
Speaker 1: And, then after that you decided that you were gonna go to Columbia and earn your master's?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 508247
Speaker 1: And then after Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], you go to Europe and what are you doing in Europe?  Where are you working in applied behavioral science (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm working all over Paris [France], San Tropez [Saint-Tropez, France], Italy.  I'm working all over Europe as a private behavioral therapist for affluent families.
Speaker 1: And how did you get your clientele, I mean, you obviously have a strong PR [public relations] muscle so what--how were you advertising your services and could you tell us--maybe you could give us the names of some of your clients?  And perhaps you can't.
Speaker 2: They will kill me.
Speaker 1: And what kind of work were you doing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I will say I had a lot of clients in the Madison Avenue, 5th Avenue, Lexington [Avenue] downtown, very much the upper echelon, which also because I specialize in luxury footwear and accessories, it was the perfect climate for me to really learn my consumer and their behavior, behaviors morning, noon, and night.  Because a lot of times it's just misperceived in the black community that if you have on a sable mink (background noise) or if you have on a fur coat that, that's luxury.  And really luxury is a lifestyle, it's how you sit, it's how you're looking, it's how you interact, it's your mannerisms.  Even in behaviorisms, if a child--I put a penny in my palm and a child grabs that, on the test that child is gonna score very poorly and it's gonna work against them.  But if the child is using their pensa-grasp [ph.], it's a higher elevation of thinking.  So it's very much those kinds of things and nuances that I learned to better serve my clientele.
Speaker 1: So it sounds like you're starting your practice in Manhattan [New York] and then you're moving over to Europe.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And are you working with the same age group, two to six?
Speaker 2: It's interesting, I started off doing that and then some of--I've learned it's a whole new world from the community of color in that communities of color, they get divorced or they may have altercations and they come back and they're in the same bed.  It was not so much the case with some of these clients.  They live in these incredible high rises or townhouses but they sleep in separate rooms.  It's just a total different way of doing things.  You know, some people would say that it's very much like Bill [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and a Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] where it's an understanding and you look at the bigger picture and it's a business arrangement.  So both parties benefit through the endurance.
Speaker 1: And so you're working with their children?
Speaker 2: And then I end up working with the parents.
Speaker 1: At the same time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what's the--what kind of work are you doing with the parents?  You know, I'm assuming you're doing a behavioral work with the children and attempting--
Speaker 2: Well, CABAS [Comprehensive Application of Behavior Analysis to Schooling], the use is what makes it unique is that it quantifies the information is that it uses visual graphic display, so everything has to be graphed.  I can show you what's happening and then create an intervention to modify that behavior to put it into extinction.
Speaker 1: Is it like a super nanny?
Speaker 2: Well, the super nanny is not graphing anything except her money in the bank.  This is more of a science, so it's measurable.  She's just go--we're gonna try this.  No, that's not scientifically based.
Speaker 1: And then what kind of work do you end up doing with the parents?
Speaker 2: Counseling, family dynamics really getting them to see their family.  Sometime help--making them accept their behaviors.  And, you know, it's very interesting so you kind of have to be very clear on who you are and skilled enough to convince them.  So they know that they came to Columbia, so that's why they came because they thought they were getting the very best.  And all of their cohorts were from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Columbia as well.  So they knew that I was qualified even though there was an instance when one of the clients was upset.  We were in San Tropez on a private beach and my student, subject if you will, took sand and everyone's topless and started throwing the sand inappropriately and screaming onto, you know, all of these beautiful women on the beach.  And, when I went to modify his behavior, the mother jumped up and she said some pretty derogatory things to me like, "I'm gonna send your black butt home."  I said, "What you failed to realize is that we attended the same school. I am a professional, and I'm prepared for an extended vacation in Paris.  It's actually my favorite pastime."  I said, "I don't know where you're going but I won't be going with you today."  And I packed my bags and I left.  Her husband called, increased my salary, said he would fly in and be there in two days if I stayed.  She ended up putting the other millionaires out of the home and said that I was her favorite person, and that I understood her.  So you have to know who you are, you have to know what you profess to know and study, and stand your ground.  And that's, you know, what I do.
Story_ID: 508248
Speaker 1: So, you did behavioral work in Europe also in San Tropez [Saint-Tropez, France].  And, how do you eventually come to curve that as a profession?  And I don't know if you still do any of that work now, and really start to focus on shoes?
Speaker 2: Well, on my days off, I'm on my way to Paris [France] or I'm on my way to shop (laughter), you know, and not only shopping for them but for myself.  And I remember in going to Paris and a guy said, "You know what you have?  Etu [HistoryMaker Etu Evans], you have impeccable taste, and that--and class is what you have most of all and you can't buy class.  You can buy style."  He said, "They're gonna love you when you get out of here out of the vineyard and you make it over to Paris."  And, sure enough, his words materialized.  A gentleman was running behind me; he was actually complimenting me but I wasn't fluent in French.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's stop and just slow that down just a little bit.  You're in Paris?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, you're on the street shopping and you get the impression that someone is about to mug you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell us about that?
Speaker 2: City living (laughter), yeah.  I didn't know that he was complimenting me. I didn't speak French.  But he was very assertive in his demeanor and how he was coming toward me.  So I said just let me move myself out of danger and I ran up an escalator.  And this guy is like, "No, you, you look impeccable, they love you."  You know, he says, "I like it."  So I took the escalator back down, introduced myself and said, "You should have told me two blocks ago."  And, long story short, I ended up in this gentleman's office and he was one of the publicists for Gucci.  And he kept trying to say, "You should really work at Yves Saint Laurent," because even before Yves Saint Laurent brought those horns out, I had been doing them ten years prior.
Speaker 1: Brought horns out?
Speaker 2: Yes, you know, they had the handbags with the, the handles were made from horns.  You know, I had been collecting wood out of St. Nicholas Park [New York, New York] and creating and sculpting handles.  You know, in the couture market you go all out and then you modify it more so for the masses.  So I would take that same design, cast it in metal and make it smaller as opposed to--like I have a bag called the survivor bag, and it's made out of a kudu horn which is about yea long.  And so, it's kind of like a weapon and a survivor bag at the same time.
Speaker 1: So, the Gucci publicist who chased you up and down the escalator, did he suggest that you do your own shoe line?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he said, "You're very talented but you should work for a company first maybe.  I could see you having your own line."  He said, "It's very fresh.  No one is, no one is doing this."  And I said, "I wanna be an entrepreneur."  And then on my way coming back there was a gentleman who had connections seated behind me at Nordstrom, and he was peeking, you know, looking into my book as I was reorganizing it and I didn't realize he was peeking.  And he made a phone call for me, wrote me a check and to get me started.  So that's when I started looking into retail.  And I decided that, you know, after studying the Jimmy Choo and those models that I always want--I believe in having your own.  So I began to just start doing made-to-measure to build a name and now that I've built a name, now we're actually transitioning into retail but not selling directly to stores, but creating my own flagship stores.  Because to me luxury is about the illusion of scarcity.  So then as they come to me and we create a demand, not to mention I get to maintain a higher profit margins and then initially going into department stores like the Neimans [Neiman Marcus] and the Harrods of the world.
Speaker 1: So, made-to-measure shoes that one that I'm ordering for myself personally--
Speaker 2: Just for you (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you're making the shoe just for me.  It's a couture shoe?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Perhaps there's only one.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, after you have spent time in Europe and now you've decided that you're gonna have your own--you're gonna continue to be an entrepreneur, what do you do when you come back to the United States?
Speaker 2: I start working--
Speaker 1: Do you stop practicing behavioral science with children?
Speaker 2: Well, I certainly decline (laughter) many offers.  I mean, I enjoy--I am really passionate about young people and teaching but what I do is I start saving every dime to actually acquire a space.  And to acquire the materials that I need, because what I need is costing me twice as much in terms of the type of luxury materials that I need.  And then, you know, shipping the lasts because they're heavy to me.  Because initially I wasn't actually having the shoes made in Italy, now I am.  I was having those lasts sent to the shoetique, I mean, Solesville shoe repair shop [Solesville: Etu Evans Foundation, New York, New York] and I had my equipment there, so that's where I would make my shoes.  But as I became increasingly popular, it just posed, you know, a big problem.
Story_ID: 508249
Speaker 1: Who are some of your first celebrity clients?
Speaker 2: First celebrity clients I would say would be like in an Iman, Afina [ph.], who was a painter and a pretty well-known model at the time, Roshumba [Roshumba Williams], the models. And then I remember doing Heavy D and Father MC, you know that--the video that Heavy D did with all the models and it has everybody in it, and Chris Tucker all of them (laughter). And then it just, you know, increased to, you know, getting a call from Halle Berry or, you know, a call from a publicist saying Madonna wants your shoes.  Now we are actually actively seeking Scarlett Johansson, and then the list keeps going, then Tyra [Tyra Banks], then it goes on and on and on.
Speaker 1: And are you making made-to-measure shoes for each of these people or are they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, absolutely, made-to-measure.  Like one time I received a call and said that a celebrity wanted to, to meet with me, they were in the area and they wanted to know was I, you know, in Europe or not because they wanted to see me.  But no name and it was Toni, the actress Jill Marie [Jill Marie Jones], who plays Toni on 'Girlfriends.'  And this was one o'clock in the morning.
Speaker 1: That you needed to go and meet with her?
Speaker 2: No, that she showed up at the door, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, wow.  And so you had her in and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, I mean, models, actresses, writers, people who come at--around the clock.  Yeah, so, I mean, I service people up to four o'clock in the morning.  And they all have their elixir of choice, you know, I have the Martell cognac campaign as well to I have confectionary, to, if you want squid and then you get the peppermint eucalyptus foot massage.  Sometimes I would have a musician to play, I had an antique piano.  Whatever it needed to create the ambiance and the experience that says, [HistoryMaker] Etu Evans, I have to come back.  You know, nothing is too good for my clients.  'Cause money is not an object.
Story_ID: 508250
Speaker 1: And when do you make the move from 135th Street to 127th [Street]?
Speaker 2: I would say that probably happened about maybe four years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when--then you said you attended FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] in 1999 and you didn't stay long because you had quite a load of credits from before, but what did you do at FIT?  You'd spoke a little bit about why you decided to go there, could you just repeat a little bit of that and tell us what you were doing there?
Speaker 2: Actually, Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York] doesn't have a matriculated program for a degree, so I decided that I should be credit-ialized even though Howard Davis does an excellent job at what he does in the curriculum and how to really consider the anatomical components that are needed into constructing a shoe, I wanted the degree.  So I transitioned over to FIT.  The great thing there is that you also learn how to do accessories; you learn handbags, immediately you learn footwear, you talk a little bit about jewelry.  I had already been doing hats so I was very clear on hats.  That wasn't my focus.  I'd sold a million hats already.  But those were some of the things, the integration of all of the creative disciplines as it pertains to accessories were instrumental there at FIT.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your most important teachers that you experienced at FIT?
Speaker 2: Well, the most memorable one would be Vasilios [Vasilios Christofilakos].  I mean, he was so direct and over the top.  It's what people perceive fashion to be the personalities of someone in fashion, flamboyant, loud, sharp, and he lived up to it on his highest heel.
Story_ID: 508251
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about your time at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], can you talk about who's there with you and perhaps who influenced you while you were at FIT?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say God influenced me at FIT, still listening to my [paternal] grandmother [Queen Esther Evans] in my ear.  I was very much an outcast, again, because they didn't like the fact that I had not pursued fashion like they did.  Most of my contemporaries went to design schools, school of the arts for this.  Their whole focus was on sketching and I'm from a background where I'm very much into business acumen and making sure that the aesthetic works but that also it can be sold.  How do you sell it?  So, I remember vividly, when they asked, "Well, how much do you think you can make?"  And I raised--when they said--and they asked me and I raised my hand and they said, "Oh, you're crazy, you can't (unclear)." "Sure I can. Why can't I?  What's to stop me?"  And it was just downhill from there.  You know, I'm an optimist and I'm not into drugs and a lot of them were interested in behaviors that they thought needed to be exercised to be accepted and that didn't work for me either.  So, it kind of isolated me.  So I was really driven by my network of friends that I had prior to attending FIT and then I met a young lady, Carolyn Desilu [ph.], who's a writer here in the city, and another woman, Betty Thomas [ph.], who is a jewelry designer among many other things, a multitalented young lady.  And they were instrumental in terms of keeping me inspired, a laugh.  But I remember them cutting up my senior exhibition exhibit so I couldn't participate.  And when I went to approach the chairperson she was very nonchalant about it.  I said, "Well, where's security?"  She said, "Somewhere up there."  So, that gives you a picture of--my mother [Rosa Johnson Evans] was just completely just vexed.  And I remember it was the students in the fashion department not the footwear department that rallied to my side and let me use the sewing machines.  And they normally give out mini cubicles but three huge cubicles, four of them in fact, and two would be solely for one person's collection and the other two would be split between two individuals.  And I had the first one, and Essence came and they sent out their cheesy invitation and I--and they told us no exotics.  Of course I broke the rules, found the brightest green, anaconda skin that I could find, striking, and I had hats in it, I had jewelry that I'd made in that, I had boots, mules, this interesting tote that I developed on an open-toe sling-back.  And I remember Scott Prentice, the president of Bruno Magli came to me and said, "You're the next big shoe designer."  And she said, "Don't talk to him."  And my mother said, "What does she mean, what is she saying?  Why doesn't she want him to talk to you, isn't that your chairperson?"  So I don't know what was going on but an interesting kind of tension certainly took place.  Many of my friends, they'd drove in from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I mean, I, you know, I'm a pretty active guy so a lot of people came to support me.  And she said, "Are you with the Etu [HistoryMaker Etu Evans] mob?"  So, I don't know, it's just very disconcerting.
Speaker 1: What do you mean your senior project was cut up?
Speaker 2: Well, I was working on a sewing machine, the table behind me I had my work on it, and someone took it while I was working and they totally destroyed it.  Demolished it, they cut it into pieces.  You know, which is heartbreaking, one, and to a student it's quite expensive.  'Cause those were exotic skins and it's a lot of work when you're learning and then you have to make everything by hand, it's not like it's being made overseas.
Speaker 1: Were there black alums at FIT who have influenced you or who you learned about while you were there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not at all.
Speaker 1: What about Steven Cutting [HistoryMaker Steven A. Cutting]?
Speaker 2: Well, I met Steven Cutting down the line actually after graduating.  I think Steven Cutting is a wonderful example, one because he's one of the few designers of color that I know, male in fashion who has a family.  And, you know, that's one of the things that I'm, I'm very fond of is having a family and being a good father.  And teaching, you know, my sons and daughters the lessons that I've learned so they can be productive citizens.  And he does a remarkable job of that, not to mention he's a talented designer.
Speaker 1: Also, when you graduated from FIT, were you able to get your senior project evaluated by the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we had the actual exhibition and that's when I did my collection in anaconda and black python.
Speaker 1: And that's when Essence magazine came and (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everyone came, yes.
Story_ID: 508252
Speaker 1: How did you start working with the Institute for Youth Entrepreneurship [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I love business.  And it really got me out of financial problems, it kept me busy, it kept me focused.  So I met--I ran into a gentleman by the name of Steve Lawrence who was the director at the time, and we had a great relationship.  And he says, "You know, we need somebody like you Etu [HistoryMaker Etu Evans].  Why don't you come by, let's see how we can work something out?"  And I went by and, you know, the rest is history.  He said, "You're gonna be my assistant director, you're gonna handle the marketing, you're gonna teach marketing and I want you to help oversee product design, as well as I want you to go around the city and recruit, from all the major high schools, students to actually enter into our program.  And explain this curriculum not only to them but to their parents as well."
Speaker 1: And what was the curriculum at the Institute for Youth Entrepreneurship?
Speaker 2: Well, it was comprised of the various compartments, product design, operation and logistics, marketing and finance.
Speaker 1: And you said that the students there were in high school--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so does that make them fourteen to eighteen?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the most impressive projects that you saw come from students that were there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the Institute of Youth Entrepreneurship, it actually ran a card and promotional company.  So a lot of the deals that I was able to land with them was to actually place their various holiday cards, or golf bags or whatever the company is looking for within, you know, their structures, corporate structures.  And some of those entities included Bear Stearns [Bear, Stearns and Company, Inc.], Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.], the Beacon Group [Beacon Group, LLC], and then a lot of other companies.
Story_ID: 508253
Speaker 1: And that inspired you to establish the Solesville Foundation, the Etu Evans Foundation [Solesville: Etu Evans Foundation, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, I established Solesville when I returned back from Paris [France] and I started to mentor a young man whom I met at IYE, the Institute for Youth Entrepreneurship [New York, New York], Christopher Chambers [Chris Chambers], still mentor him to this day.  And he said, "Professor Evans [HistoryMaker Etu Evans], one day I wanna have shoes like that."  And I said, "Well, if you bring back your report card and show me some A's, you can have these."  And I had only worn these Gucci shoes twice.  And the following week he did and I took them off and I said, "These are yours."  And then I began to look around and noticed that, though we were empowering and impacting these young people, you know, mentally but they didn't have--you know, 'cause we'd getting them to do job interviews and that kind of thing but I notice they didn't have--they had--some of them had suits but then they were wearing Timberlands and Nikes, or shoes that were not quote, unquote, corporate appropriate.  So then I began--and God told me to start collecting shoes, you know, at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] and go around every morning in Harlem [New York, New York] at one o'clock with my red cart and I would collect shoes out of the garbage, I would collect shoes off the street, anywhere I could get them.  I would refurbish them and I would give it to young people, I would give it to young men.  I have passion for young men of color who were incarcerated and who needed to be, you know, re-institutionalized back into society.  I would give them to back-to-work shelters and then it just kept going.  I became known for shoes, not only creating high-end shoes, but giving shoes to build self-esteem to create high heel success.
Speaker 1: And as a part of the Solesville Foundation is shoe repair training for young people?
Speaker 2: Yes, an apprenticeship.  We also distribute shoes in what we call Sole Out, where we distribute shoes throughout Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific Islands.  And then our Sole Tap, like everything has a shoe connotation to it, we donate shoes to Dress for Success, Career Gear, Bottomless Closet, and we have our Solevivor initiative S-O-L-E-V-I-V-O-R.  And what we do there is actually try to bring attention to pediatric aids, malaria, and kids who've been molested.  'Cause a lot of the kids who are in these orphanages in Africa, you know, that's a main thing.  A lot of them have been molested and haven't received proper counseling, so we try to help them survive.  And we created a bag called the Maria Davis survivor bag, and she's a well-known AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] activist here in Harlem and we have everything in it from dental dams to condoms and try to pass it on to the high schools, and also include them as separate package along with the shoes.
Speaker 1: So the Solesville Foundation really joins your three--I'm gonna call it three main elements, your entrepreneurship, your helping children with behavior, and shoes and accessories and fashion.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And allows me to speak and provides a wonderful platform.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about some of the initiatives that you've done with Solesville like after Hurricane Katrina.
Speaker 2: Oh sure.
Speaker 1: You said next year you're going to Africa and that right now you were in a place that's escaping me, but if you could talk specifically about a couple of the places that you've actually done shoe initiatives and start it with Katrina?
Speaker 2: Well, we've done a lot of shoe drives for the tsunami [2004 Indian Ocean tsunami] and Katrina throughout New Jersey, primarily New Brunswick [New Jersey], Plainfield [New Jersey], in front of the state office building [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. State Office Building] on 125th Street [New York, New York].  People would send us shoes all the time.  We also have something that's called Shoebox Santa [Shoebox Santa Toy Drive] where people donate their favorite items or write us a check for twenty-five to thirty dollars and that we will send that out as well to those locations.  Or, if there is any natural disaster like a Katrina, we're still sending shoes to Katrina.  Currently, we're working on a big drive for November in the Dominican Republic, Punta Cana [Dominican Republic].  And then the following year, we'll be in South Africa.
Speaker 1: Dominican Republic--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) was the one I couldn't remember.
Story_ID: 508254
Speaker 1: We talked a little bit about the history of shoes as related to slavery, but what's the most--what's important about shoes for the youth?  You talked about the fact that a lot of people don't have appropriate shoes for reentry into society or just while they're--have not been incarcerated and they are walking around.  What's the importance of shoes for young people today?
Speaker 2: Well, I think shoes are the cornerstone for--shoes are the cornerstone for one's overall attire.  I think everything is really based off of shoes, while you will hear people use cliches like you can tell a man by his shoes, or you can tell a woman where she's going by the type of shoes she wearing.  So I think it's, it provides a tremendous amount of self-esteem when you put on a pair of comfortable shoes, because when a woman's shoes are hurting her feet, the world's upside down.  So shoes are very important, she's annoyed.  But I really think not only for the aesthetic but for the spine, for the body proper footwear is really important.
Speaker 1: So, are the stilettos that you make comfortable?
Speaker 2: Well, they have a lot of perks, you know, I've had some gentlemen chase me down the street and said it saved their marriages.  So I would say yes.  I have a friend who's a professor at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] and she can't walk in high heel shoes generally, but she said, for some reason, she never falls in my shoes because they're so well made.  And I do have cushion in them.
Speaker 1: So really, the issue is not necessarily just the condition of your foot and posture but the, the quality of the shoe that you're purchasing.
Speaker 2: Yes, the material and how it's built.
Story_ID: 508255
Speaker 1: We were just talking about how a shoe is made and how it makes you feel, can you show us a couple of shoes and talk about the construction (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.  Impeccable construction, well made last, Italian last, and then this shoe, actually, this is one of the samples that I started working on.  I wanted to kind of like when you're saying does she--she loves me, she loves me not, that's where this is inspired from the petals when you pull them apart.  And I've discovered that once I completed this shoe design that she would love me.  We've gotten a lot of love for this design, so this is one of the designs that I've been playing with in the factory, and just playing with different heels.  We've done it without this, in patent leather in the back and metal.  And this one, the feminine fanfare continues, you know, with grosgrain ribbon over suede and a lattice of bows, which I think is very sexy and sophisticated, a wider heel.
Speaker 1: And are you doing anything for the person who needs extreme arch support or for people who need a wider shoe, or support in the heel?  Some of your common--
Speaker 2: I would say what we are doing is that with what I've found rather is that many women come to us to have their boots spliced because they have trouble particularly in the Latino and the African American community with the calves.  So what I've decided to do in my line is I'm creating what I call equity girls, who are larger in size.  So you can have the special ordered boot in particular where you have the calf you won't have those problems (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the shoe can come up high.
Speaker 2: Yes, that seems to be a major problem.  We haven't had many problems with shoes not fitting.
Speaker 1: So people are quite comfortable.
Story_ID: 508256
Speaker 1: Have you been teaching at Medgar Evers College [Brooklyn, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes I have.
Speaker 1: And what do you teach there as an adjunct?
Speaker 2: At Medgar Evers I actually taught--ran their freshman curriculum.  So business entrepreneurship, actually preparing for the future, how does one become successful--the steps, helping young people see the big picture and to develop a cohesive plan to achieve their goals, that was primarily my job.
Story_ID: 508257
Speaker 1: And can you talk about being compared with Manolo Blahnik?  I've heard that you're called Harlem Blahnik, what exactly does that mean?
Speaker 2: Well, in some regards it's flattering but I always say I'm better than Manolo Blahnik and Jimmy Choo.  I don't think there's a comparison, I don't think there's a substitute created for [HistoryMaker] Etu Evans.  I believe when God made me that was it, and I was complete and it is well.  And that is the type of greatness that I aspired in life for people for them to tap into their greatness.  And to step into greatness when they put on an Etu Evans design.  I think it's very interesting, when people will compare me to a Manolo Blahnik or a Jimmy Choo.  They seemingly fail to realize that the shoe was created by a man of color and the shoe lasting machine was created by a man of color.  So anyone's imitation is certainly not I.  I am the original certainly moving forward in the vein that was created for me.
Story_ID: 508258
Speaker 1: Please tell us the name of the person who created the shoe lasting machine?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, Jan Matzeliger [Jan Ernst Matzeliger].
Speaker 1: And do you know a little bit of information about Jan Matzeliger and what his background was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have the--well, he was mixed.  I found a diagram I'm actually trying to get my hands on that to purchase it of what the actual first shoe lasting machine was comprised of.  It's really fascinating when you look at the timeline and not being able to have access to shoes, to have someone with such visionary insight who can create this mechanism to produce a shoe.
Speaker 1: Well, when I said background I actually meant his background in shoe--in cobbling.
Speaker 2: See, I didn't see him with a background in cobbling.  As most people of color, they actually learn the trade or they're around someone who was actually in shoe repair, and then it stemmed out of that.  What I read of him, it didn't say that at all.  I know, and from some of the people who've taught me like Edson Murray, who is really known as my father in this industry, he started off in shoe repair and he hates the term cobbling.  He always says, "I build shoes.  Cobbling that's just decorative stuff, that's not serious."
Speaker 1: So what is cobbling, can you define it in, you know, in--
Speaker 2: Well, cobbling is the, the loose term that's used and you'll hear it in a lot of European circles, for someone who makes footwear.  But he likes to think of himself as an architect, but it synonymous, potato, potato.  So I would say that Matzeliger probably started off the same way because most people in this country don't have the access to shoe equipment and the only access that generally is available is through someone who's been actually repairing shoes.  Because you have the sander so you can sand your heels or do what you need to do.  And you have the hardware to cut the leather, you know, to, to skive, the skiver, the skiver is really when the leather is too thick, you would just cutting it down to the, the level that you need it sort of like a meat cutter.
Speaker 1: And do you have--are you constructing shoes today at your 127th Street store [New York, New York]?  Like you said, at 135th [Street] you have two places and one was a workshop, do you have a workshop there?
Speaker 2: Actually I have a rep now in Italy so all those shoes from this point on are being made in Italy.
Story_ID: 508259
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about some of the awards that you've won and what those were for?
Speaker 2: I have--well, my goal is to win the CFDA.
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: Council of Fashion Designers of America top footwear and accessory designer of the year.  But I've won public citizen of the year with a National Association of Social Workers, through my fraternity Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] I've been their public citizen of the year, McDonald's their national everyday hero, the Blessed Billionaires [National Association of Blessed Billionaires] entrepreneur, one of their entrepreneurs of the year, Crain's small business, which is like the, the business bible here in New York [New York].  I've won the Crain's award, I've really been fortunate and blessed, it's so many I can't even (laughter) think of them all.  Awards for speaking, a lot of entrepreneurial awards and philanthropic commemorations.  Oh, I received a citation last year from Senator Bill Perkins [HistoryMaker Bill Perkins], the city museum of New York [Museum of the City of New York, New York, New York], and the list continues.
Story_ID: 508260
Speaker 1: You've expressed many times that you do quite a bit of public speaking.  You said very soon you're gonna go and open for [HistoryMaker] Les Brown?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have been opening for Les Brown.
Speaker 1: Can you just tell us a little bit about what you talk about?
Speaker 2: Sure. As a speaker I'm known on the lecture circuit as the bootstrapper.  And my whole philosophy in life is that no matter what your circumstances are, no matter where you find yourself or with whom you find yourself, you can always pull yourself up, pull yourself over and pull yourself out.  The goal is to continue moving, never allow yourself to stand still and let fear stop you from moving into your greatest destiny and what your purpose to be.  For me, fear, I would say is not a death sentence.  And it's easily erased by faith that's why life provides erasers, so put your best foot forward.  So I speak on entrepreneurship, how to get started in business, overcoming opposition and adversity.  I speak on behavioral topics, how to become the best you, pursuing your passion.  I talk about youth development, how to get a job, etiquette, training, grooming, and overall relationships.  And sort of taking on a position of being a life coach.  So those are a few of the topics.
Story_ID: 508261
Speaker 1: We've spoken a little bit about your, your membership with Corinthians [First Corinthian Baptist Church, New York, New York] and your history in the church--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but I understand that you're quite spiritual.  Do you have sort of a regiment throughout the day that you use to take care of your spiritual balance?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that religion is a cover up and it's deadly.  So I try not so much to focus on the fig leaf of hiding behind religion and I try to speak more to relationship and kingdom building.  I think you should be able to speak to the alcoholic--Jesus was cool, he wore sandals, he was radical, he was--he wasn't just trying to save people who were in church.  So, I'm not the preachy type but I love humanity and I believe that people need to--their needs to be addressed where they are.  So, if someone is hungry, you need to be talking about Jesus, you need to be feeding them and seeing what they need.  And, through your life example, they will ask who you are or they will certainly know who you are.  So, that's kind of where I am, it's about relationship for me.  Generally, at five o'clock I'm up singing (laughter) and reading my Bible or just praying. It's not like I'm holy than thou 'cause I, I mean, I don't think--people go, oh, that person's gay or that person's a criminal.  But I don't think God rates sins. I just don't do what you do.  It didn't work for me; it doesn't work for me.  But I don't think he'd go around pointing fingers at people, I think you try to put your best foot forward and be your best self, and that's what shape people.  Anybody can talk, anybody can preach but it's how you live.  And I think also by being honest, I'm honest with people, I'm honest with myself.  So, if it's not working, I say, Etu [HistoryMaker Etu Evans] this is not a good look, you need to really examine this.  So I think that's what people wanna see, I think that's what people wanna hear.  He's like me but he decided to do it this way, so maybe I should consider doing it this way.
Story_ID: 508262
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the future of shoemaking.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Are you feeling that through Soles- the Solesville Foundation [Solesville: Etu Evans Foundation, New York, New York] and training the youth in shoe repair and so forth, that you're expanding the number of black men perhaps in the industry of creating shoes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely.  I would say certainly black men, but not only black men, I get calls from women every day thanking me, saying that I've inspired them.  There was an article in Black Enterprise that said--I didn't even know that someone called and told me, you know, or they'll send me an article and it'll be from Germany or from some European publication and you go, well, how did they know?  You know, so it's that kind of thing but, you know, it's been said more than once that I've inspired a lot of people because of my visibility to know that their dream of designing shoes is possible.  And certainly we wanna take these black men at the helm and help them to become the best that they can be.  If they exhibit the promise that's required and the love and care of decision, that needs to be evolved into creating an [HistoryMaker] Etu Evans shoe then certainly we're gonna hire them as well, and empower them.
Story_ID: 508263
Speaker 1: So we've talked a little bit about what you're doing in terms of Solesville [Solesville: Etu Evans Foundation, New York, New York] and--
Speaker 2: I have to say--
Speaker 1: Please.
Speaker 2: --my long term goal for Solesville (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I was about to ask, What's your, what's your long term goal?
Speaker 2: --is to create the Etu Evans Pediatric AIDS and Podiatry Hospital in Harlem [New York, New York], South Africa, and Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: And what type of services are provided by your hospital?
Speaker 2: Podiatry is definitely a major service.  All of what's needed to help combat the pains, agonies, through counseling and medical facilitation for young people who have AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].  I'm really passionate about young people.  So that's really my focus.  And just overall healthcare for young people.
Speaker 1: That sounds like it provides a lot of opportunities also for podiatrists themselves to service the community.
Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause I will actually--one of the thing we wanna do in Solesville is provide scholarships to people and to college--to go to college to actually major in business and podiatry or footwear design.
Speaker 1: And do you, do you have a--sort of an eye towards informing people about the quality of shoes?  I mean, I see a lot of people at Payless [Payless ShoeSource, Inc.] or, you know, wearing cardboard shoes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I designed--Payless has contacted me after I was featured on 'The View' to knock myself off.  So, you know, it's more like disposable shoes but it's not something that I think you should--I think--I'm not gonna say Payless per se, I'm not trying to point fingers at anyone, but I really believe in quality footwear.  And I believe you can have some disposable footwear, so you can mix it up but it really--you should have quality shoes.
Speaker 1: Over the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --term of your life?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because your foot is taking shape to what you wear.  It's just like what you eat is who you are.  Well, what you wear is also who you are because it's affecting your bones, your anatomical structure.
Speaker 1: So you told us about your future of Solesville.  What's the future of your shoe line and what are you gonna--what's your next development with that?
Speaker 2: The future of Etu Evans footwear is to create luxocratic flagship stores in Paris [France], London [England], Tokyo, Japan, Dubai [United Arab Emirates], Madison Avenue [New York, New York] and Beverly Hills [California].  That's what the business plan currently has in it and I'm zealous to do it and it shall be done, and high heel success.
Speaker 1: And are you going to expand into wardrobe and fashion?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm gonna focus on high end luggage, handbags, small leather goods, belts, wallets, passport holders, that kind of thing.  Move into high end jewelry from your diamonds on to your precious metals.  A luxury line of pet accessories, so it's pretty much in the family of leather goods.  And then once that's done and the jewelry is done and the eyewear, and the neckwear and the headwear, and the signature fragrance is done, then I will begin to focus on apparel.
Story_ID: 508264
Speaker 1: Not to imply that you won't be here terribly long because we expect you to be here for many years, but when that's all over and done with, what would you like to have left?  What would you like your legacy to be, what's the legacy that you're building?
Speaker 2: Well, I think there's a big difference between excellent--of being excellent and, and, and actually inspiring greatness.  And for me, greatness is actually touching someone's life as you go along.  The ability to stop just for a second.  You can't all the time but taking someone with you to help them remember who you are and inspire something in them to actually pursue their purpose.  An excellence is just--a lot of people do things excellent, where they get a check, it's only about them and that's it.  You don't even remember their names, and I believe people who are really great, they inspire other people by their commitment to live out their dreams and in living their dreams, share their vision with other people and that vision stretches them.  So that's what I wanna leave, a stamp of greatness, I want to--want people to say that he loved life, he loved me, and he made a difference.  So that's what's important to me.  'Cause I was born to create, I don't need someone in front of me to create.  It's who I am, it's what I do, so for me I'm creating luxury lifestyle through leather to inspire people and through a shoe foundation [Solesville: Etu Evans Foundation, New York, New York] and standing on my highest heel as I speak.  So even some of my designs, I speak them into existence.  I don't, you know, I used to go into the factories and they'd go, "Oh, it's that Etu [HistoryMaker Etu Evans] guy.  Get out," and everybody would pull their hair out in Italy, 'cause his work is--this is not an easy one.  You have to work on this one, or they tell me it's not possible.  I say, well, I made it already and then I'll take it out of my bag.  So, if I can do it in Harlem [New York, New York], you can do it in Italy so let's make it happen.
Story_ID: 508265
Speaker 1: What you're looking at now is a photograph of my [paternal] grandfather, he was eighteen, Frederick Evans, Sr. when he was sent off to war.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my grandmother, Queen Esther Evans.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know when and where the picture was taken?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure when this photo was taken.  It just happens to be one of my favorite.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of Willie Mae Johnson, my mother's mom.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of Mattie Firstner [ph.], my grandmother's mom.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next, please?
Speaker 2: This photograph is where the music comes from in the family.  It features my grandmother, her father and all of her siblings, and they're actually standing on the steps of Bull Swamp Baptist Church [Orangeburg, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my mother as a child, Rosa Evans [Rosa Johnson Evans].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This dynamic duo consists of my grandmother, Queen Esther Evans and my grandfather, Frederick D. Evans, Sr.
Speaker 2: This is the genesis, mom and dad, Frederick D. Evans, Jr. [Frederick Evans, Jr.] and Rosa M. Evans.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my father, Frederick D. Evans, Jr.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my brother, Gregory Lamont Evans [Gregory Evans] and myself, [HistoryMaker] Etu Evans, Batman and Robin.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Thank you.
Speaker 1: So glad for my sister I didn't know what to do.  This is a photograph of my sister, Ami Evans [Ami Evans Gibson], my brother, Gregory Evans and myself, Etu Evans.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of the family, my father, Frederick D. Evans, Jr., my mother, Rosa Evans, my little brother, Gregory Evans and myself, Etu Evans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This photograph consists of my grandmother, Queen Esther Evans, my sister, Ami Evans, my brother, Gregory Evans, myself Etu Evans, my mother and father, Rosa Evans and Frederick D. Evans, Jr.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my father. I believe this was for one of the high school prom, Frederick D. Evans, Jr.
Speaker 2: I need you to mention that, that's the outfit that you mentioned during the interview.
Speaker 1: And this is the outfit that I mentioned that he wore during the taping.  Perhaps it's where I got my swagger.
Speaker 2: 'Cause, you know, that is you.  Like, I thought that was you.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This photograph features fashion editor Andre Leon Talley and myself, Etu Evans.  This photograph will forever be in Vogue.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Wow, this photograph speaks to me.  It consists of motivational speaker, [HistoryMaker] Les Brown and myself Etu Evans, Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, thank you.
Speaker 1: This photograph features the legendary--god I was trying to belch at the same time, I was trying to calm it down.  There we go, excuse me.  This photograph features [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and myself, Etu Evans.
Speaker 2: This photograph is of my mother, Rosa Evans, apple of my eye.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Ol' G from way back.  This is a photograph of me, Etu Evans, I was a student at South Carolina State University [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], and I was featured in the yearbook for my floral design and that's one of my photo designs featured in this particular photograph.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my mother, Rosa Evans holding me in our first born, Etu Evans.  I know I couldn't speak at this time 'cause there's no way I would have eggs dangling over my head.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of Cornel West and myself, Etu Evans.  It's my favorite IQ picture.  I'm gonna send this picture to Cornel too.
Speaker 2: This is Etu Evans without braces.
Speaker 1: This is the photograph from my graduation at Columbia University [New York, New York] in 1996.  It features my lovely grandmother, Queen Esther Evans and my professor and chairperson over the behavioral--applied behavioral science department, Dr. Doug Greer [R. Douglas Greer] and myself, Etu Evans.
