Story_ID: 57238
[SCOTT]:  (Simultaneous)--Okay, go ahead and start.  Basically, I've captured a still image, and then each time he puts a new one up, give us a description that'll allow him to create a caption.  (Simultaneous)-
[SCOTT]:  (Simultaneous)--Go ahead with this one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a copy of--a signed copy of a speech that President Clinton [President Bill Clinton] gave on the 35th anniversary of the march across the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama]--Bloody Sunday [March 7, 1965], and he always tells me that this is one of his favorite speeches that he gave as president.
[SCOTT]:  What was the date?  The date's probably on it, but-- The date's on it [March 7, 2000].
[SCOTT]:  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a signed copy of the speech that I helped write for the Democratic National Convention in 2000 where President Clinton nominated Al Gore to be president--to succeed in his presidency.
[SCOTT]:  And that's the cover of it, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the cover; the text is inside. [SCOTT]:  Okay.  Maybe we'll do a little piece at the end of your interview where we have you just thumb through that  (unclear).
[Larry]:  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: When I was a kid, one of my heroes, in fact still is, was Smokey Robinson, and I loved--I liked him because I love to sing, and also I thought he was a great poet and he's a great writer, and I got to see him (laughter) at a club called Club Venus in Baltimore, years ago, and this is one of my treasured pictures of me and Smokey Robinson.
[SCOTT]:  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I think this was in the 1960s.
[SCOTT]:  Okay, next?
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandson, Mazi.  I believe this was when he was one or two years old; he's now three and he's a ball of joy and I love him dearly.
[Larry]:  How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: M-A-Z-I.
[SCOTT]:  Good.
Speaker 2: Mazi (unclear).  That's his family; that's my daughter and my son-in-law Mike, my daughter Maga, my son-in-law Mike, and Mazi. [SCOTT]:  Okay, next?
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken at my 50th birthday party; it was a surprise party that my ex-wife Angie threw for me and--along with my best friend, the guy with the hat on, his name is Larry Blizzard (ph.), and I'm standing there with Blizzard and two of my best (simultaneous)-- [SCOTT]:  (Simultaneous)--Hang on a second.  You know what I forgot to do?  Let me see; we're probably okay.  We may be picking up okay 'cause we're--the lights are both bright over here.  Go ahead.
[SCOTT]:  Next photo?  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a picture taken in the auditorium at the White House.  President Clinton is rehearsing for his State of the Union, and that's me with a couple of my colleagues in--the speechwriting colleagues going over the script with the president and making changes as he, as he goes along.
Speaker 2: Is that '96' [1996]?
Speaker 1: I believe this was '96' [1996]; yes, I do believe it was '96' [1996].
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 2000 in [Los Angeles] California as we were preparing for the Democratic National Convention speech in which Al Gore was nominated to succeed President Clinton.
[SCOTT]:  Good; next?
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my nephew and niece.  I got a chance for them to come to the White House and meet the president and I was very proud to be able to do that.
Speaker 1: Can I get their names?
Speaker 2: Oh, Brian and Olivia.
Speaker 1: That's my sister at the-- she's their mother--Bernadette Guthrie --yeah.
[SCOTT]:  Okay, next?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure exactly when this picture was taken, but this is representative of some of the African Ameri--other African Americans who worked in the White House during that time when I was there--yeah.
[SCOTT]:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my official White House photo.
[SCOTT]:  Okay.
Speaker 1: I believe this picture was taken in 2000.  President Clinton, towards the end of his administration, invited some of his senior staff to join him for a weekend at Camp David, and this was a dinner that we had at the time.
[SCOTT]:  Okay, next?
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my daughter and myself, with President Clinton in the Oval Office.
[SCOTT]:  Good, next?
Speaker 1: My daughter's name is Maga, by the way.
[SCOTT]:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was a picture, I think, was taken in Baltimore at a church where President Clinton came to give a speech, and after the speech we posed for that photo.
[SCOTT]:  Okay, good; next?
Speaker 1: This was, I think, a Christmas party in the East Room, or the State Dining Room, at the White House, and I was able to bring my daughter along and she got a chance to meet [Secretary of State] Hillary Clinton.
[SCOTT]:  Hold on, please.  Okay, next?
Speaker 1: This is a picture I'm very proud of; it was taken in Disney World of all places.  President Clinton had a meeting with Nelson Mandela and as the meeting was breaking up, he introduced me to the great Nelson Mandela and I got this picture.
[SCOTT]:  Good, next?
Speaker 1: This is a picture of--on Air Force One.  I don't know exactly where we were going or what we were doing, but we were advising the president before a big speech somewhere in the United States.
[SCOTT]:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a shot in the Oval Office of myself and I believe Maria Echaveste, who was the Deputy Chief of Staff; we were working on a speech with the president.
Speaker 2: This is, I believe, at the Democratic National Convention in a hallway after a speech, and this is me with my other speechwriting colleagues.
Speaker 1: Can you name them?
Speaker 2: Jeff Shesol on the left there, Josh Gottheimer on the far right, and Paul Glastris standing right next to me.
[SCOTT]:  Who was the White House photographer at the time?
Speaker 2: [HM] Sharon Farmer, I believe.  She took most of these pictures, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is another picture of the speechwriters meeting with the president in the Oval Office before a major address.
[SCOTT]:  Okay.
Speaker 1: I think that picture speaks for itself (laughter).  The president is just thanking me for a speech that I had just delivered to him.
Speaker 2: Another speech; I think this might have been the speech--you know, one of--that we were working on.  He went to Morgan State University for the commencement in 1997 and we were working on that speech in the Oval Office.
Speaker 1: That's at my daughter's wedding in Miami [Florida], on South Beach; she got married on the beach about five years ago.
[SCOTT]:  They gave us this dinky memory card that fills up.
[SCOTT]:  Okay.  All right, go ahead and tell me about this one.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is on the beach in Miami at my daughter's wedding; I believe it was about six years ago.  Her name is Maga, her husband is Mike, and my ex-wife is standing next to me--Deborah.
[SCOTT]:  Great.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's also taken during that time--me and Deborah being happy (laughter).
[SCOTT]:  Good.
Speaker 2: That's my daughter and her mother preparing for the wedding.
[SCOTT]:  Okay, next?
Speaker 2: That's me with my great aunt Lessie, Lessie Rogers; she just passed away in North Carolina and we were there for a family reunion in North Carolina-
[SCOTT]:  Okay.
Speaker 2: --Bunn, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: I believe this is also during that time with my father; we call him Buddy--Roland; Roland Parker, and my sister and her husband and her two children.
Speaker 2: This is also on the beach in Miami during the wedding--after the wedding, marching to the food (laughter).
[SCOTT]:  Oops, don't wanna lay a hand in there.
[SCOTT]:  Okay, next?
Speaker 1: This is a family shot of the wedding--of Mike and his family; his mother and father and Maga and her mother and father.
[SCOTT]:  Very good.
Speaker 1: Mike, Maga and Debbie.
[SCOTT]:  Okay, that's it.
Speaker 1: That's it.
Story_ID: 57239
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: James Terry Edmonds, J-A-M-E-S T-E-R-R-Y E-D-M-O-N-D-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 9, 1949, Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Currently Senior Advisor and Chief Speechwriter for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you have been a speechwriter for the President of the United States [Bill Clinton]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is October the 26th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at Howard University School of Law [Washington, D.C.] in the [Charles Hamilton] Houston Hall.
Story_ID: 57240
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask that only require a short answer; they're sort of like a warm-up.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Steamed crabs.
Speaker 1: Okay; do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Any beach.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and all things will be given unto you." [Matthew 6:33]
Story_ID: 57241
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So I'm gonna ask about your family history now; I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family separate from your father's side, and then we'll try to put 'em together.  So can you give us your mother's [Naomi Parker] full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Naomi Marie Rogers, N-A-O-M-I M-A-R-I-E R-O-G-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness; May 22nd, 1925 I believe, Bunn, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Bunn?
Speaker 2: B-U-N-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where is Bunn in relationship to say Charlotte or--
Speaker 2: It's near Raleigh--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family in terms of how far back you can trace them and--
Speaker 2: You know, I can only go back to Bunn, and she has a big family; she was one of 10--I think she was the youngest of 10 children and most of her--I think most of them are now deceased, her brothers and sisters, but we have lots of cousins and uncles and family still in Bunn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So as far as you know, the family history of your mother's side is basically concentrated in Bunn?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did your mother's ancestors do?  Were they in farming or did they live in the city, or--
Speaker 2: You know, I think they were tobacco farmers and, yeah, a lot of 'em did farming but then they, they got into teaching and education; a lot of 'em are--were professionals, educators.
Speaker 1: Okay; in the local schools there?
Speaker 2: Local schools and one of 'em, I think, is a principal in Greensboro, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: So these are her brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So lots of teachers are--when you go back to your grandparents and--is your mother's generation the first generation to go to college or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I believe so, and I never knew my grandparents on her side or, or, or, or my father's side; I never met them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So as far as you know, they were tobacco farmers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did they own their own land in Bunn?
Speaker 2: I believe so.  You know, if you go to Bunn, in those small towns in North Carolina, it's almost like they are the town (laughter), you know.  The whole family is there, and everybody knows everybody so if you go to Bunn and--yeah, you'll run into my relatives just about on every corner.
Story_ID: 57242
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when your mother [Naomi Parker] grew up, I assume being born in 1925, she grew up in a segregated community.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes; it was segregated, and I believe she--one of the reasons why--she, I think, left Bunn [North Carolina] when she was a teenager to come to Baltimore [Maryland] to make a new life for herself.
Speaker 1: Was it difficult in Bunn to go to school if you were African American?
Speaker 2: No, I think it wasn't that difficult, but the schools were segregated but I think she had visions of a different kind of life and that's why she wanted to leave Bunn.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she have any stories about Bunn she shared with you, or any stories about her and Bunn from other relatives?
Speaker 2: No, not in particular; I think, you know, she had a fairly decent time in Bunn but when she became a teenager, she wanted to get out of it.  It was a very rural place, there wasn't much culture or--I think there might have been one movie theater that you could go to like, you know, you had to go some miles to get to.  So there wasn't much opportunity for someone who, you know, had visions of a better life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother have relatives in [Washington] D.C. at the time?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't think so, I think she just took it upon herself to come on up here (laughter), and she did it--yeah.
Speaker 1: Now was she married at the time?
Speaker 2: No, no, she was a teenager.  She didn't get married 'til she came up here.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So that would have been--as a teen, so we're talking about around 1940 or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well let me--now, what did your mother do when she arrived in this city [Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: My mother did a lot of waitressing work, and I believe she did some, some substitute teaching, and she was very much involved in her church; and everywhere we lived, she was involved in the church, so--yeah.  And then after she got married [to James Edmonds], you know, things got a little better.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So she came to D.C. or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, she came to Baltimore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Story_ID: 57243
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Well let me go to your father, and can you give us your father's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well now, okay; I, I never really knew my father--my real father; his name was James Edmonds as well, but I know he was in the service and they got divorced when we were very young; I was probably about four or five years old, so I don't remember much about him.  But I was raised by my stepfather and his name is Roland Parker.  We call him Buddy, and he's a truck driver--he was a truck driver, he's retired now.  He's still living; my mother [Naomi Parker] has since passed away, and--yeah, he's been with us, he's basically raised the three boys that were not his.  He only has--he has one daughter by my mother, but the three of us were from her former husband.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you know where your biological father was from?
Speaker 2: I do not, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he never discussed it?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know anything about him.
Speaker 1: So they broke off all connection after they divorced?
Speaker 2: Pretty much, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: He was in the service though.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do remember that part, yeah; he was in the service.
Speaker 1: The Army or the--
Speaker 2: I believe the Army, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you never were able to contact (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Not really, never really connected with him, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And Richard Parker (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Roland (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Roland Parker, I'm sorry; Roland Parker--do you know where he's from?
Speaker 2: You know (laughter), I think he was from the Eastern Shore of Maryland.  St. Mary's County, I think, is where he was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Historic Eastern Shore, that's where Douglass [Frederick Douglass] and Tubman [Harriet Tubman] were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so he was a truck driver--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and was he older than your mother or--
Speaker 2: They were about merely maybe a year apart--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --maybe a year older.
Speaker 1: All right.  So he may have been born in '24' [1924]?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: I don't know the story of how they met; I just remember him always being there.  No, I just--and I do remember the day they got married because they weren't--they lived together for a while before they got married and I remember my mother--it was a very happy moment to see my mother so happy, and I remember her singing this song, "Something Old, Something New, Something Borrowed, Something Blue" because she was gonna go get married.  I don't think we went to the wedding, I don't think it was a formal church wedding but I do remember that day, and I was maybe five or six years old.
Story_ID: 57244
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So when you consider your parents' personalities--your stepfather [Roland Parker] and your mother [Naomi Parker]--their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, act, who do you think you pattern yourself after the most, or take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting.  I think it's a combination of the two but I would say my mother because of her, her love of education, her determination to make it against all odds, her strong religious convictions and, you know, her ability to, to take chances and take risks in order to make a better life for herself; I think that inspired me.  My father--hardworking, was kind of gruff and, you know, I was a little intimidated by him as a child, as many of us are by our fathers, but you know, I admired the fact that no matter what, he was always there and even if he would leave, he would come back.  You know, there was, there was some dissention in the family but through it all, he always came back, and what I admired most about him and--later in life, my mother got ill and she had a stroke and she became disabled, and he was by her side every step of the way when she was in a nursing home.  She was in a nursing home for the last four years of her life and he was there every day, you know, taking care of her, making sure that the staff was taking care of her, and so I, I admired that about him, the fact that he was so devoted to her and to the three, the three of us--the three boys who were not his own, you know.
Story_ID: 57245
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now can you tell us something about your brothers and sisters?  Can you name them from the oldest, and include yourself in the order?
Speaker 2: My oldest brother has passed away; his name was Albert Jerome Edmonds, a Vietnam Veteran.  He would be, let's see, I'm 64; he would be 66 today.  The other brother, his name is Harold Bernard Edmonds.
Speaker 1: Now what did Albert do?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Albert was a police officer, but prior to that he was--he went to Vietnam; he was in Vietnam where he was an MP [military police] in Vietnam, and when he came back, he used that skill to become a Baltimore City [Maryland] Police Officer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Harold, next (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Harold is still with us and he works in a factory in Baltimore; I'm not completely sure exactly what they make but he's been there for many years.  He's a year older than me, so he's 65 and still working and doing well, living with his wife Pat in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: Okay, and next is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--My sister Bernadette.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's eight years younger than me so you would have to do the math (laughter).  She is a professional counselor--a mental health counselor, and has a family; her husband Peter and her two children Brian and Olivia, and they're, they're doing well in Baltimore.
Story_ID: 57246
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Wow, an earliest childhood memory.  Wow, I guess I have a lot of 'em but I, I'm trying to think of--I, I remember living in Cherry Hill [Baltimore, Maryland]; we lived in the projects in Cherry Hill and (laughter) I remember my first day going to school, I think, the elementary school in Cherry Hill.  And all of the projects look alike, and I do remember that first day coming home from school, I got lost (laughter), and I think the school was right across the street.  But I couldn't find my house because I--all the houses looked alike and I finally found--I kinda got a little disturbed about it but somehow or another I found my house eventually.  But, yeah, that's sort of an early childhood memory, yeah.
Speaker 1: So were you a little kid?
Speaker 2: I was a little kid, I was in elementary school.  I don't know exactly how old I was, probably no more than seven or eight, yeah.
Story_ID: 57247
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--now did your family move there after--well that was after your mother [Naomi Parker] got married [to Roland Parker], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  That was one of the earliest places I remember living; I think prior to that, we lived in another project community called Fairfield, in Baltimore [Maryland], but then we moved to Cherry Hill which was sorta like moving up in the, in the project community (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now I've got information here that your family had it pretty rough, you know, I mean being moved out, and you came home and saw your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes.
Speaker 1: Is this later or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--This was a little later.  After we moved from Cherry Hill, we actually--they had tried to buy a home in Baltimore on Lanvale Street, and one thing led to another because of finances and poverty or whatever; we got evicted from that home, and I do remember that day coming home from school seeing all the furniture out on the street and I didn't know what was going on and then that's the day I learned the meaning of the word 'eviction,' and that was quite a traumatic experience.  But again, my stepfather, Buddy, [Roland Parker] he found us a place that night and we moved in to another, another apartment in Baltimore.  It was not the best but we did have--we were never quote unquote homeless.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About how old were you when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I think I was around 13 or 14 when that happened, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But you basically--I guess you would say you grew up in Cherry Hill (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, we moved around a lot.  We moved from Fairfield to Cherry Hill to Lanvale Street to Green Mountain 22nd to 42nd Street.  So yeah we, we, we moved quite a bit.
Speaker 1: This is all while you're a school age (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I was all of school age, yes.
Speaker 1: So did you have to attend a lot of different schools, or was it at the same (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I did; I went to at least, well, two junior high schools and then one high school and then--yeah, and then Morgan State University, yeah.
Speaker 1: In terms of the grade schools, how many grade schools?
Speaker 2: I don't remember to be honest with you.  As far as like when I was--before I got to junior high, I can't remember; I know I went to at least one elementary school in Cherry Hill, but I think there was another one even before that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you think like three?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And then two junior high schools and then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --one high school though.
Speaker 2: One high school, City College--
Speaker 1: (Unclear), okay.
Speaker 2: --in Baltimore.
Story_ID: 57248
Speaker 1: All right, so what were you interested in as a young man?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things I really give credit to my mother [Naomi Parker] is she bought a series of books--of classics, and I developed a love for reading early in my life.  These were, you know, Robin Hood, Treasure Island, Heidi, Black Beauty--those books.  And I think my father [Roland Parker] still has it, but somehow or another, I dug into those books and I read all of them, sometimes twice, and they really inspired me; so reading was--has always been a passion of mine.  And then later, you know, living in, in, in poverty and, and, and, and moving around a lot, I found an outlet in, in baseball, and baseball has always been my favorite sport and, you know, I fell in love with the Baltimore Orioles and I actually tried out for my high school baseball team; I did not make it but then they made me the quote unquote manager, which is a glorified batboy (laughter), but you know, we won the championship that year so I was very happy; I got my letter just like everybody else.  And so baseball and--I would say baseball and reading and music.  I came up during the time of, you know, I considered myself part of the Motown generation and I really fell in love with that music, especially the music of [HM] Smokey Robinson, and I, and I actually was a singer for a little bit of a--as I was growing up, we had a--some of my friends and I we developed a singing group called The Phonics, and I was the lead singer and I sang, I think, through my college years.  We sang all around Baltimore [Maryland] and sometimes in [Washington] D.C. and a couple of other places.  So it was a--those are my passions.
Speaker 1: You sung the Smokey Robinson part, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I sung the Smokey Robinson part; I--yes, I developed--I imitated Smokey Robinson as best I could, and I thought I was pretty good actually.
Speaker 1: Now those were the days before they had ASCAP [American society of Composers, Authors and Publishers] and BMI [Broadcast Music, Inc.] going around, "I'm gonna make sure that nobody sung somebody's song." (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh yeah; no, we just did whatever we wanted to do, yeah.  I mean we never recorded but we would do covers, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So this is all through high school.  That was a good like secondary income?
Speaker 2: There wasn't much money involved in it, you know.  If we made $100.00 between the six of us (laughter), that was a great night and, you know, it wasn't--we didn't do it for the money, we did it for the love, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 57249
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now was the media like important growing up in radio, T.V., newspapers?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I was a voracious reader of not only books but also newspapers and magazines; my father [Roland Parker] always teases me because he said, you know, he would come into my room and I would be buried under a stack of newspapers (laughter) and yes and, and television--television news--I remember [Chet] Huntley and [David] Brinkley and those guys who, you know, inspired me, and then a couple of seminal events that happened as I was growing up that really made an impression on me that I saw on television.  Number one being the assassination of [President] John F. Kennedy in, I guess, 1962 [sic, 1963]; but I--and then one day later when Jack Ruby shot Lee Harvey Oswald, I was sitting there watching that, and I saw it live and I was--it was amazing to me; it really--it made an impression on me.  And then of course in 1969 when we landed man on the moon and that was--you know, we saw those pictures; that was a very--that made a big impression on me as well.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were 19 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah, I was--yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you see the March on Washington in '63' [1963]?
Speaker 2: You know, I remember the March on--yes, absolutely saw it.  I was living--we were living on Lanvale Street [Baltimore, Maryland] and I actually wanted to go but was too young, didn't have enough money, whatever and--but the whole neighborhood was buzzing and there were--I remember people, you know, getting caravans and going to the March on Washington.  But Martin Luther King [Jr.], yes; I think at that moment, after that--that speech was so--so powerful, I think that was a seminal moment not only in American history, but in my own life, as far as inspiring me to, to just--awakening my consciousness about civil rights and social justice, yeah.
Story_ID: 57250
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the '60's [1960s], the [President John F.] Kennedy Administration, and the rise of Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was a great time to watch great oratory--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so with your subsequent career as a speechwriter, I mean were you affected by--did you realize you were listening to something special when you heard John Kennedy and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, I knew that they were special; I did not know how it would, you know, factor into my career, but absolutely.  In fact, when I first became a speechwriter, and that was in 1993 when I first became a full-time speechwriter for Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala, you know--I never took a course in speechwriting and a lotta speechwriters of my era, we just fell into it; we never really were, you know, had designs on becoming speechwriters, so my idea of a great speech was "I Have A Dream," Martin Luther King's speech.  So I started writing speeches for Donna Shalala in the cadence of Martin Luther King, and she pulled me aside and said, "Terry, I'm not Martin Luther King; I'm a short, punchy woman, I like short, punchy sentences, so let's not do that" (laughter).  So that was a great lesson to me in the fact that as a speechwriter, you really have to listen to your client and, and try to, you know, give them the kind of language and the kind of rhythm and cadence that they are used to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's comfortable for them.
Speaker 1: I would think there'd be a difference between Kennedy and King; I mean off-hand, I mean when you're watching these on T.V., you're not thinking about that kind of thing but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they had a different style but they were both really effective--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --in what they did, so--prior to Kennedy, we had Dwight Eisenhower as president, and wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, he was not a riveting presence.
Speaker 1: Richard Nixon really wasn't a riveting speaker either.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Now did you see the debates in 1960--presidential debates?
Speaker 2: I believe I did, yeah.  I, I--you know, they did not--I don't think I was that tuned into it at that point but--because those were--they were the first televised debates were they not?  Yeah, and I was still too young to really grasp the meaning of that--yeah.
Story_ID: 57251
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, in school--now where did you start school?  What was your first school?
Speaker 2: Well, the first school that I remember, you know, was Cherry Hill School--Elementary School--Number 159 [Baltimore, Maryland], and grade school, I will say that the public education I got I was very fortunate.  People talk about public education as, you know, being less than desirable.  In our era and--we had some great teachers in the public schools and beginning with Cherry Hill schools; I went to elementary there and then I went to 180, which is the junior high school, and then we moved away from there and I remember going to Calverton Heights Junior High School, which was on, I believe, Mosher Street in Baltimore, and then from there I went to City College High School.
Story_ID: 57252
Speaker 1: All right, tell me about Mr. Harmon; was he at Cherry Hill?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was at Cherry Hill Elementary School [Baltimore, Maryland].  I just remember him as being a very strong, fair-minded but fun teacher, and he really inspired me.  I, I remember, you know, not many teachers that you, that you'd remember by name, but I remember Mr. Harmon and, and, and Cherry Hill as being an inspiration to me and sort of getting me excited about learning and education--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then when I went to junior high school, I remember a teacher named Miss Foster who carried on that same tradition.
Speaker 1: Now these are all black schools (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--These are all black schools; I never went to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Public schools (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I never went to a white school; never went to a white school (laughter)--yeah.
Speaker 1: Were your teachers black too--Mr. Harmon?
Speaker 2: All these teachers were black; all of 'em were black and all of 'em were, I think, exceptional, yeah.  Well, the ones I mentioned were exceptional.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Miss Foster was at the junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At 180 [180 Junior High School], or--
Speaker 2: One-Eighty (180)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Junior High School.
Speaker 1: So in those days I mean was she an English specialist or he, or did he teach all the subjects (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You know, I think they taught everything, you know--back then; Mr. Harmon did.  I can't really remember what Miss Foster taught but I just remember her being a great teacher.
Story_ID: 57253
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you write--I've written that you write some poetry.  Did you write like short stories or essays in school?  What did you--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, again I have to say that when, when I went to school, even in Cherry Hill [Elementary School in Baltimore, Maryland], I was surrounded by some really smart students and, you know, we used to compete for who was the smartest kid in the class, you know.  It, it, it, it boggles my mind now to hear that some kids say it's, it's undesirable to be smart; I mean we, we fought like hell to be the smartest kid in the class, so yeah, I, I prided myself on being the best essayist in the class, even though there was some close competition (laughter).  But I just got into poetry on my own, and I don't remember what the spark was, I think--I remember reading a baseball poem, again-'Casey at the Bat' [by Ernest Thayer].  You remember that poem?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And that poem really kind of inspired me in, in, in--both just because it was such a great story about baseball, and because it had such great rhythm and, and, and poetry.  So somehow or another I got into that and I fell in love with the writing of poetry, yes.
Story_ID: 57254
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right, so at the junior high school level [at 180 Junior High], this was at the time of the March on Washington and the death of [President] John [F.] Kennedy.  You would have been in the eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Yes, I actually remember the day when John Kennedy was assassinated; I was in school, junior high school, and they let us out early, and we went home and, you know, started watching it all on television and--yeah, that--again, that was a pivotal moment again, not only in American history but it was also in my life, yeah.
Story_ID: 57255
Speaker 1: Now was the [Baltimore] Afro-American influential when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: Yes, the Afro-American--yes, we were avid readers of the Afro, along with Jet Magazine and some other--Ebony--and so the black press, yes, was, was, you know, in my house a lot.  And yes, reading the Afro was a, you know, weekly thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I think it came out twice a week back then in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: Did you have a special feature in the Afro that you liked the most?
Speaker 2: You know, not really; a lot of people went to the Society Page to see, you know, who's doing what in town, but I read the news stories and I read it pretty much cover to cover.  I will say the Sports Section--Lacy?
Speaker 1: Sam Lacy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Sam Lacy.
Speaker 1: I think so, yeah.
Speaker 2: One of the great sportswriters in American history.  I believe he wrote for the Afro and he--yeah, I would read his column, yeah.
Story_ID: 57256
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think you're right.  Now did the proximity of the colleges have an influence on you in junior high school or high school 'cause you know you got Coppin State [University], Morgan State [University], you got-Bowie [State University]'s not that far away but--you know, but there's another one [Historically Black College and University] in--isn't there another one in Baltimore too?
Speaker 2: A black university?
Speaker 1: Yeah. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It was Coppin and Morgan (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Coppin, Morgan and--
Speaker 2: --and Bowie and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--It's another one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Community College [of Baltimore County], CCB.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: No, I think those were, those were the two--the two choices for me were Coppin and Morgan, and of course my mother--everybody--Morgan was the "big cheese" (laughter), you know, at that time and so--and my mother was like, you know, "If you go to Morgan, be a teacher," you know; that's what you do, that's how--that's the measure of success in the black community back in those days.  So I, I--fortunately, I got into Morgan and I didn't become a teacher, but I--yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It was called Baltimore City College, and I have to say that--I forget the year, but they called me back one year to--and they inducted me in the Baltimore City College Hall of Fame, so I'm, I'm very proud of that.
Speaker 1: Now were you like a Hall of Fame type student when you were there?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't--no, I was never a--what you would call a, you know, very studious; I mean I liked to read and I, I liked education but I, I had other interests too, and I, I, I, I can't say that I was always walking the straight and narrow path but, you know--yeah, I, I enjoyed high school; those were some of the best years of my life and yeah, I think I was, I was a pretty--probably a B student at City.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were the manager on a baseball team, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What position did you play in baseball when you played?
Speaker 2: Well, I loved catcher, I loved first base, and a little bit of outfield.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now I think it was around the time that you started high school that Baltimore somehow got Frank Robinson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, that's when I really got into baseball--l966 when the Orioles won the World Series against the Los Angeles Dodgers, and that team was, you know, Frank Robinson, Brooks Robinson, Boog Powell, you know (simultaneous)--]
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Mike Cuellar (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Mike Cuellar, Jim Palmer; that was a great team, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was something; so that must have been a boost in those days--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to see, so--
Speaker 2: And the school--it's funny because the stadium was right across the street from my high school so it was all right in that same area.
Speaker 1: That's old Memorial Stadium?
Speaker 2: The old Memorial Stadium on 33rd Street, yeah; and my, my high school was right there on 33rd Street too, 33rd and Alameda.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we were interviewing somebody that actually worked over there as a vendor or something, and grew up in that neighborhood, I don't know.  Did you ever do anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, my brother did.  He worked on the baseball and football teams selling, you know, cokes and popcorn and stuff--yeah.  I never did that.
Story_ID: 57257
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have to work growing up?
Speaker 2: Say what?
Speaker 1: Did you work growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did work; I've been working since I was 15 years old.  I had a paper route as a kid, I've done everything during--when I was in school and high school, I worked at a collection agency in Downtown Baltimore [Maryland] called Kuff Mercantile; I don't think they're still in existence--just doing filing and whatever else I could do.  In the summers, I think during college and high school, I worked at a glass factory in Baltimore, so I've had a succession of jobs since I, you know, was like 15.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you on the school paper or anything at City College?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I don't think so; I may have written a few pieces, but I don't think I was formally on the staff, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you have any writing published during this period of time?
Speaker 2: In high school?
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: No, no; it wasn't until I got into college that I really started publishing.
Speaker 1: At this juncture--now you're singing and all that, you're managing baseball, you're doing other things, you like to write; what did you envision as a career in high school, or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--My, my goal was to get into journalism; I wanted to be a reporter and I remember when I graduated from--even before I graduated from college [Morgan State University], I was making the rounds in Baltimore; I went to every newspaper.  I was offered a job by the Afro [the Baltimore Afro-American], by the way, but the pay was so low I just could not take it, so I didn't do that but I, I went to the Baltimore Sun, the [Baltimore] News American, every television station, every radio station, and for whatever reason, you know, those were days when opportunities were not that numerous for African Americans.  I just was not able to crack that nut, so I got--I went into public relations work.
Speaker 1: Was this prior to college I mean prior to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, this was after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--After Morgan (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--After college, after Morgan (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay, I didn't wanna jump past Morgan, okay.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--We passed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, so this is--we'll get to that point.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: So when you were--I'm talking about when you were in high school, what were your aspirations?  Did you think you were gonna be a writer in high school?
Speaker 2: I did wanna be a writer; I didn't know exactly what kind because, you know, I was still developing my, my career goals at that time.  I did wanna be a writer and maybe--I probably envisioned myself as a novelist or a great poet, and then I realized, you know, you gotta get a job (laughter) at some point, so I, I tempered that a little bit.
Story_ID: 57258
Speaker 1: Okay, now--let's see.  All right, so you enroll in Morgan State [University] in the fall of--was it, '67' [1967]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '67' [1967].  I graduated from [Baltimore] City College in, I guess it was June of '67' [1967], and then I started at Morgan in September.
Speaker 1: Let me go back; I didn't ask you about church but was church influential on you growing up?
Speaker 2: Church has always been influential.  We were raised mainly in Presbyterian churches in Baltimore [Maryland], but I've also attended Baptist churches and, yeah.  My mother--that's one thing she was pretty strict on us about, was going to church, and I remember even going to Sunday School and then in the summer going to Bible School so, you know.  I wasn't always up for it, but my mother was (laughter), so I, I had a lot of experience in the church, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at this juncture, you weren't going to Union Baptist?
Speaker 2: No, not at that juncture.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to church in Cherry Hill; wherever we moved, we went to a--we found a church, and I remember my mother was a member of Knox Presbyterian in Baltimore.  I attended that one; my sister still goes there.  And then when I got married, you know, my ex-wife Angie was very big at Union Baptist Church.  We talked about that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with [HM] [Rev.] Vernon Dobson.
Speaker 1: Because at the time you were in high school, that's when Union Baptist was really engaged in the throes of the Civil Rights Movement (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes.
Speaker 1: --and the Goon Squad (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --they were really--that was the center for all that kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, right.  They even had a T.V. show for a while, 'The Goon Squad.'
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 57259
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any rate, so--at Morgan State [University in Baltimore, Maryland] in the fall of '67' [1967], so what's your major?  Is it in journalism?
Speaker 2: English.
Speaker 1: English, okay.
Speaker 2: They did not even have a journalism major at that time.  I think they had one journalism course, which I took, but they were pretty much--they didn't have much of a mass communications curriculum at that time; they've since gotten a great one, and I, you know--do you know [HM] DeWayne Wickham?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, DeWayne is now at Morgan running their Mass Communications--whatever--department, so--but at the time when I went, none of that existed so I was an English major, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did you work for the paper?  Did you do anything for Morgan's student paper?
Speaker 2: I did, I did do something for--it was called--I think it was called the Spokesman; I did some writing for them.  And one thing I remember at Morgan, they had an annual poetry anthology that they put out that, you know, from student--student poems, and I contributed to that every year, and that was, that was really inspirational and fun for me to see my work published.  That was the first time I guess I published a poem was in the Morgan Anthology.
Story_ID: 57260
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is--now I read that you were inspired by [HM] Smokey Robinson because of his voice but also because of his writing.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Smokey has written some of the most classic songs in American history in my opinion, and so I was inspired by him both as a singing artist and as a writer and, you know, some of the things he wrote just--I just, you know, they're wonderful to me.
Speaker 1: For instance, can you give us an example of what you think is good poetry out of Smokey?
Speaker 2: Oh God; oh my goodness.  I think he, he wrote a lotta songs for the Temptations and for other artists at Motown.  This song called "Swept for you Baby."  "I'm just like a"--Oh, my God.  (He starts singing) "You know that I'm Swept For You, Baby, Way Down Deep In My Soul."  You know.  "I'm just like a falling leaf on a windy day.  You're like the breeze that comes and sweeps leaves away.  I'm like a broom, you're like dust in the room;" something like that, you know.  Those, those lines I think were great poetry, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think a lot of teenagers of that era, you know, really liked the smoothness of Smokey's lyrics.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  "Choosey Beggar"--just some of the great songs.
Speaker 1: "Tears of a Clown" (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes.  "Tears of a Clown," yes; "Tracks of My Tears," yeah.
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 57261
Speaker 1: Now Baltimore [Maryland] is, you know, is the home of Lucille Clifton, and there's some other like fairly well-known black poets that come out of Baltimore.  Did you have any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I met Lucille Clifton and I think I even was on a--we read one time together.  Yes, there were some great poets that came out of Baltimore and I--at one point, I was sort of affiliated with a band of Baltimore street poets and we had a little--in fact I published two books with them called Apathy Press, and it was a lot of fun.  We didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--What was the group called?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: It was called Apathy Press.  It was a guy named Tommy DiVenti [Tommy Tucker] and some other guys that I can't remember their names, but I think Tommy DiVenti was the, was the, the, the, the head of it and we, we read around town--coffee houses, bars, churches--wherever people would hear us, and we published some, some books and it was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: So this is the era of what's subsequently been called the Black Arts Movement with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Uhh huuh.
Speaker 1: A lot of poetry.  Last Poets were out--had records (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I think [HM] Haki Madhubuti was a writer in residence at Morgan for a period of time.  I know he was at--I know he was at Howard.  I know he was at Morgan too; yeah, he was at Morgan.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you there when he was around?
Speaker 2: Are you talking about LeRoi Jones [Amiri Baraka]?
Speaker 1: No, Haki Madhubuti (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay.  I believe I was there, and I, I can't--I know I took one--I took a poetry course at Morgan, or it was a writing course, and he may have been the teacher; I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Now what about--you mentioned LeRoi Jones; was he there too?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, but he was, he was always accessible and around (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, did you hear him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, a couple of weeks ago, I got a chance to have dinner with [HM] Nikki Giovanni who's still writing, and she was of that generation as well.
Speaker 1: Who came to campus when you were a student?
Speaker 2: I believe Nikki Giovanni came, and I believe--as far as poets?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, poets or writers or essayists.
Speaker 2: I believe he might have been called LeRoi Jones at the time, came and I do remember Mohammad Ali coming, who was another one of my heroes of that era, and he was a bit of a poet himself, too (laughter).
Speaker 1: He was, he was.  He wrote poetry the way he boxed.
Speaker 2: Yes, sting like a butter--you know, float like a butterfly, sting like a bee (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  And he would say, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--"I am the Greatest," yes.
Speaker 1: "I'm great, I'll beat you in eight," and all that sort of thing (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: It was kinda elementary poetry but it was--he was the only boxing poet at the time.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So these are--I mean were you influenced at all by the Last Poets?
Speaker 2: Yes, I got their records and yes, I do remember them as well as--"The Revolution Will Not Be Televised."
Speaker 1: Gil Scott.
Speaker 2: Gil Scott, Gil Scott-Heron.  And yes, and--yes, the Last Poets, that was a very powerful album.  You know what I'm talking about?  Did they do "The Revolution Will Not be Televised" as well?  On that--and I remember "New York, New York, the Big Apple."
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You remember, you know, all that--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that--Yellow and Blue Album I think, on Douglas Records.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you used to deliver poetry live in coffee houses with your group (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, yes, I used to do some public readings.  That was really a lot of fun; it was kinda scary 'cause the first time I did it I was petrified, but after a while, you know, I got really used to it and I really liked to read poetry.
Speaker 1: That's interesting; now, why would you be petrified?  You're used to singing in high school, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I know, but I would sing other people's words; singing my own, it's--you know, you're kinda baring your soul a little bit there, and it's a little more daunting for me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but again, as I said, after a while, I got over the stage fright and enjoyed doing public readings.
Story_ID: 57262
Speaker 1: Now, growing up in Baltimore [Maryland], a town that has this historic Edgar Allan Poe, kids all over America, you know, remember reading about Edgar Allan Poe in grade school, middle school and high school.  Was that an influence on you?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  The culture of Baltimore not only, you know, Edgar Allan Poe, but Eubie Blake and Billie Holliday, Cab Calloway, you know, Pennsylvania Avenue used to be the--a lot of black entertainers like Redd Foxx would come through there and, you know, we were on the Chitlin' Circuit for the Motown, you know, Review and all that, and so yeah, where was--the Royal Theatre was like, I guess the Howard Theatre was here in [Washington] D.C., was where a lot of, you know it was like our Apollo Theater of Baltimore.  And yeah, I was influenced by all that; yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So would you often go down to Royal and see acts?
Speaker 2: I would go whenever I could, but I--again, money was always an issue in my family so I didn't go as much as I would like but yes, I've been to some shows at the Royal and--yeah.
Speaker 1: So what you're describing is that you were growing up in an atmosphere where a lot of the traditions have known a lot of black history is out there, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and well-known by the residents.
Speaker 2: What was your question?
Speaker 1: No, I'm just saying that what you're describing, unless I'm wrong, is that a lot of history, cultural history, was available to people and people felt a part of it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Baltimore.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  I feel very fortunate to have grown up in Baltimore in that era because there was a lot of culture and history, and it was a sad day when they, they tore down the Royal Theatre and, you know, people--it was a lotta controversy about that in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: What is the story of Edmondson Avenue?  Now I kept hearing about all the Baltimoreans that would come to Chicago talking about Edmondson Avenue.
Speaker 2: Well, I lived near Edmondson Avenue; in fact, that was part of my paper route when I was kid when we lived on Lanvale Street.  Edmondson Avenue was just, it was just a strip.  There was a big high school up there, Edmondson High School; there wasn't anything--there was--I remember the Bridge Movie was on Edmondson Avenue where we would go to the movies, but it was just, you know, a strip right in the inner-city.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Nothing in particular stands out?
Speaker 2: No.  Edmondson Village, you know.  That didn't--it wasn't anything particular that stood out for me.
Story_ID: 57263
Speaker 1: Okay, now who were some of the teachers who were inspirational to you in college?
Speaker 2: In college?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well I have to start with Dr. Ruthe Sheffey who just retired after like 60 years of teaching at Morgan.
Speaker 1: How do you spell her name?
Speaker 2: S-H-E-F-F-E-Y, I believe; and Ruthe, I believe, has an E on the end of it.  Dr. Ruthe Sheffey.
Speaker 1: Now was she African American?
Speaker 2: African American.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just spoke with her last week; as a matter of fact, we stay in touch. But she was--she really took me under her wing as--when I was a freshman, and helped me in so many ways just being almost a surrogate mother to me, and she still is, and so she's number one as an inspiration, as a Morgan professor.
Story_ID: 57264
Speaker 1: All right.  So Dr. Ruthe Sheffey was a tremendous influence on you at Morgan [State University in Baltimore, Maryland], and you're reading poetry, you're doing some writing, and who else?
Speaker 2: There was a professor named Waters Turpin, T-U-R-P-I-N, English professor, and I remember taking--I probably took English 101 from him, and he was a very supportive--especially of my, my fledgling efforts as a poet.  I would sometimes take my--some of my poetry down to his office after class and just get his opinion.  He was very supportive, and I remember one time--you know, kids would sometimes snicker at you, you know, a male writing poetry was not such a, a, a good thing back then but he would tell them, you know, "Do not laugh at him because one day he's gonna be a great writer, a famous writer."  And I also remember him giving me one piece of advice; he said, "If you wanna be a good writer," he said, "write something every day, even if it's a shopping list; no matter what it is," he said, "just write something every day.  It doesn't have to be an essay or a poem, but put your pen to paper every day and write something."  And I've tried to, I've tried to remember that and to follow that advice.
Speaker 1: Now one thing you have to do as a professional writer is that you have to be good with grammar I guess, right?  You have to be able to--you know where a period goes and where, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And a lot of times, coming out of public school, really not knowing how to do this--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --so was this a struggle for you when you came out or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Not really; again, I said I had really good teachers in elementary school and junior high, and so I got the rudiments of, of grammar, even though--I will say one of the great things about being a creative writer and a, and a, and a poet is that you can violate those rules (laugher) whenever it's appropriate, and so--no, but I would say that the education I got in the Baltimore City schools really prepared me to be the writer I am today.
Story_ID: 57265
Speaker 1: What characterized your poetry?  Was it free verse or was it--
Speaker 2: Most of it's free verse; most of it doesn't rhyme but it's--I, I think it has a structure and a rhythm that, you know, holds it together.
Speaker 1: What were you writing about in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, everything from, you know, everyday life, nature, spirituality, civil rights, current events, everything.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite poet yourself?
Speaker 2: I would say my favorite poet is Walt Whitman with--and Langston Hughes; those are my two favorite poets.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Now why those two?
Speaker 2: Well I, I think Walt Whitman because of the sort of the, the metaphysical nature of his poetry; he combined spirituality with, you know, just everyday life; he would bring it home.  And of course Langston Hughes, there's no greater troubadour of the black experience in the Harlem Renaissance period than him and, you know, "A Dream Deferred" ["Harlem"] is a timeless piece of work--yeah.
Speaker 1: They teach [Paul Laurence] Dunbar when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: They did some; I did not really resonate that much with his poetry.  I think the dialect stuff didn't get, you know, maybe I was trying to get away from that so much, so it didn't--I didn't resonate with his poetry that much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just asked because of high school and all that other stuff (unclear) (simultaneous) (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but okay.
Story_ID: 57266
Speaker 1: So now when you--now did you pledge a fraternity?
Speaker 2: I did not pledge a fraternity, that's when I had my singing group; that was my fraternity in college--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No pledging, and did they have a--like a black student organization on campus, even though I know it was a black college, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah--no, you know--actually, they had like a underground newspaper back then (laughter), and I did a little writing for the underground newspaper.  I don't know if it had a name but, you know, back in the '60's [1960s], everything was subversive and revolutionary, so I kind of gravitated towards that at Morgan [State University in Baltimore, Maryland], yeah.
Story_ID: 57267
Speaker 1: So did you come out [of Morgan State University in Baltimore, Maryland] in '71' [1971], '72' [1972]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-Two [1972], I believe, yeah.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Seventy-Two [1972], [sic, 1973] okay.  And what were your prospects?  Were you thinking about going to graduate school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, I was thinking about getting a job, you know.  I, I was tired of being poor (laughter), so I wanted to get, I wanted to get a job.  And, again, like I said, my first inclination was to go into the journalism route but those doors just were not opening and I do remember being recruited--my first job out of college was with Dow Chemical Company in Saddle Brook, New Jersey.  I left town, they offered me a job as a sales trainee or some kind of management trainee, and so I, I took that job and went to Saddle Brook, New Jersey and moved to--moved there and I think I took it for about a year, and then I came back to Baltimore to, to get into public relations work 'cause that's really where my heart was.
Speaker 1: So you just didn't like the--
Speaker 2: What?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--The work.
Speaker 2: The Dow?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Dow.
Speaker 2: You know I, I, I, I wasn't cut out to be a chemical salesman (laughter); I just knew that wasn't what I really wanted to do.  It was a great experience and I learned a lot, but I, I, I wanted to--I guess I missed Baltimore as well at that time, and then I wanted to get into more communications jobs.
Story_ID: 57268
Speaker 1: So journalism, the doors weren't opening but public relations was much more receptive, so I took a job, a PR job, with the United Way of Central Maryland doing public relations work as--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --writing press releases and--
Speaker 2: Now how did you find out about it or did you have anybody on the inside that could tell you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--You know, I don't even know how I got that job, I think I just applied and, and, and got it but I did have some good mentors here in Baltimore.  My boss there was a guy named J. Joseph Clarke; Joe--he was married to Mary Pat Clarke who was a City Councilwoman, and Joe really showed me the ropes in PR, showed me how to do a newsletter, and at that time, you know, not only did you write the newsletter, you actually had to lay it out, size the pictures, do the whole thing, and I did all that and he taught me, he taught me so much about that, so that was my first public relations job.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this was in '73' [1973] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: This was like '73' [1973], '74' [1974], yeah.
Speaker 2: Seventy-Three [1973].  So how long did you--so you did that through '74' [1974]?
Speaker 1: I did that and then I had a--you know, at that time I was, I was changing jobs quite frequently because each, you know--I would get better opportunities.  So I stayed at the United Way for maybe two, three years, and then I went to--I think--I can't remember whether it was the Maryland Science Center or the Brewery; I had a succession of jobs in Baltimore.  I worked for the Maryland Science Center, I worked for National-Carling-National Breweries in public relations, and that was fun because that was when the owner of the brewery was also the owner of the Orioles.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is Carling (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--It was called Carling-National Breweries; that's when National Boh [National Bohemian] and Carling got together and they called it Carling-National Breweries.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that Carling Black Label (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, Carling Black Label and National Boh and National Premium, and we even did Carlsberg Ale; you remember that?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Carlsberg Elephant Beer (laughter).  So that was a, that was a fun time, doing public relations working for them.  I also worked for an ad agency called Trahan, Burden & Charles; I was the first PR director for the ad agency, stayed there for about two, three years [1982 to 1985], and--
Speaker 2: You were with the MTA before this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was with the MTA, Mass Transit Administration, doing PR for them and that's when Baltimore was just building this subway system, which I remember--at that time, in addition to being a writer, I was also a photographer and I remember going down into the pits when they--and taking construction photos of the subway system as it was taking shape in Baltimore.
Story_ID: 57269
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought about that when you were talking about the newsletter, and it's often a person does a newsletter has to shoot his own photos (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah, I've done all that.  Right now, I would not sell myself as a photographer but back then I, I, I did it and some, you know, pictures were in the newsletter and--sent 'em to the newspapers and, you know, they would reprint 'em and, you know.  Back then they--do they use--still use pictures that are sent in by PR [public relations] types, or do newspapers run their own pictures now?
Speaker 1: I think it depends on what, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, they will sometimes use--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I'm sure they will (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--a PR photo.
Speaker 1: Everything happens so fast now you can shoot it and send the photo or--with the camera now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: It may be a matter of time and speed, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I guess if it's something that's coming up where you can plan, they probably would take a picture. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Well back in the--back then, I learned the rudiments of public relations which are, you know, it's vastly changed now.  You know, when you would write a press release, you would either mail it or you'd hand-deliver it to the, to the newsroom, and getting into the newsroom was sometimes, you know, sometimes they'd let you in, sometimes they wouldn't.  I remember climbing many steps, climbing--I remember the steps of the Afro [Baltimore Afro-American] in particular because that was a very steep (laughter) walk up there, but--the Baltimore Sun, the News American.  You know, I would, you know, take press releases to hand-deliver them after you write them--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They don't do that now with the Internet.
Story_ID: 57270
Speaker 1: 'Cause it was in '82' [1982], you started working with Trahan, Burden & Charles, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is an ad (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It's an ad agency; it's still in, still in service here in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: Who are some of their clients?
Speaker 2: The clients then, I remember we had the Maryland State Lottery, we had Wendy's Restaurants, we had a car dealer--I forget the name of it.  It was mostly like local clients but it was like the third largest ad agency in Baltimore at the time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So would you consider this like you're moving steadily up, or--
Speaker 2: I would say yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Each job was moving up.
Story_ID: 57271
Speaker 1: In '85' [1985] now, this is important.  You started working for the Joint Center for Political Studies.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I went to Washington [D.C.]; that was my first Washington job, I guess--working for the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies--
Speaker 1: That's [HM] Eddie [N.] Williams?
Speaker 2: --with Eddie Williams, yes.  And I was the communications director for a couple of years there.
Speaker 1: This wasn't full-time though, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was full-time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: It says here you were doing both, working for Trahan, Burden [& Charles] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, no; I had left Trahan to go there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you left Trahan in '85' [1985], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were working with the Joint Center and in '87' [1987]--are there any stories about the Joint Center?  'Cause they--I know--just give an idea of what they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, the Joint Center was the, and still is, think tank dealing with African American ideas and, and politics and economics, and they put out a book every year about the number of African American politicians across the country.  They would do an annual dinner--fundraising dinner, they would put out books and, you know, pamphlets about what issues there were of particular interest to the African American community--studies, and it was, it was quite an--a very good experience.  It was a think tank, so sometimes it would, it would feel a little staid and intellectual but it was--it's a very necessary organization.
Story_ID: 57272
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you--in '87' [1987], you started working for [Representative] Kweisi Mfume?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, Kweisi was running for Congress and I--first I was working for [HM] DeWayne Wickham; DeWayne had a small firm and his client--one of his clients was Kweisi, and during his campaign we would help him with his campaign to get to Congress.  So once he got to Congress, I went with him to be--I don't even know what my first job was; I guess it was just an administrative aide, and then I became his Press Secretary.  And that's--I guess working for him was when I really wrote my first quote unquote speech, 'cause I would write floor statements for him and different things for him, yeah.
Speaker 1: So would you say the job at Joint Center [for Political and Economic Studies] kinda sharpened you up for that kinda--
Speaker 2: Absolutely; yes, yes.
Speaker 1: These are--a lot of speeches of politicians should have, you know, valuable information about what the nature of things are at the time they're speaking.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And this is--it seems today that a lot of politicians don't even pay any attention to what, you know, the facts are about certain things, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, the Joint Center was a source for the black politicians of information and statistics and studies and surveys, so yeah, we--yeah, relied--a lotta black politicians even today the Congressional Black Caucus, you know, relies on information that's produced by the Joint Center.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--As you know, Kweisi became part of that Congressional Black Caucus and I think he, he, he headed up the Black Caucus for a while, before he retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's important to Kweisi Mfume to be right on this, on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Absolutely, yes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--in terms of his information.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had an inside track as to where you get your stats (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Some, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --which is good.  I mean I'm sure he knew about the Joint Center too, but--so are there any stories about working with Kweisi Mfume?
Speaker 2: Well, Kweisi was a very dynamic--and he still is a very dynamic speaker and a very dynamic leader.  He inherited [HM] Parren Mitchell's spot in Congress from the 7th Congressional District in Baltimore [Maryland], and I was very inspired by his eloquence and his commitment and it was, it was, it was great working for him.  I will say that working on Capitol Hill, especially for the House of Representatives at that time, and I think it's probably still true to some extent today, it's very hard work for very low pay (laughter), so it's a good place to go and get some experience but, you know, you don't wanna stay there too long so I didn't stay but a couple of years there.
Story_ID: 57273
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So where did you go afterwards [in 1988, after being Press Secretary for Kweisi Mfume]?
Speaker 2: I can't remember where I--after I left Kweisi.
Speaker 1: Well we have here--I don't know if it makes a--that you went back to--well you went to Macro Systems.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes; I started--yes, I got into, wow, a succession of jobs with consulting firms in the Washington Beltway area; we call 'em "Beltway Bandits," euphemistically.  These are companies that have government contracts, and a lot of 'em were health-related macro-systems at the time.  I think we had a substance abuse contract, and some other health-related contracts I remember--yeah.  I remember we did a--at Macro Systems, we did a campaign called "Be Smart, Don't Start--Using Alcohol and Other Drugs."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we used an entertainer--remember Dawnn Lewis?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did a commercial with her and--up in New York, and I got my daughter to be in that commercial and that was, that was fun 'cause I wrote the copy and was on set when they recorded it.  That was fun.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dawnn Lewis, she was on a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-'Diff'rent Strokes,' or Different--what was it called?  'A Different World?'
Speaker 1: 'A Different World,' right.
Speaker 2: Different World (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That's it; it was a spin-off from 'The Cosby Show' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--black college life.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'A Different World,' right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that was--she was well-known in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't know whatever happened to her; she sort of disappeared.
Speaker 1: Dawnn Lewis.  And so you worked for them--this is 1988; and so--and what did you mean by "Beltway Bandits?"  I have to ask you.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  They call 'em "Beltway Bandits" because they, they--these are the firms that exist solely on government contracts.  "Bandit" is sort of just a joking way to say that they're stealing money (laughter) from the government, but not really; it's all, you know--in fact, one of the reasons why I, I, I, I didn't really stay and like that world was because you had to write such voluminous proposals in order to win a contract.  Sometimes you would write a 500-word proposal, you know, and then still lose the contract and you'd be up, you know, late nights, you know, have all kinds of re-writes and what have you, but--so that's a very specialized world where you have to write these proposals to win these government contracts, and so I did that for a number of years, not only with Macro Systems, but with a firm called University Research Corporation, and another one called R.O.W. Sciences, which was owned by an African American guy.  But that was great experience too, working for those firms.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--So I've had a lotta jobs, as you can see (laughter).
Speaker 1: Is that the nature of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I think it's the nature of public relations and the nature--and maybe it's, you know, I'm not gonna say it's--everybody does it the same way; it's maybe something in me, you know, that I'm very restless, and I'm always looking for a new, a new experience, a new horizon.
Speaker 1: Now I didn't ask you when you got married but did you get married like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I got married the first time in 1972 or 3 when I got out of college, and I stayed married for 15 years, and then we, we divorced; then I got married a second time in 1990, I believe, and that lasted also 15 years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in this period of time you're between marriages sort of, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and in '88' [1988], '89' [1989]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you could afford to leave one job and go to another one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was wondering, you know.  I said, "What is his wife thinking about it?"  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Uhh huhh.
Speaker 1: Usually, wives have something to say about that kinda thing. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, again, when I--I'd left some jobs while I was married but they were always, I always found something better.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're a consultant for Blue Cross and Blue Shield in '89' [1989] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, that's right; I forgot about that one (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, I worked for Blue Cross and Blue Shield for a couple of years as a media relations director, you know, handling the press and writing press releases and what have you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Any memorable stories about that job?
Speaker 2: No, not really, no; it was a typical, you know, health insurance agency.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in 1990, you went to the University Research Corporation.
Speaker 2: Yes, that was another one of those "Beltway Bandits," so yeah.
Speaker 1: That's what you described a few minutes ago, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And '91' [1991], you were working at R.O.W. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Sciences; R.O.W. Sciences; that was another one of those consulting firms in--they're usually in the Bethesda-Rockville area in the--that's why they call 'em "Beltway."  (Unclear) around the Beltway of Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is 1990; you're 41 years old now, and you just got married again, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 57274
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you're doing public relations until '93' [1993], I guess, with them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '93' [1993], I went to the White House--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or I went to the [President Bill] Clinton Administration, first with Donna Shalala, who was the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Speaker 1: Now did you meet her through R.O.W. [Sciences], or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, I--you know, I just was restless, as I often am, and this was right after the election [1992], and somebody said, "Well, why don't you just send your resume to the Clinton-Gore Transition Team."  So I did, and I believe [HM] Vernon Jordan was heading up that team, and I, and I know that Clinton--he had said, and he really lived up to his word, that he wanted to put together an administration that looked like America.  So he, he was looking for diversity and so, anyway, my resume popped up in the--and, and, and I got the job [Senior Speechwriter] with Donna Shalala at the Health and Human Services, and then after two years of working for her, a position opened up at the White House and I applied and went--moved over.
Speaker 1: Now Donna Shalala, she's the one that you said liked short, punchy sentences and you were trying to write like Dr. [Martin Luther] King for her speeches (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right.
Speaker 1: --and you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--She's now the President of the University of Miami.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, yeah.  Well what was she like, and what were some of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--She was great to work for; she's kind of a no-nonsense person but a great administrator, very fair, did a lotta public speaking.  I wrote speeches for her from, you know, employee groups to advocacy groups.  This was also during the time of the first health care reform attempt by Hillary Clinton [1993].  Remember before, you know, ObamaCare, it was HillaryCare, which didn't make it but we, we were in the thick of that, writing a lotta speeches about that.  I remember writing a speech when she went to Israel to Technion, which is a university in Israel, and it was a great experience; I learned a lot about government, about health care.  It was also during the time, you know, I believe, Social Security used to be part of the Department of Health and Human Services, but Social Security split off and became its own entity at that time, so there was a lot of movement, a lot of action during that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was great to work with.
Story_ID: 57275
Speaker 1: All right.  So how did the call come from the [President Bill] Clinton Administration--from the White House, rather?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was--and it was almost--I, I, I, I was--I didn't know how to take it at first because the guy I was working for at HHS [Health and Human Services], his name was Dan Porterfield; he was the Chief Speechwriter for Donna Shalala and he was friends with George Stephanopoulos and so he said to me, "You know, there's a job opening up at the White House; I can talk to George if you're interested."  And I said, "Well, you trying to get rid of me?"  (Laughter).  He said, "No, but I think you'd be good at it and it's a great opportunity."  So anyway, he put me in touch with George Stephanopoulos.  I went to some party at his house and we finally met and that was, you know, sort of the, the, the opening round, and then I, I got an interview at the White House with the Chief of Communications who was a guy named Don Baer at the time, and they offered me the position, yeah.  I mean I had to show them some writing samples, had to take a writing test, and of course they do the big background check and all that, and then I got the job, yeah.  And again, the first African American to be hired as a speechwriter; I would not say I'm--first African American ever to write a speech for a president, I'm sure there were some, but to hold that position, I was the first African American.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you know that when you took the position?
Speaker 2: I think I did know that--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So were your friends proud of you when you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  And my family was ecstatic, you know.  And it wasn't--actually, at the time, to be honest with you, it wasn't a slam dunk; I mean I had to think about it because this was a world I didn't know anything about, really, you know--the White House?  You know, I went to a small African American HBCU [Historically Black College and University], I'm surrounded by all these Harvard and Yale types, so I was a little intimidated or daunted by it, but I thought about it and I--'this is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, you better take it,' so I took it and--yes, the community, my family especially, was very proud; but I will say that the African American community--once they got wind of it, the African American press-Afro [the Baltimore Afro-American], Ebony; Ebony did a story on me, Afro did a story on me, Jet Magazine, so--yeah.  Even though, you know, as a speechwriter, you're not supposed to get too much publicity, but because I was the first African American, everyone knew that, that there would be special interest in, in me.  Even the Wall Street Journal did a story on me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah--and the New York Times.
Speaker 1: I would guess the Clinton Administration knew that on some level (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, they knew it, they knew it.  But Clinton--I remember one time he saw me in the paper and he kinda joked like, "Terry, you gettin' too much publicity here" (laughter), but he was just saying it in a joking way.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 57276
Speaker 1: But I would guess--you describe it as atmosphere--these Harvard and Yale graduates and all that, but do they really understand--I mean I'm sure they know how to message a lot of things, but they can't message everything.
Speaker 2: No, they cannot and, you know, the great thing about the experience at the White House was, you know I--my portfolio was not limited to African American issues; I wrote about everything from the federal budget to education to civil rights to--you name it.  And I had a--I think [President Bill] Clinton was a special person because of his background growing up in the South, coming from kinda similar situation that I did, and he had, he had a real affinity for African American culture, you know.  He knew the words to the Negro National Anthem more than I did, you know.  And, you know, when he would go to a black church, he knew the hymns and the songs, and he was very comfortable with African Americans.  So I think that helped me in many ways, and gave me somewhat of an edge over the Harvard/Yale types who had no interest or knowledge of that world at all, so--it was good.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah, Clinton was--Clinton's base included a lot of people that were not familiar with Harvard and Yale.
Speaker 2: Yes, right.  And he brought a lotta people with him from Arkansas.  African Americans like [HM] Rodney Slater, the personnel, [HM] Bob Nash.  I don't know if you know Bob.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Story_ID: 57277
Speaker 1: How were you--what was your work day like?  What was the situation like?
Speaker 2: No two days were alike at the White House, and it was kinda like a 24/7 situation where--you know, this was before the cell phones and, and--we had--but we had beepers; I remember I had a beeper and you had to always be ready for that beeper to go off.  I would get to work maybe--I think my first meeting--when I became--you know, I, I started as a sort of a junior speechwriter but after, you know, a couple of years, I was promoted to chief speechwriter, and that day--the days were like--started--my first meeting was 7:45 in the morning; if I got out by Nine at night, that was a good day.  Sometimes I would stay there 'til midnight, sometimes all night, and--
Speaker 1: Is this something you understood when you were weighing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I think I did; I mean you understand it intellectually, but you can't know it until you actually experience what it's like being on call like that and having to--it's like being a fireman in a way because when something happens in the world, the president has to make an instant statement; you have to, you know, help them craft that statement when, you know--in a very short period of time.  So it, it was interesting and I--it was--after you get in there, you know, people say, "Well (unclear), you work in the White House; that must be very glamorous."  It's hard work, it's a job, you know.  You, you, you, you never--I will say this, I never walked into the Oval Office without a sense of history, that I knew that I was in a special place, and whenever I got to meet with the president, you know, that was always special.  But a lotta the work was routine and just grueling and just producing, you know.
Story_ID: 57278
Speaker 1: Now did you have to dig for your own facts, or did--were there other staff that would find out the facts of a situation and then you'd have to craft it or shape it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, there was, there was some research help, but most, you know, most speechwriters have to, you know, you have to do some of your own research; you have to get the facts or you have to talk to the right people who have the facts because there's no way you can be an expert on everything or be aware of everything that's going on, so yeah it's, it's a very collaborative process being a speechwriter, and whenever you--especially for a president, and whenever you write something for a president, you know that it's going to be scrutinized by a lotta eyes before it even gets to him.  So when I talk to young people and they ask me about that, I say it's the most excruciatingly collaborative process that I have ever been involved with--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So a decision you might make on something on one level, may not--it may change (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, it may change.  And then of course when the president gets it, he's the final word; so a lotta times we would write speeches for the president and by the time they came out of the vetting process and the meat grinder, they wouldn't like anything that we (laughter) started off with--yeah.
Speaker 1: So a lot of what--your work, I mean as you envision it, didn't happen the way (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's true; a lotta things wound up on the cutting room floor but a lotta things did not and so, you know, it--but it was a mix of the two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 57279
Speaker 1: I'm just thinking about this, and hearing you as we were going over the photos and stuff [earlier in the interview], and I guess there would be two different streams of things you'd have to write about--emergency things that happen in the news that are timely, that he [President Bill Clinton] had to address and then things--planned addresses like State of the Union--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or a visit to Morgan State [University in Baltimore, Maryland], you know, that kinda thing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, in the first instance, say there's a--I think when they bombed the Embassy in Kenya or something, you'd have to like depend--what would happen?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, I would get--I remember one incident, 'member the young boy Elian Gonzalez that we--I don't even remember the total scenario, but he was a Cuban refugee or something and we, we grabbed him or something [April 2000]; we had to--we got him and (laughter) and I got a phone call that night--that morning, I think it was 5:00 in the morning, from John Podesta the Chief of Staff, saying, "Terry, we got Elian Gonzalez; the president has to make a statement in about an hour.  You need to get here."  So I got out of my bed, and at that time I was living about an hour away from the White House, so I had to really step on the gas and get there quickly, and when I got there and spent some time working on the speech, going--getting it vetted and everything.  You just speed up the process and you get it done, and there were a couple other instances like that where something would happen.  The Oklahoma City bombing happened while I was there; we had to do a quick statement for the president.  These are usually quick statements and then he'll, you know, work on a longer statement as things develop.  But usually, the media--the public is looking for the president to say something immediately when something happens, and so that's, that was kind of the fire drill side of the business--yeah.
Story_ID: 57280
Speaker 1: Was there ever an instance--I'm sure this must happen, where speechwriters like weigh in on something and they disagree on how it's pitched.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a little give and take within the staff but, you know, we work those things through and, you know, usually--again, the president makes the final call.
Speaker 1: I know there was a--we have like a little story here that I read that you were influential in shaping what the president was gonna say about the Million Man March in 1995, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was '96' [1996], I believe, [sic, 1995] and you know, there was a lotta controversy around that because of [HM] Louis Farrakhan and, you know, some people were advising the president not to even comment about it but--in fact, he wasn't going to be in Washington [D.C.] during the speech--during the march; he was gonna be in Texas at--the University of Texas in Austin, and he called a bunch of us together and asked us our opinion of what should he say about the march or should he say anything, and I said, "You know, yes, you have to say something about the march; you don't have to mention anything about the organizers, but you should acknowledge the fact that hundreds of thousands of African American men were gonna be coming to Washington to make a statement about their plight and about, you know, their demand for dignity and for jobs and for, you know, equal opportunity."  And so that, that sentiment prevailed and that was--he wrote--his speech at the University of Texas was on race in America, and we did mention the Million Man March, and that was, that was--I, I was pleased about that.
Speaker 1: So this was an argument where your point of view carried weight.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  He went around and asked, and some people said, you know, "Don't say anything," or "Stay away from it," but he heard, he heard us all and he, he made the final call but he, he went the way I suggested.
Story_ID: 57281
Speaker 1: What was your, I guess, favorite speech for the president [President Bill Clinton], or which one did he think was the--first of all, what did he think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well I think he thought--well, there were so many I wrote for him--literally hundreds.  I know whenever I see him, he always talks about the speech that he gave during the 35th anniversary of the Bloody Sunday [March 7, 1965], when he went back to Selma, Alabama to give a speech at the Edmund Pettus Bridge to commemorate the 35th anniversary of that march which, as you know, resulted in beatings by the State Troopers and [HM] John Lewis almost losing his life.  And anyway, he went back on the 35th anniversary and, and gave a speech, and I gave him a refrain that 'We have another bridge to cross.'  As long as African Americans are, you know, are not being treated equally, we have another bridge to cross.  And he liked that refrain, and he liked that speech.  My favorite speech, of course, was when he went to Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland] in 1997 to deliver the commencement speech and, you know, I not only had a chance to write that speech, I flew over in the helicopter with him; we flew from the White House to Morgan in Marine One, you know.  People say a ticket on Air Force One is, you know, the hottest ticket in town; ticket on the Marine One is even hotter--getting on that helicopter, 'cause it's only about four people on that helicopter with the president.  Anyway, I flew over with him.  It was a speech about science and ethics in the 21st century, and I think we made a pledge to try to find a cure for AIDS within 10 years.  But the highlight moment for me was--and this was something I did not write into the speech--was, you know, when he pointed me out as a graduate of Morgan State University and made me stand up before the graduating class and be acknowledged, and of course you can imagine how I felt; I was very proud, very humbled, and it was just a great moment because my wife was there, family, and of course the faculty and the president of Morgan, you know; they loved me ever since (laughter).  So that was, that was a great moment.
Speaker 1: Well would you consider that to be a part of the Clinton--I guess charisma or style?  Because so many people we've interviewed who served with President Clinton talk about how he seemed to personally connect with them.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  He, he, he, he made an effort to connect not only with the staff, but of course with his audience and with the American people and--yeah, that was a special quality that he had.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They say like everybody felt like he was their buddy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, yes, yes.  When you were with him, you felt, you felt like, you know, there was no one else in the room but you and him, and he was very personable and--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So those are two speeches.
Story_ID: 57282
Speaker 1: Now did you--his [President Bill Clinton] secretary, or major secretary was--or main secretary was [HM] Betty Currie.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was the fact that she was African American make things easier for you to maneuver around, or--I don't know, I'm just asking.
Speaker 2: You know, that's a very good point.  We did have sort of a, you know--there were, there were quite a few African Americans in that White House--in the Clinton White House and, and Betty, you know, was like a surrogate mother to a lot of us, especially the African Americans.  And yeah, I, I, I, I have to that yeah, that my friendship and relationship with Betty did help; there were times when I wanted something, to get something to the president and only she could get it to him, or you know, if I wanted to see him or talk to him or get a message to him, she would help facilitate that, so--yeah, having Betty there was, was a great asset.
Speaker 1: I hesitated to ask that, but I do--I mean I understand it's so many stories we don't have that access--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know; we're the only one that doesn't have any access--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, and we're like, trying to figure out how to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It's true, and there was an inner-core of people who, you know, didn't have to, you know, ask for access as much as some of us did.  And you know, I wasn't in that inner-core, to be honest with you, but Betty helped, you know, get us through when we needed to, so--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wondered if she could give wings to some things and (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah.
Story_ID: 57283
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were with the [President Bill] Clinton Administration through the Republican Revolution in '94' [1994]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all the way through to the end, right--of the administration.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep; I did leave for a brief period.  My wife had a stroke in 1997, and I, I left for about a year to go to the Social Security Administration, and then I came back to the White House that next year, after she got better.  And I will say that that was one of the most touching things about President Clinton.  When my wife had her stroke, she was in the hospital and he called the hospital, and the nurses to this day were like, "Is this real?  Is the President of--the President of the United States is on the phone?"  And he called just to check on how Angie was doing; she was still like in a coma at the time.  I don't think she got a chance to speak to him, but he spoke to me and I think he was in California taking Chelsea [Clinton] to Stanford [University] to, you know--for a college visit or something, and that stuck with me as another one of those instances where he went above and beyond to, to show his compassion for the people who worked for him.
Story_ID: 57284
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now you were--you also wrote a speech eulogizing [Representative] Barbara Jordan, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes; that was one of my, one of my favorite speeches, and I--yes, when you asked me favorite speeches, I should have included that one because that was another instance where the president called me after that speech and, and, and thanked me, you know.  I was out to dinner with my wife and I got a--my beeper went off (laughter), and I had to--I went home and called him back and he said, "I just want you to know that that was a great speech that you wrote for me and it went off very well."  And Barbara Jordan, of course, was, you know, the first African American woman--everything, in Texas, and so I was honored to be able to help him with the eulogy for her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you also drafted his speech that was the official government apology to the victims of the Tuskegee Experiment, right?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know if I did that one; I don't know--I think, I think one of the others; I may have been on the team, but I don't think I was the head writer on that one--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well every now and then we get one of 'em wrong (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's okay.
Story_ID: 57285
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was the hardest part of being a speechwriter?
Speaker 2: The hardest part, I think, was just the sheer volume and the, and the pressure of producing and meeting deadlines.  And with President [Bill] Clinton, especially like with a big speech like the State of the Union or a Democratic National Convention speech, you know--sometimes I remember writing like 13 drafts of one speech because they would, you know, either the message would change or other people would have input on editing, and it was just a, a very time-consuming experience and, you know, working at the White House, you know, it's sort of a--accepted axiom that you, you, you really don't you really don't have a life (laughter), you know, beyond your work; so that was very difficult.
Speaker 1: Was that hard on your marriage?
Speaker 2: It was, it was hard on family life, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--now what about--was it challenging to keep your own opinions to yourself about certain things and not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You know, luckily, President Clinton's philosophy and policies meshed with my own, but there was one time where I had second thoughts about something; it was when he was going to make the announcement about Welfare Reform; I forget the year [1996], but I was to draft his statement, which he was (unclear) deliver in the Rose Garden, about why we were gonna undertake welfare reform.  And as you may remember, a lot of the progressive political wing was against it; a lot of the CBC members, Congressional Black Caucus members, and just liberal establishment, was against this welfare reform; they thought he was selling out but--and I initially agreed, and I didn't wanna--in fact, I told the folks in the White House I didn't wanna work on that speech.  But then as I talked with him and with the domestic policy advisor who, at the time, was Bruce Reed, I realized that this was gonna happen, and there were some provisions in the bill that needed to be talked about, which was protections for women and children, and I wanted to make sure that that got across, so I decided to work on that speech.  But that was the one time where I had second thoughts about, you know, adding myself in--putting myself into that message.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What was the--I mean it's the toughest issue you had to face, I mean to write about.
Speaker 2: Well I guess it was that Welfare Reform thing and, you know, one of the other things that I was fortunate to work on with the president was, you know, he initiated an initiative on race.  In fact, he was going to write a book about the unfinished business of race in America.  He asked me and Professor Christopher Edley.  I don't know if you know Chris Edley; he's now, I think, the Dean of the University of California Law School [Berkeley School of Law].  But anyway, we were working on an actual book that we were ghostwriting for President Clinton on race in America; it was a difficult subject, you know, and there was a lotta tension within the White House about race, you know.  Some people don't wanna talk about it, they didn't think it was politically advantageous for the president to weigh in on it.  That was a very difficult time; we never did finish the book, the book kind of faded away because of the dissention within the White House.  But during the president's last weeks in the White House, he did ask me to help him put together a report to the Congress on the unfinished business of race.  It turned out to be a--like a 30-page report, which we submitted to Congress in his last week in the White House.
Story_ID: 57286
Speaker 1: All right, yeah.  We were just mentioning off-camera that [HM] John Hope Franklin was part of President [Bill] Clinton's Advisory Panel on race, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was the chairman of the commission--on the race commission.
Speaker 1: Now did you consult with him in terms of writing a book?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did consult with him and with people like [HM] Dorothy Height and others, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there any issue of contention there that had to be resolved?  I mean any main issue that was--
Speaker 2: There was--I think it was just an overall issue of--there was a faction of people in the White House and in the country who felt that, you know, it was not the time to talk about race, or that having a commission and having Town Hall meetings about it was, was not particularly useful and, you know, people said that the president was expending too much of his political capital on this issue.  So it went on for a couple of years but then it, it, it, it faded out.  My good friend [HM] Ben Johnson ran--he had an office in the White House called the One America Office [President's Initiative for One America], which was devoted to this issue and to just the whole issue of racial reconciliation across all racial lines--African American, Latino, Native American, Asian American, you know, and mainstream America, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 57287
Speaker 1: Now also in 1997 when this was going on, you were promoted to Deputy Director of Speechwriting, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Yeah, I sort of worked my way up to being the Chief Speechwriter; I started off as a--just a junior speechwriter and then I became the Deputy Director under Michael Waldman, and then when Michael left, John Podesta asked me would I, would I wanna--would I consider putting my hat in the ring for it; he didn't offer me the job right out.  And I said, "Yes," and I got the job as Chief Speechwriter.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1999--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so not only the first African American to be an official speechwriter, but now you become the director of speechwriters (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --for the president of the United States, and you serve there until the president left in 2001.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how did that change how you approached the job?
Speaker 2: Well, I did less writing, more managing, and more editing, I was attending more Oval Office meetings and more senior staff meetings, so I was more involved in messaging and policy development than, than just, you know, just writing speeches.  And the highlight of that experience was the president's final State of the Union in 2000, which--if anybody tells you they wrote the State of the Union by themselves, they're telling--they're not telling the truth.  I did not write the whole speech, but I was the, the manager of the process and, and, and a lotta my words are in that final--his final State of the Union in 2000, so I'm very proud of that product.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that involves a group of how many people?
Speaker 2: That involves a group of--I don't even know how many.  All of the speechwriters--I had six speechwriters--domestic policy speechwriters, and then there's a foreign policy section of the speech, and there was another team of speechwriters that worked on the foreign policy section.  I--my job was to put it all together.  And then of course there are lots of people that you have to vet it with.  We will get--every agency in the government would, you know, want their program to be featured in the State of the Union, or have mention of something that they did.  So it was quite a--I was like a traffic cop, you know, trying to deal with all those different pressures.
Story_ID: 57288
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now--so in--I guess around 2000, and during this period, this is when the Monica Lewinsky scandal hits.  And how did that affect--I know it affected the spirits of people in different ways (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--was really disappointed and I don't think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, a lot of people were disappointed with that.  You know, I think that happened--most of it happened during the time when I was out because I had--my wife had the stroke.  Between '97' [1997], '98' [1998], that's when it really--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --hit fire, because the president [President Bill Clinton]--yeah, he--yeah.  I, I wasn't really there during most of that but I--of course I was tuned in to it and, you know, I shared the dismay of many about what happened, but we got through it and I, I really admired the president for not letting it detract from his commitment to serve the American people.  He was, he was very good at compartmentalizing and dealing with his personal issues on one side, and the speechwriters, myself included, were actually precluded from even working on anything that had to do with that, so I had very little inside knowledge of what was going on there.
Speaker 1: And in terms of disappointment, some people were disappointed because of what actually--the facts of what happened; some people were disappointed because it was in the news, some people were disappointed because it kind of got the wheels of activity stuck in the mud, you know, so things weren't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it wasn't possible to do things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, all of that.
Speaker 1: What was your--
Speaker 2: Well my, my--I was disappointed, yeah, because it detracted from--it, it, it, it had the potential to detract from our core mission and, you know, as much as we tried to stay on message and stay on point with our policy's direction, yeah, inevitably it--some things did--were affected by that; so that was my main issue with it.
Story_ID: 57289
Speaker 1: Can I ask you some reflections on the [President Bill] Clinton Administration, then we'll go on to John Kerry and the rest of (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what are your--when you look back at your service in President Clinton's administration, what are your reflections?
Speaker 2: Well, I have to say that writing speeches and serving as the chief speechwriter for the president of the United States is--was the highlight--has been the highlight of my professional career; it was an honor to serve with President Clinton and to serve with so many of the people that worked in his administration, including the, the, the, the huge number of African Americans who served at the same time that I did.  You know I, I, I'm indebted to him for giving me that opportunity, which was historic and transformative to me in a personal way and, you know, I, I, I admire him and, and stay in touch with him even today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now I have a note here that Christina Macy, was also a Baltimorean, was the First Lady's Chief Speechwriter at that time.
Speaker 2: Christina Macy--
Speaker 1: Did you know her, or--
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  There's a factoid on here, and I'm not sure (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that's what it said.
Story_ID: 57290
Speaker 1: So--at any rate, you went on to work for the--as the Director of Editorial Management for AARP.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I've had a number of other speechwriting jobs since I've left the White House, starting with AARP writing speeches for the board members and the CEO of AARP, yeah.
Speaker 1: How do they react to the fact that you were the, you know, a speechwriter for President [Bill] Clinton?
Speaker 2: Well, everywhere I've gone since then, it has, I must say it has opened some doors and opened some eyes and, you know, it is something that I will say has been helpful to me since leaving the White House.  You get an extra measure of respect, I think, when you are a presidential speechwriter.
Speaker 1: So how was--now in 2004, you're 54 and you're working as a speechwriter for John Kerry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, I was actually working at AARP and I took a leave of absence because the Kerry Administration asked--or Kerry himself actually called and, I guess they had known about my work with Clinton and they, they asked me to, to join his campaign.  First, they asked me to write a speech for him; I think it was about the anniversary of Brown v. Board of Education, and I wrote a speech for him in which I used a line from Langston Hughes, from a Langston Hughes poem, "Let America Be America Again," and he liked it so much, it became part of his campaign theme, and then when I--and then I joined his campaign and worked with--I was not the chief speechwriter; I guess I was a senior speechwriter.  Bob Shrum--I don't know if you know that name, he was sort of the chief speechwriter, but that was also--I worked with a great team.  One of the young speechwriters on that team was a guy named Jon Favreau, who went on to become [HM] President [Barack] Obama's chief speechwriter; he's since left the White House, but he's, he's--he got his start with me on the Kerry campaign.
Speaker 1: What sorts of things did you--details did you have to be mindful of in terms of a difference between writing for Clinton and Kerry?  I mean I know they're two different personalities, but--
Speaker 2: Well yes, and they had two different speaking styles.  You know, one of the things they had in common was they liked to extend the length of their remarks, sometimes to their detriment (laughter).  As you know, President Clinton had--you know, he had a reputation for giving long speeches and I think it was in 1988--convention speech which people still make fun of it because it went on so long, and his State of the Unions sometimes would run over an hour.  The thing--the difference was, you know, John Kerry also had a propensity for extending the remarks.  You know, we would write a speech--usually, a good speech--15, 20 minutes at the most, and then you start to lose your audience; but both he and Kerry would extend their remarks.  I would say the difference being that Clinton was so engaging and so conversational that you--sometimes you didn't mind him going over.  Kerry, on the other hand, you know, would tend to lose his audience at times (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(Unclear) formal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yes, because of his style.
Story_ID: 57291
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--now you went on to write speeches then for Time Warner, and you served as the primary speechwriter for [HM] Richard Parsons, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Richard Parsons was the Chairman and CEO of Time Warner; that was a great experience, you know, working in corporate America for one of the few African American CEOs of a Fortune, you know, 50 company and, you know, I got a chance to move to New York [New York City, New York], live in New York, and write speeches about, you know--Time Warner is, you know, is a communication dreamland because it was magazines, movies, you know, T.V., and all the things that I love so much, and so that was a great experience writing for Dick Parsons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then in 2010, you worked for the Corporation for National Service, which heads VISTA, AmeriCorps, and all that.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I came back to the Washington area to re-join--to join the [HM] [President Barack] Obama administration as a political appointee, so I, I, I, I feel very fortunate that I've worked for the last two Democratic presidents and--one who used to say he was the first black president, and the other one who is actually the first black president (laughter), so it's--yes, it's been good.  And I'm still with the Obama administration; I left the corporation in--but now I'm with NASA, writing speeches for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--for [HM] Charles Bolden (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Charles Bolden.
Speaker 1: --the first black director of NASA.
Speaker 2: Absolutely; he's the first African American administrator of NASA and a former astronaut and a great guy, yeah.
Story_ID: 57292
Speaker 1: So needless to say, you didn't dream of doing this when you were growing up in Baltimore.
Speaker 2: I had no idea I'd be at--this trajectory was never on my radar screen; I, I attribute it to hard work, faith in God, family support, and just natural talent (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know often people we interview say that preparation is the key for--to meet an opportunity.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Preparation--again, as I said, the schools that I went to in Baltimore [Maryland]--public and Morgan State University, as well as--and I have to give all praise to, to the higher spirit and to God which, you know, something that my mother really infused in, in me and at an early age--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sure you know people that grew up with you that had ability that didn't make it.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yes.  There's a litany of missed opportunities and people who didn't make it, who had the ability--yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you see as the difference?
Speaker 2: You know, again I'm gonna have to say faith, knowing yourself and trusting in yourself and--you know, it's not enough to have the skill and the ability, you have to have some inner values and core values and inner strength.  I always think about how Nelson Mandela survived 27 years in prison; he had to have a lotta inner strength to do that, and I think as an African American, you know, we do need to have a lotta inner strength to achieve the things that we have achieved when nobody thought we could.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently, if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: No, there's nothing I would change.  The ups and downs--it hasn't always been a smooth ride; I've had some bumps in the road, but everything, I think, has contributed to my growth and my, my success if you will, and it ain't over yet; I'm still out there pluggin' away, I'm not ready to, you know, call it a day yet.
Story_ID: 57293
Speaker 1: Have you any future plans of writing a novel or a book of poetry or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, I'm always--yes, I've always--I'm still writing poetry whenever I can.  I do think that there's at least a memoir in my, in my future, but I'm so busy still writing for other people that I don't have a lotta time to focus on my own writing; but that will come.
Story_ID: 57294
Speaker 1: Now, once again, when you look back over everything you've done to this point, is there--what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: Wow.  I guess, you know, first African American speechwriter for a United States president, and I would hope also--you know, I do take whatever--any opportunity I can to talk to young people and to hopefully inspire them, especially young black males, that, you know, coming from where I came from--poverty, eviction, you know, I did spend some time in a foster home when I was kid, and I overcame all that and have realized many of my dreams, and I still have more to strive for, so I just want them to know that they can do it too.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 57295
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we--we're still struggling, you know, economically, educationally, socially, criminal justice system, there's still too many African Americans being incarcerated disproportionately, so I do have a special, you know, I feel responsibility and desire to contribute to changing some of that, and I do that--I do some writing on the side for--I've done some writing for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], for the National Urban League, for other, you know, civil rights organizations; so I, I, I plan to stay involved in that arena so that we can start to turn some of these things around.
Story_ID: 57296
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us something about your family.  Now you've been married twice, you've got a daughter (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I have a daughter--
Speaker 1: --and a grandbaby.
Speaker 2: --and a grandson.  My daughter's Maga; I think she's 35 now.  Maybe I shouldn't say that, but--and my grandson is three years old, and I love them dearly; they're inspirational and lights of my life, and--again, my sister [Bernadette Guthrie] and brother [Harold Edmonds] are still with me and they, they are also inspirational and very supportive, and my father, Buddy [Roland Parker]; I call him my father, he is my father 'cause he's the only father I've ever known and he's, he's still strong and, and supportive--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there anything I haven't asked you we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't think so; you've been very thorough (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 57297
Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Wow.  I'd just like to be remembered as a person who cared about other people, who did everything he could to make this world a better place, and who tried to exemplify the highest values of love and respect and dignity towards everyone.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's good enough.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you.
