Story_ID: 660949
Speaker 1: So, I'm [HistoryMaker] Randall Pinkston, your interviewer.  This is videographer Scott Stearns, and if you would give us--we know who you are, but for tape (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know, I know, I know--
Speaker 1: --identification purposes, give us the, your name and the spelling of your name?
Speaker 2: My name is Bobby Rush, B-O-B-B-Y, R-U-S-H, slash, Emmett Ellis.  I was born Emmett Ellis, E-M-M-E-T-T, E-L-L-I-S, Jr. [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.].  The only reason I changed my name because my daddy [Emmett Ellis, Sr.] was a preacher.  He was my father and my best friend.  I had so much respect for what he stood for, what he was, what he did 'til I wanted to change my name 'cause I knew one day--at least, I thought in my heart, I was gonna be this big artist, and I didn't want it to be on my father, as a preacher, and people had the name crossed up as Emmett Ellis.  That's the only reason I did it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And I guess, some of your lyrics would not exactly be appropriate for the pulpit (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I think so, I, I think so.  I think so.
Speaker 1: So your date of birth, Mr. Rush, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My--
Speaker 1: --and your place of birth?
Speaker 2: My--I'm from a little place called--I got two birthdays.  I got two birthdays.  Let me straighten this out.  I got a birthday, somewhere, say I was born in 1940, someone said 1937, but it's 1933.  We surveyed it because I was a midwife child.  Nobody really knew.  You had to go back and get the uncles and aunties and, you know, and gather up the birthday.  So I got three birthdays, 1940, 1937 and 1933 (laughter).  So I take the 1940 (laughter).  No, it's 1933 (laughter), but that's what we come up with because I'm--as a midwife--because of records and things, and we have to go back and kind of survey things and find who and what.  And so they come up with that number, so--
Speaker 1: Month, month and day?
Speaker 2: Yeah, November 10th.
Speaker 1: November 10th.
Speaker 2: November 10th.
Speaker 1: Well, belated, happy birthday.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, last month.  And where were you born?
Speaker 2: A little place called Haynesville, Louisiana.  Haynesville, H-A--see, Haynesville and Homer, Louisiana is about--it's five miles from Haynesville and it's six miles from Homer.  So the, really, it's a little place called Colquitt, C-A-R-Q-U-I-T [sic.], Colquitt, Louisiana, in the country, you know, like in a little--in the country.
Speaker 1: With a little store.
Speaker 2: Little store, little--one little store, Colquitt.
Speaker 1: And was there a post office in Colquitt?
Speaker 2: No, no, post office (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just the--
Speaker 2: --post office was in Haynesville, Louisiana.  That's the closest I can get to where I'm from.
Speaker 1: That's the--so I guess, so it was a farm?
Speaker 2: Oh, god, yes.  And that's all we knew about.  My daddy had a farm, had a couple of mules named Jake [ph.] and Jerry [ph.], a bunch of cows and goats and horses and, and the whole bit, man, you know.
Story_ID: 660950
Speaker 1: Now, I have--these are required questions that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we have to ask all of our (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's all right.
Speaker 1: --guests.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I have two favorite colors, white and green, equal.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Now, it's vegetables and seafood, anything that flies or swim.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably in a hot climate, the West, anything out west where it don't get too cold.  After living in Chicago [Illinois] for a long time, west.  I like, I like the West.  I like the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) California?
Speaker 2: California, anything in California, west, if it's--climate wise.  I can, I can call you twenty towns, but anything west.
Speaker 1: Favorite season?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: And your favorite saying?
Speaker 2: Do unto others like you wish to be done unto.
Story_ID: 660951
Speaker 1: I wanna talk about your parents first, starting with your father's side.  What's your father's name?
Speaker 2: Emmett Ellis, Sr.
Speaker 1: And do you remem- know his date of birth and where he was born?
Speaker 2: Fourteen--19--yes, I know.  He was born February the 14th, Valentine's Day, 1906.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: In Homer, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And do you know his parents' names?
Speaker 2: Yes, my--his parents is Charley Ellis.
Speaker 1: Okay, and his mom?
Speaker 2: Emma Lee, E-M-M-A, Emma Lee [Emma Ellis].
Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know when and where they were born?
Speaker 2: In the same area, in Homer--Haynesville, Louisiana area, all from that same area.
Speaker 1: So 18 something, right?
Speaker 2: Eighteen forty [1840], 1850--I think it was '69 [1869], I believe it was.
Speaker 1: Eighteen sixty-nine [1869] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep [sic.].
Speaker 1: --for Charles Ellis?
Speaker 2: Charley.
Speaker 1: Eighteen sixty-nine [1869], so it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was 108 when he passed.
Speaker 1: Ooh, okay.  So he was born right after the Civil War?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what about your grandmom, Emma Lee?
Speaker 2: They were two, two years apart in age.
Speaker 1: So 1871 [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know how many siblings, sisters and brothers your, your father had?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't--I knew--I think it was eighteen or nineteen.  There was thirty-two of 'em.
Speaker 1: Whoa, whoa, excuse me.
Speaker 2: Yeah, thirty-two--my granddaddy had thirty-two children.  He was married--I understood that he was married twice.  He had eighteen and eighteen children, but some of 'em were stillborn, but thirty-two lived.  I never knew but twenty-one of 'em.  I believe seventeen of 'em lived to get over a hundred.  And at my granddaddy's funeral, we counted 612 grandchildren at his funeral.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what year your grandfather died?
Speaker 2: I have to look back on it.  Sixty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, if he was 108--
Speaker 2: Sixty, sixty--
Speaker 1: So eight, plus nine, '77 [1977], 1977--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have to get the years, about--I have to count the years--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975] or '77 [1977], between them ages, in them times.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was a farmer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a farmer.
Speaker 1: And did he own his own farm?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: A sharecropper.
Speaker 2: A sharecropper and work at the fish house (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh what--
Speaker 2: --I know he worked at that fish house for fifty years.
Speaker 1: What kind of crop?
Speaker 2: Cotton. Cotton and sugarcane.
Speaker 1: Of course, Louisiana.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Louisiana, cotton and sugarcane, syrup mill.
Story_ID: 660952
Speaker 1: Now, when you were a little boy, your [paternal] grandparents obviously were still alive, did you spend much time at their house?
Speaker 2: Yes, my grandfather--I, not--my granddaddy, I didn't because he was always gone, but I went by my grandmamma house, and I spent a lot of time on her porch.  When I say on her porch, because she was so neat in her house, as kids, she didn't want nobody in their messing up her house.  We would go to her house and we would sit on the porch (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --with the dogs and what have you.  And that was fun to us as kids.  And she was so disciplined to us by behaving, sit down here and sit down there.  If you play, go outside and play.  If you come back in, pull your shoes off, sit on the porch and wipe your feet off and don't come in the house with that mud.  And she was so (laughter), yeah, you know, one of them kind of things.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, is that Grandma Emma--
Speaker 2: Emma.
Speaker 1: --Lee (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Grandma Emma Lee [Emma Ellis].
Speaker 1: Now, you said, her house.  Did they have two different houses?
Speaker 2: I don't know what, but he was married, and my granddaddy was a, my granddaddy was a road hog, and my granddaddy was here and was there.  And I didn't know him to be there that much.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was a rolling stone?
Speaker 2: Yeah, rolling stone, my granddaddy.
Speaker 1: Wherever he laid his hat--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I remember my granddaddy when he was--funny story, when he was ninety years old or roughly, they had a birthday party for him.  And before the birthday party, my daddy [Emmett Ellis, Sr.] was running revival at his church.  And he--it was at my daddy's church, but somebody else was preaching revival.  So it come to his birthday, so he was outside of the church with wine in his pocket--
Speaker 1: This is your granddaddy?
Speaker 2: My granddaddy.  My granddaddy drank like fish.  So he was keeping up so much noise around the church, so my daddy get up to go out the back of the church and said--they called him Papa Charley [Charley Ellis], said, "Papa Charley, you the oldest man out here.  You should set an example for the young men.  You keeping up noise outside the church. Shh, we're trying to have a, a--do a situation, and here, close to Easter Sunday, we're talking the resurrection," and whatever, and he looked at my daddy and (unclear) and half drunk, he said, "Boy," he said, "who died?"  He said, "We're preaching about the resurrection of Jesus."  "Jesus died?  I didn't know the boy was sick." (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: My granddaddy (laughter), my granddaddy, half drunk, you know.  And he would go sit the bottle up under the church, and he would likely go back in and cry a little bit and come back out and get him another one, and go back in the church.  I loved my granddaddy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you see your granddaddy doing these things?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, and so, and so you modeled yourself after him, did you (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, really, not really, not really, naw.  I, I think the reason why I don't drink because of all that, you know.  I had a drink in fifty--I had three beers in my lifetime.  Never drank, I never had a glass of wine for dinner.  I never drink anything.  I had three beers my lifetime.  I don't drink, smoke, get high, in no form or fashion, don't smoke a cigarette, nothing.
Speaker 1: That's why you're looking so young.
Speaker 2: I had a--that was in 1957, me and Muddy Waters.
Speaker 1: That's- when y'all stopped.
Speaker 2: I--he didn't stop, but I stopped (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, you stopped.
Speaker 2: He didn't stop--Muddy Waters didn't stop drinking or smoking (laughter).  Muddy Waters would have a reefer this long, man, come on, this my (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 1: Back to your family, but we gotta, we gotta get to--we gotta--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --talk about your very famous colleagues in, in the blues world.  But about Miss Emma Lee, do you know with her and also with your grandfather, Charley, do you know if they had any schooling?
Speaker 2: No, I, I know now--I didn't know then, I know now that when I look back on it, very little schooling, very little schooling, they had, almost like myself. Let me tell you a little something about the schooling.  He had all them children, and some of the kids grew up to get good schooling and education wise from the college and what have you.  But between the two of 'em, very little, very little.
Story_ID: 660953
Speaker 1: Unfortunate as I was (clears throat), didn't have a opportunity to go to school.  All the chi- kids at my house--it was ten of us sisters and brothers.  So my daddy [Emmett Ellis, Sr.] came to me one day, and he said, "Junior [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.], I want you to drop out of school and help me with my--help me with the other kids because you seem to be more apt than all the other children.  I want you to help me work the fields so I can have a opportunity to feed 'em and, and send them to school."
Speaker 2: And how old were you when he came (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About eleven or twelve, about eleven or twelve years old.  He said, "But I want you to get a job--," 'cause I always followed my daddy, and I always--it was a biblical study, loved my father.  He said, "I want you to get a job at E.L. Burgess [ph.].  He won't pay you much money, but you can bring me the news."  Well, I had been to church with my father, and he was talking about that particular day, was preaching about the Lord's Supper and where it was gonna be.  And he was preaching this sermon.  I can't remember everything about it, but I know he was preaching about someone wanna know where it's gonna be.  He say, "Go down to the fork of the road.  You'll see a man with a jug.  Follow him."  And I always studied that.  But I noticed when--if I read and he was talking about following the man to the, where the Lord's Supper gonna be, the man he was following didn't know where he was going 'cause he said, "When you get there, there's a man upstairs will come down and lead you to the upper room."  So that tells me the man he was following didn't know where he was going.  So when he told me to go get a job at a gin, I remembered this, so I'm gonna get a job in this gin, and bring my daddy the news.  I knew right then spiritually, what my daddy was talking about.  He never told me.  Well, I went in the gin, and there was white men sitting around the table talking about the Dow Jones [Dow Jones Industrial Average] and black mens and women didn't know anything about a Dow Jones.
Speaker 2: Stock market.
Speaker 1: Stock market.  They were talking about what they gonna sell, when they gonna sell, and how much they gonna sell it for, the ups and down of it.  And they was talking this around these white mens, around this table.  I was this little boy, uneducated, but I was smart enough to put sand in my pocket and a rag, and get it--I'd get some sand in my hand and throw it around their feet, so I have a reason to be around the table.
Speaker 2: Oh, sweeping.
Speaker 1: Sweeping, so I could hear what they were selling, what they were gonna sell.  They would use the word, the N word.  "We can't sell no potato because them N words got some in the field.  We gotta hold this back.  We can't raise this price on this because of them."  They were talking about the black peoples.   Then I would go home.  My daddy say, "What you hear today, son?"  I said, "You can sell peanuts, but you can't sell no popcorn."  You can sell this; you can't sell that by my information.  So he would be like the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in the neighborhood--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --so he would go to all the people and say, "Listen, tomorrow--Saturday now, tomorrow, I want everybody to meet me at the church at nine o'clock."  Sunday school weren't until 9:30 or 10.  We'd go thirty minutes early so he could tell the mens what to sell, not to sell, from my information.
Speaker 2: Wow.  How long did this go on?
Speaker 1: Went on for--'til my daddy got in trouble about burying cotton because he knew the price was down.  He would get his brother and sister, and he would bury cotton in the ground 'cause I had the information when it was going up.  When it would go up, he would dig it out the ground.  They wanted to know, where did this cotton come from this time of year?  And I--my daddy got in trouble because he had a way of knowing when it was going up by my information in the gin.  And I was making--the man was paying me twelve dollars a month.
Speaker 2: What kind of trouble?
Speaker 1: But they probably gonna kill him or lynch him or what have you because the trouble was that, if--here, this black man got cotton in January.  The cotton was out in September or October, and now the price is way up, and my daddy still got twelve--three or four bails buried in the ground, and he bringing 'em in here when the price is up, because I had the information when it was going up.  I'm in the gin.
Speaker 2: And this was Homer [Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: Well, it was in, it was in Colquitt [Louisiana] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Colquitt, okay, but--
Speaker 1: --which is five miles from Homer.
Speaker 2: But, but the--where you were working at was--
Speaker 1: Was working at, out in the country in Colquitt.
Speaker 2: Oh, you were working in Colquitt (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes.
Speaker 2: That's where the--
Speaker 1: Five miles, five miles from Homer--
Speaker 2: That's where the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) out in the country.
Speaker 2: That's where the gin--
Speaker 1: That's where the gin--
Speaker 2: That's where the gin was.
Speaker 1: That's where the gin was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 660954
Speaker 1: Oh, and your dad [Emmett Ellis, Sr.], how much schooling did he have?
Speaker 2: Third grade education.
Speaker 1: Third grade, okay.
Speaker 2: But he was like a college student.  He was a bookworm, book nut--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: My daddy would pick cotton, plow the mule real fast, go to the other room, the other end, and read.  When you get there, he'd go back again, read, day in and day out, day in and day out.  He was a bookworm.
Speaker 1: Did he--you say he was a pastor.  Do you remember the name of his church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Antioch and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Antioch Baptist [Antioch Baptist Church, Homer, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: --he had a couple, couple of churches, Baptist churches, Freewill Baptist Church [Colquitt Freewill Baptist Church, Haynesville, Louisiana]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --one in Homer, Louisiana, one in Pine Bluff, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: And, and, okay, and--one in Homer.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About how many members did y'all--
Speaker 2: I think, I think--oh, god, it was a small church.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean if--you were lucky to have forty members.
Story_ID: 660955
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mom for a little bit, if you don't mind.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Mattie, M-A-T-T-I-E, Mattie--her maiden name was Spivey, S-P-I-V-E-Y [Mattie Spivey Ellis].
Speaker 1: And do you know her date of birth and where she was born?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, now, September the 18th, '06 [1906].
Speaker 1: Oh, they were both born the same year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Same, same area (laughter).
Speaker 1: And she's from Homer [Louisiana] also?
Speaker 2: Well, naw, she's from Colquitt [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Oh, she's from Colquitt.  I'm sorry, Colquitt.
Speaker 2: Well, it's--Colquitt is--it's a little place called Gordon [Louisiana], came from Gordon, which is five, eight miles apart.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Gordon.
Speaker 1: Did you know her parents, your maternal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't know her, her parents.  I just know of her parents--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and grandparents which if they're on that side, they gonna be white.
Speaker 1: But her parents, do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Johnson and--Johnson, (unclear).
Speaker 1: Now, I got--saw somewhere Van--who is Van Spivey?
Speaker 2: Van Spivey was my great-granddaddy.
Speaker 1: So that's your mother's grandfather?
Speaker 2: And he also had a--she also had a brother named Van Spivey.  That's my mama's, that's my mama's--that was my mama's granddaddy.  That's my mama's granddaddy.
Speaker 1: So Van is your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And, but her father's name was what?
Speaker 2: Her father's name was Johnson.
Speaker 1: Johnson, okay.
Speaker 2: Amos Johnson [sic. Amos Spivey].
Speaker 1: Amos Johnson.  And do you know her mother's name?
Speaker 2: Sarah [Sarah Spivey (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Sarah, Sarah, okay.  And do you know--were they as old as your paternal grandparents [Emma Ellis and Charley Ellis], you know, 1860s [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Oh god yeah, yeah, yeah.  They all were 18--they're all, 1850 to 1870, in that area.
Speaker 1: Were either one of them former slaves?
Speaker 2: I believe my--on my mama's side, the grandmamma, her grandmamma and all of 'em was slaves.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Van--
Speaker 2: Now, I don't know about my--on my daddy's [Emmett Ellis, Sr.] side.  I don't about my great-grandmamma on my dad's side.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Van Spivey was Amos' father or Sarah's father.
Speaker 2: It was, it was Sarah's--that was Sarah's father.
Speaker 1: Sarah's father, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, of course.
Speaker 2: I don't know who Amos' father was.
Speaker 1: Right.  And Van Spivey was white?
Speaker 2: White.  To the best of my knowledge, all the Spiveys was white.
Story_ID: 660956
Speaker 1: Now, I've read that you mother [Mattie Spivey Ellis] could have passed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mama, you couldn't tell whether she was white or black.  She was blue eyed and blonde hair.  I remember going to get some hay with my father [Emmett Ellis, Sr.] (crying)--my mother was my babysitter when we was out in public, lots of times, and my daddy was her chauffeur.  We would go to the store--I remember one time that three guys came up and asked my mama (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) White guys.
Speaker 2: White guys, say, "Why you with this nigger?"  She said, "I'm a nigger too."  She--two guys was on a horse, one guy was leading a horse.  He said, "Naw you aren't."  She say, "Ask Miss Debaer [ph.]."  She went in the store Miss Debaer owned, and I could see my mom when she left me, she was my mama, but when she got in the store, I was her babysitter [sic.].  She related to the white guys 'cause she was this white woman in the store.  They was all friendly, and when they left she said, "That's one of Van Spivey's kids," and the guys got on their horse and ran off.  Whoever my great-granddaddy was, he was some big shot, so they left.  My daddy never knew about the conversation.  When he come back, he was my father, but he was chauffeuring for my mother 'cause she had set this agenda up in the store with the white guys.  I don't know what she said or how she said it, but I know now, looking back as a grown man, that when she was in the store, she was babysitting me.  She wasn't my mama, whatever she said and done.  And when she came back, we got home, on my way home, she was my mama now.  And she was my daddy's husband [sic. wife].  But for the moment, he was a chauffeur and I was a baby--she was my babysitter.  And when I look back on it, she did what she had to do because when we needed food or whatever, she could get what she want because she was considered a white woman.  And we had to struggle for it.  So my daddy was apparently smart enough to let her deal with it and get it, what she needed, when she needed it.  I can't say what she did or know what she did, but when I look back on it, it bring tears to my eyes, knowing she had to be two women.  She was white in the store.  She was my mama, as a black woman when she got back in the wagon.  Those are some sad times for me (crying) for her to play the two parts with me (crying).  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: No, that's, that's fine.
Speaker 2: And my poor daddy never knew.  He didn't know what she had to do.  If she did, if he did, he covered it well.
Story_ID: 660957
Speaker 1: It remind me, in 1963, I was in Rock Island, Illinois, going from Rock Island to Chicago [Illinois].  I had an accident.  Two--a truck hit me in the back.  Myself and Ike Turner had just got off a gig--that's before Tina [Tina Turner] got with Ike Turner, during the time she was with him, but she wasn't with him at the time.  He went one way, and I went another way.  We had this accident, myself and Robert Plunkett, a drummer.  The truck hit me in the back, truck hit him in the back.  Anyway, ten trucks hit each other.  All ten trucks blew up.  The ten mens got killed.  Myself and Robert Plunkett were the only survivors out this accident.  So it was about four o'clock in the morning, I guess, roughly, it was a lot of fog.  I dug a hole in the ground to bury ourself to try to keep warm 'til someone found us.  I don't know.  I was going in and out, but someone found us, a hour or so later, and I could see mens walking from the sheriff department.  And when someone called and say, "You see any more--anybody else hurt here?"  He said, "Everybody in the truck is burnt up, but we have two niggers, they're buried in the ground.  They're already buried.  Let's leave 'em."  And they left us there.  And someone found us some time the next day and taken us to the hospital.  But the guys left us there because we were black mens who needed some help. And when I think about that, it remind me when my mother [Mattie Spivey Ellis] had to play the white role with the white men to save my daddy's [Emmett Ellis, Sr.] life because when they come to the van--come to the wagon, asked her, "What you doing with this nigger?"  That was harm for my father.  And my mother went in the store to, protected that, and my daddy never knew that. I'm so happy that you're talking about these kind of things.  I'm so happy that The HistoryMakers decided they would do something about history, but I tell you, as an old man, a lot of things have changed, but a lot of things remain the same.  What's going on today is still going on because the law have changed that you must treat a man a certain way, but the law haven't never been changed that a man must change his heart.  You change the law, but the heart haven't been changed.  If man beat his wife and he stopped beating his wife because he learned not to beat his wife, he's still a wife beater who learned not to beat his wife.  But if you don't have a desire to beat your wife, that's a change.  If you put a speed limit sign up on a highway, and you say you shouldn't go over this speed limit, whatever that is, but if you don't have a desire to speed, you really don't need a speed sign.  This is--this interview have been hard with me because when I think about where it was, when I think about where it is, the distance, not very far.  It haven't came that far to make a difference because we're still talking about slave and enslavery because there're still some things I dare not do because of who I am and what I do as a black man.
Speaker 2: Such as?
Speaker 1: When I sing the blues, and sing the blues and talk about the things inside my storylines, it's different when a white guy do it.  I remember when they designed a wah-wah, a wah-wah pedal for guitar players.  The wah-wah was designed for black--for white people to sound like blacks.  Now, you have black people buying wah-wah, trying to sound like a white guy who trying to sound black.
Speaker 2: Hold that point, Dr. Rush [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.].
Story_ID: 660958
Speaker 1: I'm happy that you're talking to me because when I went to Chicago [Illinois] in 1951, Muddy Waters was there, Howlin' Wolf, John Lee Hooker, Jimmy Reed, Willie Dixon, Little Walter, many guys in the (unclear).  In 1953, Bo Diddley came.  In 1955, Smokey Hall [Bobby "Smokey" Hall] came, T-Bone Walker, Chuck Berry. In 1957, Etta James came, 1957 Buddy Guy came.  There's no man living can tell the story I tell.
Speaker 2: They're all gone.
Speaker 1: They're all gone.  Since Chuck Berry, they're all gone, and most of the guys couldn't say what I say because they wasn't free to say it.
Speaker 2: And if they had said it, they wouldn't have had a job.
Speaker 1: (Inaudible response) Because when I went to Chess [Chess Records], in 19--early '50s [1950s] to get a job, 10 [Chicago Federation of Musicians Local 10] and 208 [Chicago Federation of Musicians Local 208] was merging [Chicago Federation of Musicians Local 10-208], and I said to Leonard [Leonard Chess], who was Phil's brother, I say, "I'm so happy that the merg- that the union is merging," 10 and 208, because 10-208 was the same union, but they were merging.  One side represented the white musicians, one side represented the black musicians, and they didn't have much protection.  And I say, "I'm happy.  Now, we can, we can work and have a better job."
Speaker 2: What union was that?
Speaker 1: Ten and 208.
Speaker 2: But the name of it?
Speaker 1: Union, musicians union (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Musicians union.
Speaker 1: There was number 10 and number 208.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: As they were merging, Phil said--looked at his brother, said, "Where that boy get that information from?"  He say, "Off your desk."  He threw it back to me, said, "What does this say, boy?"  I said, "The union is merging."  He turned and told Phil--turned and told Leonard, "We can't use that nigger.  He can read."
Speaker 2: Phil, what was Phil's last name?
Speaker 1: Phil Chess, Chess brothers.
Speaker 2: Oh.  So he didn't hire--he didn't sign (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Muddy Waters and them got the gig.  I didn't get the gig.
Speaker 2: Because you could read.
Speaker 1: (Nods head).
Speaker 2: Well, Muddy Waters could read too, but they didn't know it.
Speaker 1: They didn't know it, yeah, but, but he said to his brother--he wasn't talking to me.  He said, "We can't use that nigger 'cause he can read."
Story_ID: 660959
Speaker 1: We gotta get back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --gotta get back to Louisiana.  So, you're in Homer [Louisiana].  Your dad's preaching.  How do you get introduced to guitar and harmonica?
Speaker 2: My--my cousin, called him Son [ph.].  My daddy's brother gave me a guitar when I was about seven years old.  I hid it in a loft.
Speaker 1: Why did you hide it?
Speaker 2: Because I thought my daddy [Emmett Ellis, Sr.] wouldn't approve of it because, his being a preacher.  And I knew I didn't wanna sing gospel.  I knew I wanted to sing the blues, and I wouldn't--didn't kid myself.  And I knew.  So one day, he told me, say, "Boy, bring that guitar here to me."
Speaker 1: Your daddy?
Speaker 2: My daddy.  Now, you know, how my daddy know I had a guitar and it's hid in the loft, 'cause you know, your mama and daddy know everything.  I went and got the guitar.  It was all bowed and warped and they--been up in the hot sun, been up there for, for a week or so.  I got it, and he tuned it up--with one string broke on it, and he tuned it up.  And he said, "Boy, let me sing a song to you that I used to sing to a little girl when I was a little older than you."  Well, I wanted to hear this; didn't know he could play or sing, didn't, didn't know he could play the guitar, didn't know he could tune it, nothing.  He said, "I'm a sing a song I used to sing to a little girl when I was a little older than you."  Well, I got interested then.  My mama's [Mattie Spivey Ellis] in the kitchen cooking, and I got close to him.  I said, "I'm not looking for any--," 'cause I know, I figured he was gonna sing (singing), "Glory, glory, hallelujah, when I laid my burden down" ['Glory, Glory (Lay My Burden Down)'] or either, you know, something about my mom, you know.  He said, (makes sound).  He picked it up.  There was a pecan tree in the back of my yard there.  There was another tree on the corner, called it Chinkapin tree [Chinkapin oak tree].
Speaker 1: Chinkapin tree.
Speaker 2: Chinkapin, that's what they called it.  It's Chinkapin.  It's in the dictionary, Chinkapin.  So he said, (makes sound)--I'm looking for this gospel song or something about my mom, 'cause he said about this little girl.  And I wanted to hear about my ma.  I get close to him.  He said, "Me and my gal went to Chinkapin hunting.  She fell down, and I saw something."  I said, "Daddy, sing it again."  Now, I'm a little boy.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: What I wanted him to do, to sing the next verse because I figured the next verse gonna explain what he saw.  So I don't know how to say, "Daddy, what you saw?"  I don't know how to tell him that.  He said, "Me and my gal went to Chinkapin hunting.  She fell down and I saw something something."  My mother was in the kitchen cooking.  She said, "Ah," meaning, don't sing that boy--don't sing that song to that boy like that.  So he went to sing it again.  I said, "Daddy, daddy, how big was she?"  He said, "Aw, boy, she was fat, 350 [pounds], big woman."  In my mind, I said, "Daddy, what she had on?"  He said, "Nothing but a dress, boy, big woman, nothing but a dress."  My little mind running now, big fat woman falling down with nothing on but a dress, and I know if she fell down, that's a lot to see.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I say, "Daddy, sing it again."  Now, I can't say, "Daddy, what you saw?"  I say, "Sing it again."  I figured and now, he gonna get to the next verse.  Said, "Me and my gal went to Chinkapin hunting," so my mother was coming up by that time.  I kicked him.  I said, "Dad, daddy, here come, here come mama."  Oh, he acted like he didn't hear me or didn't care, had his hat down, shirt off the overall, just got out the cotton field, "Me and my gal went to Chinkapin hunting.  She fell down and I kept running."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I never knew what the song was gonna be 'cause my mother, my mother broke it up, man (laughter).  He was getting ready to tell me, man (laughter).  My daddy was getting ready to put it on me, man, I know he was gone tell me some terr- whatever it was.  I just wanted to know about it, you know.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that started me to singing the blues, man.  From that, I knew.  My daddy was a preacher, upright man.  In that time and era, everybody talked about the devil music.  But my daddy never talked about the devil music to me.  He never came to see my shows.  He never encouraged me to do it.  He never told me not to sing the blues.  He never told me to sing the blues, but he never told me not to.
Speaker 1: Did you ever find out whether your daddy had, at one point when he was a young man, been a singer or blues singer himself?
Speaker 2: I never found that out.  I didn't know.  But I figured he could because my daddy had that finesse, had that thing he could do on the stage--I wanna say on the pulpit, just like on the stage.  He had that, he had that thing, man.  He could just reach and get 'em.  He had--he knew what to say, when to say it and how to say it, how to hit it and step back.  So I kind of got my little grip from him, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you sing in the choir in chur- in your dad's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, I knew I wanted to be a blues singer at the, at seven years old, man.
Speaker 1: But you didn't sing in the church choir?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And your daddy didn't make you sing?
Speaker 2: Didn't make me sing.  I was a Sunday school teacher, biblical studies, super- little superintendent.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm a biblical study, man.
Story_ID: 660960
Speaker 1: How did you hear the blues?  I mean where--
Speaker 2: I think--well, I hear what I knew.  I, I took, I took what I knew and I always was singing at the blues.  When I say, singing at the blues because I had no way of knowing where the blues was because until--my daddy [Emmett Ellis, Sr.] had this radio--he was boxer nut.  He liked to listen to Joe Louis and when the fights come on.  So he had this radio in his house and had the wire run to a battery up under the house, so at night when the fight was off or whatever it was, I would turn to WLAC [WLAC Radio] and listen to Muddy Waters and all the guys like that.
Speaker 1: WLAC in Nashville.
Speaker 2: In Nashville, Tennessee, and listen to the radio, listen to the blues, Hoss Allen [Bill "Hoss" Allen] and all them guys.  I would listen to Jimmy Reed and all them guys.  That's what I would do, man, and I got a taste of that, that tone of the blues, just from me--just from what I heard, from T-Bone Walker and them guys like that.
Speaker 1: So for the transcriptionist, the way somebody is able to listen to a radio station in Nashville, when you are in Louisiana--this is before the web [World Wide Web].
Speaker 2: Oh, before the web, yeah.
Speaker 1: The signal skips at night.
Speaker 2: The signal skips, skip.  You, you--some places you can get it and sometimes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sometimes, you--
Speaker 2: --when it's cloudy, you can get it as well.  It just comes in--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: --go out, but you could hear enough of it to get the ground of it.  So that's where my blues sound come from.
Speaker 1: What other stations, DIA, WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: DIA, when I, when I got close to Arkansas, I could--over into Arkansas, I could hear DIA, and they would play the blues, 24-24 [hours].  And WLOK [WLOK Radio] and people like that, will play the blues.  And WDIA came later, but WLOK was first.
Speaker 1: Where was--LOK was in Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: In Memphis, uh-huh, Memphis.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember 'Randy's Record Shop' ['Randy's Record Shop Show']?
Speaker 2: Oh, god, yeah, 'Randy's Record Shop' was--everybody thought he was black, everybody thought because he sound like a black guy intentionally--I learned that later, Hoss Allen and all the guys like that, and Gene Noble [sic. Gene Nobles], all the guys, man, was, you know, they were, they were--I remember they would sell records and chickens--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --you know, (laughter).  I mean little bitties, man, you know, yes, yes, 'Randy's Record Shop.'
Speaker 1: And, and did you also listen to 'Grand Ole Opry'?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, god, I, I listened to 'Grand Ole Opry,' where my first love for music, one of the, one of the country westerns, called, you get the hook and I'll get the pole, babe ['Crawdad Song'] (singing), "You get a hook and I'll get the pole, we going down to the crawdad hole, hey, baby, mine."  Oh, I loved that song, man.  I loved the country and western stuff, you know.
Speaker 1: So you listened to that concurrently with the blues?
Speaker 2: Oh, god, because--yeah, and I took, I took those country lines and, and, and took my guitar upside the wall and made me the blues out of it, you know, you know.  I had to, I had a ol' one string guitar.  That's when I made my first guitar.
Speaker 1: So now, this is like late '30s [1930s], early '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947].
Speaker 1: Oh, but no, no, not with the guitar--I mean like when you're listening to these (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, god, yeah, it was early '40s [1940s], early '40s [1940s] music because I--Louis Jordan and all the guys like Steve [ph.], you know--
Speaker 1: Oh, so you listened to Louis Armstrong--
Speaker 2: Louis Armstrong, Louis Jordan, Louis Jordan, really.  I--Louis Armstrong I listened to somewhat, but Louis Jordan, I was in love with it, 'cause he'd talk about things I related to, about the farmer's chicken, the (unclear) the dogs, the cows and whatever.  I related to that, man.  You know, my first big records, gold record was 'Chicken Heads,' coming from, like from Louis Jordan.  He would talk about the 'Saturday Night Fish Fry,' you know.
Speaker 1: So you're writing about what you know?
Speaker 2: I write about what I knew, and I write--and I like to write about a lot of things, a lot of art--entertainers that I love so much, if you listen to my records, you can hear a little Muddy Waters, a little Howlin' Wolf, John Lee Hooker, you can hear some Elmore James.  You can hear all these guys, little elements of all of 'em.  When you take a little element from all of it, and put 'em in a bowl, you stir 'em up, you got a Bobby Rush [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.] soup.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 660961
Speaker 1: Oh, I forgot.  How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: Four.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I had four.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had four. Just one--I had four.  I was married--
Speaker 1: No, not children, brothers and sisters (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Oh, well, it's ten, ten of us.  It's ten of us, at five--it's, it's nine sisters and brothers and ten with myself.
Speaker 1: And where were you in the line?
Speaker 2: Seventh.
Speaker 1: Seventh.  Were there any other musicians?
Speaker 2: I don't--well, I, I don't think so.  I don't think so.  I have my son, who's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I mean of your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Naw, naw, naw, naw, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Did any of them become--did any of them go to school, go to--make it to college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my sister, and she taught, my sister.  I have, my sister that's next--that I'm next to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was a school teacher and taught in Little Rock [Arkansas] at the college for many years until she passed.  She was--
Speaker 1: Are any of your brothers and sister surviving?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have two brothers and one sister that's survived.
Speaker 1: And they are in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: One in, one in Arkansas, one in Michigan, one in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: One--you know.
Speaker 1: Now, at some point, you moved from--
Speaker 2: That's three brothers and one sister.
Speaker 1: Three brothers and one sister (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Three brothers, one sister.
Story_ID: 660962
Speaker 1: At some point you moved from Chi- what's that little town called (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From Chicago [Illinois] to, to Jackson [Mississippi]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. To--Colquitt [Louisiana] to Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Arkansas, that was 1947.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was 1947.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So thirty to--you were fourteen then?  Yeah, no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, I was about fourteen, about fourteen--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --roughly.
Speaker 1: And, and why did you all move to Arkansas?
Speaker 2: I think it was because of a better living and better money and more money, better opportunity (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So all--
Speaker 2: --for farming because my daddy [Emmett Ellis, Sr.] was a big farmer.  And at that time I believe the kids and his children, we could pick a bail and a half of cotton a day.  A bail and a half of cotton a day was worth--one thousand five hundred pounds in a bail, and you get like three dollars a hundred.  So, and back in, back in them days, for a black man to make a hundred dollars a day, was a lot of money.  And my daddy was making a hundred dollars a day when most people wasn't doing it.
Speaker 1: Where did you move in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Pine Bluff, well, Sherrill, Arkansas, we was out ofSherrill, S-H-E-R-V-E-I-L-L [sic.], S-H-E-R-I-L-L, Sherrill.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Which is, which is twelve miles from Pine Bluff, Arkansas, out in the country.
Speaker 1: To a farm.
Speaker 2: To a farm.
Speaker 1: And sharecropping again?
Speaker 2: Sharecropping again.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did your dad have another church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, later in Pine Bluff.
Speaker 1: Later.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So initially, you're just going there to--
Speaker 2: Right, for a farm, to farm.
Speaker 1: --to farm.  Now, did your mother [Mattie Spivey Ellis] work outside the house?
Speaker 2: No, just, just, just on the farm with my father.  That's it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My mother worked around the clock 'cause she would go to the field with us, come back and cook dinner at eleven o'clock, back at one o'clock in the field with us.
Story_ID: 660963
Speaker 1: So now that you're fourteen, are your parents still running into this racial problem because she looked white and your dad [Emmett Ellis, Sr.] looked black and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --how did that work itself, in--in Pine Bluff [Arkansas] area.
Speaker 2: Well, it worked itself better in Pine Bluff.  I don't know whether he got there and established that, that she was this black woman.  Before in Louisiana, it seemed to be like they wasn't established with my daddy being a black man, and she being a black woman.  When we got to Arkansas, seemed like somebody had already established, "Here this lady who look white, but she's black."  So there wasn't--didn't seem to be any controversies about that.  Now being a kid, I don't know.  But it didn't seem to be as much as it was in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Before you left Louisiana, did you ever hear your parents talk about that as, as a problem or talk about how they were gonna handle it or--
Speaker 2: Naw, I didn't hear my mama and father talk about it, but I did hear her talk to her friend about it.  My mother was named Mattie [Mattie Spivey Ellis], and there was another lady, her best friend, named Mattie.  Her last name was Hatta [Mattie Hatta (ph.)].  She talked to her, her friend about, she said, "Mattie, I'm gonna go up to Arkansas 'cause I think that they'll accept me better being who I am than who was--," she didn't say black or white.  She said, "Accept me better being who I am."  And I heard her talk about who I am, and she, she didn't pretend to be this white woman.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, she wasn't trying to pass.
Speaker 2: She wasn't trying to pass.  She just looked (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and what she did was to protect--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, yeah--
Speaker 1: --protect your daddy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I don't know (unclear), so I could say, I don't know.  I just often say, I really don't know what my daddy knew, whether he was just hiding behind the protection and knew it or he just really didn't know.  I didn't know.
Speaker 1: Do you know how they met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know how they met.  I know they met when they was fourteen or fifteen years old.  I heard 'em talk about that.
Story_ID: 660964
Speaker 1: Your grandfather [Amos Spivey], your mother's father--no, I'm sorry, your mother's mother [Sarah Spivey (ph.)] had come from Jackson [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: No, my--from, from Vicksburg, which is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From Vicks- from, from Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I understand around the Vicksburg area.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I see your story in here that you had been told never to go to Jackson (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was told all of my life that we never go to Mississippi, especially from the Jackson area because we was in, we was gonna get in harm's way because someone would try to harm us.  That's when we--my cousin and myself started to surveying where we come from to try to get our background of where we were from.  And then we found some peoples in Carthage, Mississippi who was eighty and ninety years old then.  I'm talking about in 1983, and we found some people that knew my great-grandmamma, and they was white.
Speaker 1: The people in Carthage who knew your great-grandmother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  And they was white.
Speaker 1: Were white.
Speaker 2: There was a nursing home at that time.  A cousin of mine, my mother's brother's child, was kind of getting this--Mary Jane [ph.] was her name.  She was kind of the head of this, trying to get this up for me 'cause she knew I was coming to Mississippi, trying to find out, if I'm gonna come, was I gonna be in harm's way.  And she the one really found out that we wasn't up for harm.  He was trying to divide land to all his children.  That's kind we kind of got away because I understand that my great-grandmamma had six kids or five kids by this Van Spivey.  He also had five or six kids by his wife.
Speaker 1: His white wife?
Speaker 2: His white lady, and they lived in the same house.  So when he was on his dying bed, he wanted to divide land to his children--
Speaker 1: All of 'em?
Speaker 2: And the white side, of the boys who are eighteen, nineteen and twenty years old grabbed the black kids up, took 'em to Eudora, Arkansas where they raised themselves in a barn.  That's how my dad [Emmett Ellis, Sr.] met my mom [Mattie Spivey Ellis].
Speaker 1: In a barn?
Speaker 2: In the barn.  They raised themselves, never had a house.
Speaker 1: Why did they go to Arkansas?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  He took 'em from Vicksburg to Eudora, Arkansas.  That's across the--it was where you go cross.  That's from Louisiana, Eudora, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: So now, so now, who took them there?
Speaker 2: The half-brothers.
Speaker 1: The half--the white brothers?
Speaker 2: The white brothers.  They was sister and brothers.
Speaker 1: So do you think the white brothers took them to Arkansas so they wouldn't get any of the land?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, definitely.  They didn't want to divide the land 'cause he was dividing land to these black children so he took 'em--so now, they don't have no land to divide.
Speaker 1: So if the, if the--and so, when the white half-brothers take all the black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All the black land.
Speaker 1: --brothers and sisters out of the state--
Speaker 2: Out of the state--
Speaker 1: --they can't get--
Speaker 2: --they, they can't claim anything.  And we were told not to never come back because the man was gonna try to harm us.  But he wasn't trying to harm.  He was trying to divide his land to his children.
Speaker 1: How did you find all this out?
Speaker 2: By Mary Jane, who's a very educated woman, who is my first cousin.  She passed years ago.  She'd of been close to ninety years old now herself if she would a been living.
Speaker 1: So she was one of your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother's sister's children.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And so she knew the story.
Speaker 2: She knew.  She the one went to Mary--went to Maywood, Illinois.  For fifty years, she was a study--school teacher who was trying all these years to get the root of her mama and daddy which would be--her grandmamma, which would be my grandmamma too.  We're first cousins.  And she the one enlightened me what it was.  And I'm, I'm the only great-grandchild to move back to Mississippi, only one.
Story_ID: 660965
Speaker 1: I keep skipping around, but let me--while we're on it, why did you feel compelled to, to come back to the state (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I wanted--because I was told with her information that this man had land to divide, and I understand the land was in Mississippi, and it was in Louisiana.  This man was some kind of rich man.  He had land on both sides of the fence.
Speaker 1: Van Spivey.
Speaker 2: Van Spivey. And I wanted to find out.  So now, in Louisiana, they have a Van estate.
Speaker 1: A Van Spivey estate.
Speaker 2: Estate in Louisiana now.  Now, I have--my mother [Mattie Spivey Ellis] finally got I think it was twelve acres of land, and she sold to her sister's children for no money, little or no money.  And she didn't let her children know--which I'm one of 'em, about when she sold it.  So when I come back to reach for it, we found that she had sold it to her niece, sold it to her niece in 1957.
Speaker 1: Do you know how she, how, how she ended up finally getting possession of the land that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No--
Speaker 1: --that Spivey's--
Speaker 2: That the Spivey--it's so many heirs out of thousands of acres, run down to about less than twenty acres apiece for all the heirs.  And my mother finally got her little acres of the heirs.
Speaker 1: 'Cause her name was Spivey.
Speaker 2: Her name was Spivey.
Speaker 1: And, and her daddy [sic.], even if he couldn't marry, he didn't--well, he had a wife anyway, but he didn't disown--
Speaker 2: Didn't disown, he didn't--oh, no, he never denied them children.  He never denied none of 'em.  It's just that, that the white side of the sisters and brothers who's half sisters and brothers, taken the black children to Eudora, Arkansas, all but one.  One was three years old and couldn't go with them.  And we tried to find her for forty or fifty years.  We finally found someone--found her daughter, and she was almost ninety years old in Carthage [Mississippi].  That's who we found.
Speaker 1: So now, that was your mother's--
Speaker 2: That was my mother's grandmother's child.
Speaker 1: Child.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So she was raised by the white part?
Speaker 2: By, by white people, yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: There wasn't no blacks where who was raising her. When we found this lady, almost ninety years old, it was a white lady.  We were looking for the black, but she was white.  We found nobody black as a Spivey.  And we got Spivey live in Carthage right now, but none of 'em are black.
Speaker 1: So when you were looking at this, experiencing this, this hurtful observation of your mom who looks like she's white, and your dad [Emmett Ellis, Sr.] who looks like he's black, having to tiptoe around that, men who would do him harm, how--and then you look at your great-grandfather trying to do something, how do you, I don't know, sort all of that out?
Speaker 2: It's the hardest thing in my life, when I look at that, look at this now.  When I look at the TVs of yesterday, what's going on, this is something been in black families, with black womens all their life.  This ain't nothing new.  We won't get into political things, but this, this ain't nothing new.  You looking at a product of it.  My daddy who migrated from Africa, which is, is a black man in texture, in every way you can cut it, and my mother, the opposite race.  So when you take that and take, take my mama, this what you get.  This what you get.
Story_ID: 660966
Speaker 1: All right, back to the music, we were talking about Bill Allen [Bill "Hoss" Allen] and Gene Nobles and John R. [John Richbourg] and Herman Grizzard, all of the deejays (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And all the deejays from--
Speaker 1: --from that era.  Were you able to pick up WO- was WOKJ [WOKJ Radio] on the air then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear) a little after that, after that.
Speaker 1: A little after that.
Speaker 2: But, OKJ was one of the first came.  If you notice that--I'm glad you mentioned that.  The marker, when I'm seventy-five years old, I got the seventy-five year marker at seventy-five years old, it's in front of the OKJ studio, right here in Jackson [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: On Lynch Street [John R. Lynch Street]?
Speaker 2: That's, that's a--it ain't no coincidence now.  They asked me, at seventy-five years old, where would I like to get a marker, a blues marker?  I said, "I want it in the front of OKJ."  At seventy-five years old, the only one playing the blues at the time, my marker's in the front OKJ Radio station.
Speaker 1: Why did you pick that station?
Speaker 2: Because of the root of it, because they were the only one playing the blues (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Jackson.
Speaker 2: In Jackson.
Speaker 1: And it was a day timer.  Couldn't pick it up at night.
Speaker 2: Couldn't pick it up at night, after six o'clock, you couldn't find 'em.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1550, WOKJ.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) WOKJ.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And Jobie Martin [Jobie L. Martin] and Bruce Payne (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jobie Martin and Bruce Payne--
Speaker 2: --and Poppa Rock [Joe "Poppa Rock" Louis].
Speaker 1: And Poppa Rock, Poppa Rock just died three weeks ago.
Speaker 2: Oh (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not Poppa Rock, you know, he moved to--Rivers [ph.] is his name.  He moved to Pensacola, Florida.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he moved to Pensacola, Florida.
Speaker 2: I don't remember him.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I was a little guy.  I just remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but he, then he went to, went to Florida, and about, well, less than ninety days ago, he passed.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I talked to him all the time.  He was eighty-six years old.
Story_ID: 660967
Speaker 1: My friend, videographer and producer extraordinaire wants to know a little bit more about WOKJ [WOKJ Radio] which was a radio station here in Jackson [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) OKJ was the leader of the, of the blues stations, not only in Jackson, they influenced people out of Jackson 'cause peoples in Chicago [Illinois], WVON [WVON Radio], everybody watch OKJ, what they played.  And also WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] was watching OKJ.  OK (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even though DIA was first--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --was on the air before.
Speaker 2: On the air, yeah.  But they would watch they play list.  OKJ really set the trend of what they should or should not play around the country.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.  They had a big influence, OKJ, you know.  If you were playing a record and wanna get it played around the country, the promotion was that, is OKJ playing it?  If OKJ playing it, then it must be all right.
Speaker 1: What was it about that little one--'cause, look (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, but, but--
Speaker 1: --let me just, let me just--I remember--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --seeing the studio--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a little brick building on the corner of Lynch [John R. Lynch Street] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's the programming of it, the programming of the, of--if what they, what they--what they program.  They program things that other guys wasn't doing or playing and people wanted to hear it, you know.  People, people wanted to hear that, you know.  And started me to, to listen to WVON, the people like that in Chicago and what WVON was not playing, I would tell them, you can play this because OJK, OJK of Jackson is playing it.  I would just the use the word Jackson and when the--, "Jackson is playing it."  That was OKJ.  And that was the influence.  I would call PRS [KPRS] in Kansas City [Missouri] and say, "Listen, y'all must play this record because Jackson's are playing it."  They were like the leader of this thing then.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And that's how they kind of got they name because they were a little station, but they were playing good music and were programming well, you know.
Speaker 1: And most stations back then--first of all, it was this thing called race music, and so the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --that is most--
Speaker 2: --but they, they was--but see, OKJ set a trend even for WRL [WWRL Radio] in New York [New York].  I know Crafee [ph.], Crocker.  Crocker would tell me back in the early '50s [1950s]--
Speaker 1: Frankie Crocker?
Speaker 2: Frankie, Frankie would say, "Well, what OKJ playing?" I'm serious.
Speaker 1: The chief rocker, Frankie Crocker (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The chief, that's right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That's the way--he getting his mold from the little bitty town because the little bitty town got big minded peoples.
Speaker 1: Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir, yes, sir.  If you, if you notice--you probably never (unclear)--I left Chicago to come to Jackson, Mississippi for three reasons.  First reason is, it's the center of the South.  Next reason, because they got a mind of them own.  They don't follow nobody.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Mississippi is it, man.  You either get on board or you get drowned (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That's the way it is, man, that's the way it is.  And here I am coming from this mold to do all of these things and learn all what I have learned, and out of all the places I've been, why you think I'm in Jackson, Mississippi?
Speaker 1: Yeah, why?
Speaker 2: Because, because you're free to do what you want to do musically.  You either take it or you like it or, "What you see is what you get."  That OKJ.  The guys wasn't, the guys wasn't making no money playing the records, you know--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Even--and at that time, they were too small to be into the, the payola thing.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Nobody counted, counted 'em out.  So it's about the love of the music.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And the programming of the, of the station.  The guys had nerve to do this.  You either like it or you don't.  Here it is.  And they started a trend, man, they started a trend.
Story_ID: 660968
Speaker 1: And so you knew Jobie Martin [Jobie L. Martin]?
Speaker 2: Oh, god, did I know Jobie.  I knew him before he got the TV station, the whole bit (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When he was Flash at Jackson State [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) When--yeah, I knew him, man, I just (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As the oldest football player (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Oldest, oldest football, oldest, youngest football (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, oldest, youngest football (laughter).
Speaker 2: The oldest, youngest football player.  But, you know, I laugh about that.  Now, you see I taken all of that, went to Chicago [Illinois], taken all the things I've learned and to, from that time to this time, I recorded 374 records.  But now, this first time, being from Louisiana, the first record I recorded in Louisiana, every musician I recorded on this last record, where I won the Grammy [Grammy Award for Best Traditional Blues Album] is from, from Louisiana, except one guy, Vasti Jackson from Mississippi.  And he got one foot in Mississippi, and one in Louisiana.  It's right cross the line.  The first time I recorded in Louisiana, being from Louisiana, I got a Grammy.  And now, well, you know, as we talk today, yesterday, the remix went up for the first time as a blues man in a remix.  I'm up for a Grammy remix with the Snoop Dogg and the whole bit, the first time.  It's up now, just went up a couple days ago (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Snoop?
Speaker 2: I went up--in that category.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: For a remix on a Bobby Rush [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.].  I'm up for a Grammy for it.
Story_ID: 660969
Speaker 1: Elmore James.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Where'd, where'd you meet Elmore James?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950].
Speaker 1: And where were you?
Speaker 2: Pine Bluff, Arkansas, at a place called Jack Rabbits [ph.].
Speaker 1: And now, you were a teenager.  You were too young to be in that place.
Speaker 2: I was too young to be up there.  That's why I had to paint--I didn't have no mustache.  I, I took me a match and scratched it and blowed it out quick, get me about four or five of 'em, blow it out, start, had the soot off the match stem--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You used the soot from a matchstick to create a mustache.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And made, and created my mustache playing in the Jack Rabbit, in the jitterbug.  But Elmore James, I met him there.  So I wanted him to play the Jack Rabbit.  Well, he got about--I gave Elmore James fifteen hundred dollars [sic.] for Friday, Saturday, Sunday, five dollars a night.  Now, as a bandleader, I was making $4.50 a night.  And the guy said, "Well, I'll give Muddy Waters ten dollars for two days," which was five dollars a night.  And I say, "Well, maybe I can get Muddy Waters."  I couldn't get Muddy Waters.  He was booked, but Elmore James said, "Naw, I can't do it.  I got to have six dollars a night."  Now, I couldn't pay him six dollars a night, but I could pay him four.  So I came over to Canton, Mississippi where Elmore James was living at the time.  He from Canton.  I came over, to try to get Elmore James to do it, and so there was a guy called Lee Robinzine, lived in Chicago [Illinois], but he was dating this girl from, in Belzoni [Mississippi].  They had a funeral home called Delta Burial Funeral Home [Delta Burial Corporation].  He also had, she also had one--her, her mama and dad had one in Clarksdale [Mississippi].  So she was about eighteen, nineteen, maybe twenty years old, could of been twenty-one.  Lee was, he was dating her.  He was my friend so I got to be friends with her.  So I--Elmore James said, "Man, I got to have more money.  I got to have six dollars a night," you know, "twenty-four, give me twenty-four, twenty-four dollars.  I, I'll do it for you."  That was too much money.  I couldn't pay it.  I say, "Elmore James, I can't pay it."  So this girl walked by.  He said, "Wow, who is that girl there?"  I was walking along with her.  I didn't--he said, "I'll do anything just to talk to her."  I said, "What you say?" 'Cause my friend's girlfriend there.  They getting married.  This is a dirty story.  I shouldn't tell this.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell it, tell it (laughter).
Speaker 2: But I said, "You'll do anything?"  I said, "Will you play for me?"  He said, "Man, I'll play for you free just to talk to her."  He used the word, "If I could just lay with her," you know, you, you know, we talk men talk.  I said, "Maybe I can fix that up for you."  So in the meantime, Lee Robinzine was dating her.  They were gonna get married.  So the weekend, Saturday, he didn't have a funeral, he would take them to my gigs.  I would go to the gig in the hearse but I would get out two blocks from the gig 'cause I didn't want nobody to see me getting out this hearse, you know (laughter).  So I told him, I said, "Lee, what you got going this week?"  He said, "Well, man, ain't got nothing going this week."  I said, "I tell you what you do.  Why don't you go to Arkansas with me?"  He'd go to Arkansas with me, and I'd introduce Elmore James to the girl.  So Elmore James (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To his fiancee.
Speaker 2: Yeah, to his fiancee.  Elmore James stayed with his fiancee that week, and he went with me.  So I know (laughter), oh, that's a bad story.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, so the next week, he come back--Elmore James, every other week, Elmore James would play for me free.  And he would stay (unclear), you know, 'cause he knew the man wasn't home 'cause the man was with me.  That ain't no good story (laughter).
Speaker 1: You were slick, weren't you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But Elmore James--aw, 'cause that--shouldn't tell that story (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Tell it (laughter).
Speaker 2: But Elmore James would play for me free every other week.  I don't know what they was doing or what they did.  All I know, I just introduced him, and I'm clear of that, you know.  That's all I did was introduce him.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But, but now you--so you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I got my gig free.
Story_ID: 660970
Speaker 1: So now, you're a teenager at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you had a band?
Speaker 2: I had a band.  I never played with no one. I--I didn't--I had a band, and I went to Chicago [Illinois]--1951, I put another band together, called it, Bobby Rush and the Four Jivers.  Who I had with that was Pinetop Perkins, myself and Little Walter for a hot minute.  Then I got Freddie King, you know, Freddie King on the guitar.
Speaker 1: Who taught you how to play guitar?
Speaker 2: My daddy [Emmett Ellis, Sr.].  From that time we were talking about the Chinkapin [Chinkapin oak tree] hunting, and I just--
Speaker 1: So, so nobody else but your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nobody else, no one but daddy.
Speaker 1: --the rest of it, you learned on your own?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have a guitar, but that one little guitar, he was (unclear).  When I went to Chicago in '51 [1951]--
Speaker 1: Well, wait.  Before Chicago, when--'cause you're in Arkansas now.
Speaker 2: That was the--I'm in Arkansas now, but I went to Chicago in 1951.  I didn't have a guitar.  Jimmy Reed had a guitar.  I would go to Calvin Carter [Calvin T. Carter] who was with Vee-Jay Records, and Calvin Carter wouldn't let nobody play--I meant Jimmy Reed wouldn't let nobody play his guitar.  But he would let me tune it up until he got real comfortable with me.  Then he started to letting me be, give me a dollar and a quarter, go get him something to drink 'cause he was a alcoholic.  Jimmy Reed would send me, get him something to drink, and I was slick enough to get me a, a bottle--I'd fill it up with water.  And I would go get him a drink, and I would take this bottle and fill it up half full of whiskey--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --and half full of water.  And I would take it to him--and I was making about four or five runs a day.  That's five dollars, but I'd only get him half of what he was--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --you follow me?  So every other time, I'm making like fifty-two cent a day--fifty-two cent a trip.  So I'm making five dollars a day.  In 1951, five dollars a day was a lot of money.  So, and Jimmy Reed would get drunk, and he would talk out of his nose.  He said (imitates Jimmy Reed), "Bobby Rush [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.]."  I say, "What is it, Jimmy?"  He said, "You sho' make some good whiskey," like I make it, you know (laughter).  And I would, and, but that's a bad story too.  And I just--Jimmy Reed would, I would just cheat Jimmy Reed out of the, out of fifty-two cents, fifty-five cents, yeah, but, every trip.
Speaker 1: But now, you learned how to play like Jimmy Reed too, didn't you?
Speaker 2: That's what I did.  That's why--he'd give me guitar, and see, he would get drunk now.  Now, he drunk.  Now, he get ready to record, I learnt the licks so well, so he would say, "Bobby Rush, you can play my lick."
Speaker 1: So he'd let you use his guitar?
Speaker 2: Yes, the guitar, and I would play his lick.  Sometimes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The way he would play?
Speaker 2: The way he would play.  Sometimes, it wouldn't be Jimmy Reed.  It would be me playing the lick, yeah.
Speaker 1: I, I--
Speaker 2: And I just--that's how I really learned how to really play like that because it's his guitar, it's his song, and I--come on.  It's--
Speaker 1: Now, I heard you doing a master class and there was, there was this thing that Jimmy Reed used to do.  It was kind of--it sounded kind of metallic.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And--I wish we had a guitar here, 'cause then you showed that class how, you said you flip it upside down (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You flip, upside down, right.
Speaker 1: And you had something that The Beatles did.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's where, that's where it come from--
Speaker 1: 'Come Together.'
Speaker 2: 'Come Together,' that's what it was.
Speaker 1: It was Jimmy Reed, upside down.
Speaker 2: It was Jimmy--see, well, all the music had been set, most of the music had been set by some black guy, and the white guys are doing it.  I'm not angry about that.  I'm not gone have no chip on my shoulders about that.  But I often talk about when they invented a wah-wah [wah-wah pedal], it was for--the wah-wah was invented so they could sound like the black guys.
Speaker 1: And for those of us who don't know, a wah-wah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A wah-wah is something, is a, is a--
Speaker 1: Is a foot pedal.
Speaker 2: --is a foot pedal that you play, and you get the note (makes sound), like a [HistoryMaker] B. B. King.  That's the only way the white guys could get it then.  Oh, they play it well now, but that time.  Now, the wah-wahs have been sold to black guys who wanna sound--who sounded like white guys who wanna sound black.
Speaker 1: So, but B. B. was doing it without a wah-wah.
Speaker 2: Oh, it wasn't, wasn't no wah-wah.
Speaker 1: It wasn't a wah-wah.
Speaker 2: It's in the hand.
Speaker 1: It's just B. B. and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause B. B. is in the soul of the hand, heart and his hand, you know.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And the, and Jimmy Reed, I just watched Jimmy Reed.  I could play just like Jimmy Reed, and I could just copy him down.  And, and Calvin Carter would like that--that was the producer, Calvin Carter and Vivian Carter, two sister and brother, over at Vee-Jay Records.  And when Jimmy Reed got drunk, I was there, you know.  B-Lo [ph.] was there.  I remember when we was cutting, ain't it a shame, shame, shame (singing), "Shame, shame, shame the way you do," ['Shame Shame Shame'] the drummer didn't show up.  They had a stack of yellow page books.  That's what they were playing the drums on, the yellow page book--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --a stack of 'em (makes sound).  That's what they were playing on, you know (singing), "Shame, shame, shame, Lord, it's a shame, shame, shame the way you do." Jimmy, Jimmy Reed was drunk, but he could sing.  He was just in the chair.  He propped up--they propped him up, "Shame, shame, shame, the way you do," you know--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Jimmy Reed was a killer, man.
Story_ID: 660971
Speaker 1: I remember Elmore James, myself at the Kostner Lounge [ph.] in 1957, after this--well, late 1957.  So I'm in Chicago [Illinois].  I got my little band together [Bobby Rush and the Four Jivers].  Man, I'm thinking I'm all of this and all of that.  Elmore James got his slide.  He playing--Jimmy Reed is a headliner; place seat three or four hundred peoples, but it's packed.  But at that time three or four hundred people is a lot of, a lot of people for us as a, as black mens.  We was at Kostner Lounge on Kostner Street [sic. Kostner Avenue].
Speaker 2: In, in--
Speaker 1: In Chicago.
Speaker 2: In Chicago.
Speaker 1: So I went up, man, I killed it.  People just fell out.  Elmore James went up, killed it (unclear).  Elmore James come, "Well, we got 'em, Bobby Rush [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.]."  I say, "Yeah, we, we got 'em.  I don't know what Jimmy Reed gonna do."  Jimmy Reed was asleep in the corner, and he done (unclear) everything all wet up and everything, Jimmy Reed, drunk.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And I said, well, we laughing to ourselves, say, "We done killed this house.  We got this house." They finally got Jimmy Reed propped up in a chair.  They put a little chair and a pillow upside him, got him propped up, and gave him his guitar.  He finally leaned over, he said (gesture), "Oh, baby," and the crowd went wild--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --like we hadn't been up there.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Was it 'What You Want Me to Do' ['Baby What You Want Me to Do']?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And I said, what the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was, that was--was that the first time he had done that song?
Speaker 1: No.  That (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh--
Speaker 1: But, but that--
Speaker 2: --but that was--
Speaker 1: But that's how they loved Jimmy Reed, man.  We thought we had did everything--
Speaker 2: Doing what you want me, tell me what you want me to do.
Speaker 1: --and they propped him up, and they propped him up, and he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sing it for me, sing it for me.
Speaker 1: He said (singing), "Ah, baby, you don't have to go, you just back up darling, and down the road Jimmy go."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And the people just--and we were like, what is this?  And he called, and he went back in a little ole dressing room they had in the corner.  He said (imitates Jimmy Reed), "Let me tell you something--Jim, let Jimmy talk to you and Bobby Rush, you young, you listen to me."  He said, "You see that guitar Elmore James got?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "That ain't nothing but a cut out piece of board," (laughter).  It was, it was electric guitar, you know.  He said, "Cut out piece of board," you know--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --and, and, "Man, listen." He said, "You see these peoples out there, remember, they here to see Jimmy.  They didn't come here to see you."  And he was right.  I respect him because we were there entertaining to people that came to see Jimmy Reed.  And I've never forgotten that.
Speaker 2: You said that when you were younger, you didn't, you didn't have the wisdom to give--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --than the--people like Jimmy Reed, the proper respect.
Speaker 1: I didn't quite get you, what you--
Speaker 2: That I was reading this, something about--
Speaker 1: He didn't get the respect he due.  That's for sure.
Speaker 2: He didn't.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Jimmy Reed was talented man, but he had his personal life mingled up in his talent, and he got--was drinking and the whole bit.  And then he had the epilepsy, you know, he was, wasn't as well as what--as a young man too.  But, man, he had this--he could write, didn't remember the lyrics, but, but he could write, you know.  And his wife [Mary Lee Davis Reed] would be there whispering in his ear, "Oh, baby," (singing), "Ah, baby."   "You don't have to go," (singing), "You don't have to go."  He'd never remember no lines, but, but she was all in the back of him at all times, and whisper in his ear, the songs as he sang, I mean--and he could deliver 'em once, once he--
Story_ID: 660972
Speaker 1: I found this quote, and I don't know where I--I hope it's not misquoted.  It, it says, "Rush talks about regrets from his youth.  'When I was a young man, I listened, but not well enough.'"
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) "I disrespected Muddy Waters and Howlin' Wolf when I was,"--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --"very young.  I took it for granted.  These guys loved Bobby Rush [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.].  They had their arms around me."
Speaker 2: I'll tell you what, what have happened--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --just like anything else, Albert King, Muddy Waters used to get off from work on their off days and come to see me, sometimes four or five hundred miles just to say hello and be in my company.  I didn't give that to them.  I remember when Muddy Waters was thirty-three years old, had his thirty-three year old birthday party.  I forgot his birthday party.  He invited me personally.  He say, "I want you to come to my birthday party."  I said yes to him, but I forgot it, not, didn't really care.  You're young.  I went to his party at 10:30.  It was over.  He was hanging out the window and looking.  He say, "Blood, come on up here.  I been waiting on you, man."
Speaker 1: This is in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In Chicago at Western [Avenue] and Lake Street, Silvio's.  I went upstairs, and he had eight or ten ladies around him with their dresses up like this, ol' ladies, ol' ladies.  I asked one lady, "How old are you?"  She said, "I'm thirty-one."  The other lady say I'm, say, "I'm thirty-six," other one say, "I'm thirty-nine."  I sneaked out the back door.  Thirty-one years old, I sneaked out the back door and left him (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But too old, too old for you.
Speaker 2: Too old for me.  Now, I'm thinking about, look at it now.  But they loved me.  I remember coming to the Delta Blues Festival [Mississippi Delta Blues and Heritage Festival] for the first time, and the blues festival now is forty some odd years old.  They did the blues, they said, "Bobby Rush, I'm gonna do the blues festival.  I want you to go to Mississippi, Greenville, Mississippi with me."
Speaker 1: Muddy Waters.
Speaker 2: Muddy Waters, Muddy Waters loved me.  I say, "I'll go with you."  He said, "Well, I'm going down Friday night.  I'm a do a little boat ride and meet and greet.  I want you to be with me."  Naw, I goes down Saturday night, it was just time for the gig.  I don't go Friday night to hang out with him, which he wanted me to.  I'm not going to hang out with the old men, no.  I disrespect, just didn't know.  You follow me?
Story_ID: 660973
Speaker 1: Same thing when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] would come to Chicago [Illinois], call me, "Come on man, just hang out with me."  What they saw in me, what did these guys see in me, a little blues singer.  They want me hanging around them.  What did [HistoryMaker] B. B. King (unclear) said he would--let me tell you a story.  A year, three months before B. B. King died, he said, "Bobby Rush [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.], I want you to do me a favor."  I said, "What is it, B. B.?"  He said, "I'm going to play Indianola [Mississippi], and I want you to play it with me this time 'cause it gone be the last time I play Indianola."  I say, "I'm already booked in Memphis, Tennessee on that day."  He said, "See, can you get off?"  I went to the promoter--the promoter was paying me a big dollar.  I said, "Listen," they called him Little D [ph.], I said, "Little D, I say, I got a problem."  I said, "The day you got me booked, that's the same day B. B. King got in Indianola for his homecoming.  He asked me to do the date with him."  He said, "Why he want you to do the date with him?"  I got on the phone, and I called B. B.  I said, "B. B., why you want me to do this date with you?"  And he said, "Because I need to draw black peoples and black people won't come to see me." I went back and told the promoter, I said, "He want me to go because he figure I can draw black people.  He said it's gonna be the last show he do in Indianola.  He want black people to come to see him."  The man had sent me a deposit.  He said, "Bobby Rush, if you gonna do this for B. B. King, here's the rest of your money.  Can you come early at four and go do this for B. B. King?" I was knocked off my head.  God is really working.  Not only the man didn't fire me or didn't get of me, he paid me my money in advance, and told me you go there at four o'clock in the afternoon.  He say, "I know won't nobody be there at four o'clock," he said, "but at least you're there, and go do this for B. B. King."  I went and did the show for B. B. King.  We got off the club.  He went to Ind- Club Ebony that same night.  They did a farewell show for B. B. King.  I'm sitting in the audience--
Speaker 2: And where is Club Ebony?
Speaker 1: Club Ebony in Indianola, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: In Indianola.
Speaker 1: Went in the Club Ebony, this is the god's truth, I'm sitting at the Club Ebony, like this.  B. B. King's singing 'Sunshine,' ['You Are My Sunshine'] and he sung it, looked to me, for twenty minutes 'cause he's kind of losing it at this time.  He's kind of losing it.  And I got bored, started getting sleepy, and he finally looked over to me and said, "Bobby Rush, wake up and come on over here with me," embarrassed me.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: He said, "Wake up and come on over, come over here with me.  Ladies and gentleman, my friend, Bobby Rush."  I went onto the stage with him, stood behind him in a chair, singing all his songs that he song.  He was singing, 'Sunshine,' which is not his song 'cause he was kind of losing it then, you know. You know, the mind was kind of losing it.  And I'd kind of lead the band into some of this songs, 'Rock Me, Baby,' so he could get out of that song and the crowd enjoyed it because I kind of led him through that.
Speaker 2: You follow me?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: The point I'm getting to is, when I looked around--they did a interview on me a few days later, and I was talking about what he did.  Then maybe ninety days later--or could have been less, the man passed.  And look at the torch.  And now, I'm the oldest blues man in this category around.  He passed the torch to me, and I did not know it.
Speaker 1: That's what he was doing.
Speaker 2: He laid it in my lap, in Indianola, not knowing this gonna be the last show he did.  He say it's gonna be the last show he did in Indianola.  That's the last show he did.  Now, at his funeral--and it's documented, at his funeral, they asked me if I have a word to say.  I said, "Yeah, when you want me to say it?"  They say, "I want you to do it last."  I was the last man spoke at his funeral.  As they was riding down, get in the hearse to ride him down Beale Street [Memphis, Tennessee], I doing the harmonica to his last song, and walking in the front of the hearse on the way to the grave.  And you can find all this on film.
Speaker 1: Beale Street (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not knowing, not knowing nothing--not knowing nothing gone be passed to me. So that's what I was talking about.  I just didn't know why these guys liked me at twenty years old?  What did I have to offer these guys?  Now, I'm the old man.
Story_ID: 660974
Speaker 1: How did you learn how to play harmonica?
Speaker 2: From my daddy [Emmett Ellis, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Oh, he taught you that too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my daddy could--a good harmonica player.  I always liked it, didn't know he could play, yeah, playing the train.
Speaker 1: The what?
Speaker 2: Train, you know, by train.
Speaker 1: I don't know what that means.
Speaker 2: Well, playing the harp like a train is running, like a train is coming, like a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh.
Speaker 2: --like a T Model Ford [Ford Model T].  He always played this thing like a T Model Ford and a hound dog and a train, all in a race.  The hound dog was barking, the train was running, and the T Model Ford was cranking up, getting ready to run.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You got it with you?
Speaker 2: No, I have it in my car.
Speaker 1: Oh, shoot.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I would love to hear what that sounds like (laughter).
Speaker 2: You wanna cut it for two seconds, I'll pick it up.
Story_ID: 660975
Speaker 1: We were talking about the harmonica that your dad [Emmett Ellis, Sr.]--so your dad was your music teacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, my dad was my everything.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your dad.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was my everything.
Speaker 1: And everything else, you picked up along the way (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everything I picked up, kind of like my daddy assured me that I could do it, and he was my first I saw do it personally.  I heard a radio, but my daddy was the first musician, first guitar player that I, that I looked at who had a guitar, who could tune it up even, not just, not, not just playing it.  He could tune it up, and now he used to take--he would say, he used to tell me about the harmonica thing.  He said to me, "There was a hound dog, a guy had a hound dog and had a T Model Ford [Ford Model T] and a train.  They was all in a race together.  Now, a T Model Ford, you crank it up, like this, in the front of it."  And he said, "It sound like this, hear," (plays harmonica).  And the T Model sound like that.  He said, "And the hound dog say, ooh," (plays harmonica).  "And the train would say," (plays harmonica).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And he kind of taught it to me.  He said, "The train said," (plays harmonica) (makes sound).  And he went on to do the same (laughter), and tell me about all the dogs and the whole bit, and they was racing, you know.  But someone asked me later on in the years, said, "Bobby Rush [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.], why do you sing the blues?"  I'm gonna tell it to you, and I want you to know that I appreciate doing this interview with you.  The music maker lady who stuck her own money and time and effort in to do this.  Someone asked me, say, "Why you sing the blues?  Is it because your woman left you?"  Yes, but you can also have the blues if they stay too long.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Let me demonstrate this to you.  (Plays harmonica) (singing), "Have you ever been mistreated, by someone you sho' nuff love? Have you ever been mistreated by someone you shouldn't have loved? Out of all the men my woman could a left me for, she left me for the garbage man."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Plays harmonica) (singing), "No matter how bad she treated me, still can't get her love out my mind. Oh, no matter how bad she treated me, still can't get it out my mind. Oh, every time I see a garbage can I think about her and the garbage man all the time. If I can get my woman to come back home  I'm gonna buy myself a garbage truck. If I ever get my woman to come back, I'm gonna buy myself a garbage truck.  Oh, when my garbage can get full, I'm gonna take it and dump it way, way out in the woods" ['Garbage Man'].
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yes, sir, all right (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's the blues for you.
Speaker 1: That's the blues (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And you didn't even get to the one about holding flashlight (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, that's the blues for you, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That flashlight, though, that was pretty bad (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (laughter), yeah, yeah, yeah.  That's rough, that's rough.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What do you (laughter)--
Story_ID: 660976
Speaker 1: How much of your lyrics are based on something that actually happened as opposed to some--
Speaker 2: Everything.
Speaker 1: --(Laughter) something that you just pull out of the air?
Speaker 2: Nah, everything--it's, it doesn't happen to me, but it happened to someone.  Everything's about what happened to me or possibly or could have happened to me.  If it didn't happen to me, it happened to someone that I know--I think it happened to someone that I know.
Speaker 1: So there was--(laughter) so it was a guy who--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was a guy.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (Unclear) where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a guy that (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) For real?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, even if he wasn't holding a flashlight, it happened, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And just to fill in the back of the story 'cause I didn't tell the first part, tell me about that song.  What's, what's the lyrics say?
Speaker 2: Yeah, if you're--I was talking about this woman.  She got ice water down in her veins.  I said, I believe she got ice water in her veins, you know, because last night she had me holding the flashlight when she was making love to another man.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's (laughter)--
Speaker 2: That's pretty cold.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I'm still there?  (Laughter) That's pretty cold and she pretty good too, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I haven't left yet, you know (laughter). Oh well, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, and you wrote that one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I write 99 percent of what I do, you know.
Story_ID: 660977
Speaker 1: In the remaining time on this session--and we do hope to, to catch up with you later, talk to me a little bit about keeping the rights to your music 'cause we've heard so much--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --through the years about how musicians, especially black musicians, but not totally, but mostly black musicians lose the rights to their product because some producer puts their name on the title, and then they get The ASCAP [The American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers] and the BMI [Broadcast Music Inc.].
Speaker 2: They lose rights to their song because sometimes they think they don't have the rights to hold 'em.  They, they--you know, when you go to a record company, most time you got the A and R [artists and repertoire] man which is a person who takes you into the big boss man.  If he wants to get you in the door, he tells you, "Listen, you got a good song, but you got to give me a piece of the action so I can take you to Mr. So and So."  And that's how, and that's happened with people like Willie Dixon, and I'll tell it now.  You know, if you wanna get to Chess [Chess Records], you go through Willie Dixon 'cause part of the time, he wasn't the one write the songs.  I know this--and this is a hard thing I'm telling you about.  He wasn't the one writing the songs for Muddy Waters and Howlin' Wolf, all the guys.  How can you write a song for a man who couldn't read or write?  What I'm saying now, ain't never been told.  And I can say it.  At eighty something years old, I can tell some things that should a been told.  Now, there was a few people who knew about this, and Chuck Berry was one of 'em, but never talked about it.  Fats Domino never talked about it.  Jimmy, Jimmy Reed never talked about it, never had a chance to.  Little Richard know about it.  He talks about it, but nobody listen to him.  But how can you write a song for a man who couldn't read or write?  What a rip off.  And most of the time, we got ripped off, and we've been ripped off by our own people, who ripped us off for the white people.
Speaker 1: So Willie Dixon--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Black.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Ripping off--
Speaker 2: Ripping off songs of the guys who he taking to Chess.
Speaker 1: Well, how--
Speaker 2: I know it's never been talked about.  But I didn't wanna hurt his family, but I wanted the truth to come out, to know, but how can you write for a guy who couldn't read or write?  Let's face facts.  Who was writing the songs?  Do you follow me?  You know, and so now, it's gonna hurt both ways.  Maybe I should a took it to my grave.  It's gonna hurt both ways.  But the thing about it, that's what I'm--you asked the question.  This is what young people got to understand.  You got to be in control and write the things and try to publish the thing and register things that you write and have a control of it.  You follow me?  But you got to know when to give up a piece in order to, to get some help on some things because all of nothing sometime is nothing.  So you got to know when to give up a piece of the action of it in order to, to record it and keep some things going for yourself.  But you got to be in control of it.  You gonna have to give up 49 percent of it.  You'll keep the 51 percent so you can control, you know, 'cause I been did the same way.  I trusted people who would register it.  They put my name on it, Bobby Rush [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.] wrote this.  But when they registered BMI, your name on the record, but that don't mean you own the contract.
Speaker 1: And it's the contract that controls who gets (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: --the royalties.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just because your name on the record, that don't mean nothing.  Who submit the license--who licensed it?
Speaker 1: So how much money you think you lost?
Speaker 2: Ah, millions, millions.  But, but I want the world to know that I'm so blessed.  Life to me is like a wheel.  You put a mark on it, and you roll it down a hill.  Sometimes your mark will come back, and sometimes it won't.  I have lived long enough for my mark to come back.  How blessed I am, not lucky.  I'm just lucky that God had gave me health and strength to live to see my mark come back, and when a mark came back--come back around, that gave me knowledge of what I should or should not do because I strived to do everything that I cannot do 'cause what I can do will take care itself.
Speaker 1: You strive to do what you cannot do?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I strive to do what's hard, what I--not--I work hard to do the things I cannot do, are hard to do 'cause the things that's easy, that I can do, they'll take care of themselves.
Speaker 1: Where'd you learn that?
Speaker 2: From my father [Emmett Ellis, Sr.], from my father, uneducated from the street, but very smart in matters of life, just life, just--see, I'm a biblical study, not a religion nut, just a biblical study 'cause the Bible give me a roadmap to life.  And I know one thing, that if you do what you need to do and do it in a manner you need to do it, people won't steal as much from you. This, I use the word as much, I use that because anything that ain't worth stealing, ain't worth having.
Story_ID: 660978
Speaker 1: Can we talk about a few of the people?  You've mentioned some of them already.  [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You worked with Jerry Butler?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The Iceman (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Beautiful guy, the Iceman, cool cat.  He's so cool.  Jerry Butler is so cool.  [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble and [HistoryMaker] Leon Huff, god.  Leon Huff just taken me in like a brother, ah, god, with Philly International Records [Philadelphia International Records, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Calvin Carter [Calvin T. Carter] who taken me in as a brother, but yet ripped me off as a song writer because he knew some things I didn't know.  He didn't--he knew I was my--I'm his friend.  I didn't say he was my friend.  I knew I was his friend.  And he taken some things from me that I didn't have knowledge of.  That's how people do.
Speaker 1: What did he take?
Speaker 2: Songs.
Speaker 1: More than one song?
Speaker 2: Yeah, three songs.
Speaker 1: Which ones--hit songs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, hits, of 'Chicken Heads.'
Speaker 1: He took 'Chicken Heads.'
Speaker 2: 'Chicken Heads,' took the publishing on it, and I didn't know how to do the publishing.  He took the publishing and half of the writer.  I wrote all the song.  I wouldn't a mind splitting the publishing 'cause he knew how to do the publishing, just splitting the publishing, so I should a got all the writer's, half of the publishing, which was 75 percent.  But when he registered it, he registered it in Calvin Carter, half of the writer and all the publishing.  That mean he own 75 percent of the song.
Speaker 1: So you only got a quarter of it?
Speaker 2: A quarter of it.
Speaker 1: And that was your hit.
Speaker 2: That was a hit.
Speaker 1: That was your first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first--well, the first gold record.
Speaker 1: --gold record, yeah.  He--what, what else did he--
Speaker 2: Oh, 'Gotta Be Funky,' yeah, all that stuff, you know, 'Mary Jane,' all that stuff, Calvin Carter.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, is he still alive?
Speaker 2: No, he not still alive.  His son's still alive, but, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did, did--
Speaker 2: But many things.  Same, 'I've Been Watching You,' all that stuff, you know, sold over 18 million records, and I didn't paid on it.  So, you know, got, just got shuffled around.  But, but look at the lesson I learnt from it, and that's worth more than the money.
Speaker 1: Did yawl come to some kind of reconciliation before his death?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Naw, it's sitting in the court system now.
Speaker 1: Oh (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it's in the court system now?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you, you'll wind up paying a whole lot of money to prove it's yours, and when you get, when you get what's yours coming out of it, the lawyers and the courts have made all the money on it.  Simple as that.
Story_ID: 660979
Speaker 1: Howlin' Wolf?
Speaker 2: What a guy.  I didn't meet Howlin' Wolf 'til 1956 in Clarksdale [Mississippi], 1956.  He had been to Chicago [Illinois], for recording in Memphis [Tennessee] for Sun Records [Sun Record Company].  Sun Records was recording for Chess [Chess Records].  I learnt through the grapevine what him and Ike Turner, that they were--and Junior Parker, were recording for Sun Records in Memphis, for Chess in Chicago 'cause a lot of early stuff wasn't cut at Chess.  They were cut in Memphis, and--I'll give you some good information here now.  It was cut as Sun Records for Chess, so apparently, Leonard Chess and Phil Chess got into it with Sun Records.  And that's when Sun Records established Sun Records because Chess wouldn't pay 'em for the records.  I was there.
Speaker 1: Did you know The Bar-Kays?
Speaker 2: Yes, I know 'em very well, just talked to Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Dodson] this morning.  I just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, they were out of Memphis.
Speaker 2: I just--Memphis, and I just talked to him this morning.
Speaker 1: So tell me about that?
Speaker 2: The Bar-Kays was with--was Otis Redding's band.  That's really what it was.  And Larry came in shortly after that to establish the thing with The Bar-Kays as a leader, a lead singer for The Bar-Kays.  I did not know them as a individual.  I knew them as a group, The Bar-Kays, like as a group.
Speaker 1: And they weren't on the plane, thank god, I would say.
Speaker 2: One of 'em wasn't there, wasn't on the plane.  That's the one survivor, and Ben [Ben Cauley], who died last year was on the plane--
Speaker 1: That killed Otis.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 660980
Speaker 1: What about, kind of, I don't know, influences?  Did you, did you consi--we mentioned earlier, [HistoryMaker] B. B. King--
Speaker 2: Beyond that, influenced me?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) J.B. Lenoir, J.B. Lenoir was a guy, was a guitar player who got me my first gig for more than five dollars behind a curtain.  He was so advanced politically.  He had the black and white issue down to the pat at them days.
Speaker 1: Now, where was this?
Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Chicago.
Speaker 2: When we went to the South Side of Chicago or rather Blue Island [Illinois] to play, the man asked him about two peoples he wanted to play.  He wanted Bobby Rush [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.] and Muddy Waters.  He said, "I can't get Muddy Waters to play it, but I can--I know a guy will play your place.  His name is Bobby Rush.  You'll like him."  He sold the deal to the guy, but he knew I didn't knew about the racial thing 'cause I was a guy who came up with my mother [Mattie Spivey Ellis] being who she was--you couldn't tell if she was black or white, and my daddy [Emmett Ellis, Sr.] being this black man who was my daddy in one sense and was chauffeur and at another--and babysitter at another sense.  He knew I didn't knew about the racial thing because everything around me was black, black churches, black schools and everything.  So he told the guy I worked behind, he said, "Man, this man pay you $7.50 a night, Bobby Rush.  You'll like this gig."  And I did.  I went to this gig.  Skins [ph.] was the name.  I went in the back door, through this back door, crawled up on this valance and went in the back door up on the stage.  You wouldn't see anyone.  There was a curtain.
Speaker 1: Why was there a curtain?
Speaker 2: Because they wanted to hear my music, didn't wanna see my face, all white audience.
Speaker 1: And this is in Chicago?
Speaker 2: This was in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty something?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-three [1953], I believe it was.
Speaker 1: Chicago had segregated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes--
Speaker 1: --clubs in 1953?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So black people couldn't go into the club?
Speaker 2: No, no, naw, they couldn't get into the club at all.  I played behind this curtain, and I left there and went to, went to Rush Street, and I was the only black man on Rush Street, 1954, I believe it, a place called Bourbon Street [Chicago, Illinois].  It was on Rush Street, but the club was called Bourbon Street.  I played at Bourbon Street--how I got the job at Bourbon Street, I took three white guys and myself and did a audition.  The guy who run the place was named Mr. (Unclear), it was a Chinese guy.  When I went and did the audition with the white guys on a Tuesday night, he said, "You can start tomorrow at nine o'clock.  We got two bands.  You play one hour, other band play one hour.  We got four go-go girls," a go-go club.  We were down in this pit.  I play one hour.  Each girl played fifteen minutes apiece.  So when I went in at nine o'clock to play--I went at 8:45 and sat in the car, with this black band now.
Speaker 1: Not the white band that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not the white band 'cause the black guys don't know it, that I did the audition with the white band.  They don't even know this.  So I sat in the car.  They said, "Bobby Rush, what we waiting on?"  I said, "Well, I'll wait a few more minutes." So I waited 'til five minutes to nine to walk in the door.  When I walked in the door, (Unclear) said, "Hey, man, I thought you gonna be late.  Where's the band?"  I said, "Right here."  He said, "Oh, god, you gonna get me killed.  We can't integrate this place."  I'd never heard the word integrate.  I was puzzled about integrate.  So I went in the place, and when I got in--, "I don't got--I don't have a dressing room for you guys.  I got to make a dressing room," said, "give us a few minutes."  So let--the other band went on at nine so I goes on at ten.  They played this other hour.  By time they got a cloak room--they took all the stuff out the stockroom and got a chain to put on the door.  They put us in there and made a dressing room.  And they locked us in the room.  If we wanted to go to the bathroom, we just--three knocks.  If we wanted to the number three, it's four knocks.  If we want something to eat, it's five knocks.
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: They'd bring us out one at a time into this club.  And on this, front of the club, it said, "No colored allowed."
Story_ID: 660981
Speaker 1: This is in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: In, naw, this is in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: In Chicago, this is Chicago.
Speaker 2: It said, "No colored allowed."
Speaker 1: Oh, it was called Bourbon Street, but it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bourbon Street.
Speaker 1: --but it's in Chicago.
Speaker 2: It's in Chicago on Rush Street, but it, the club is called Bourbon Street.  So I went in.  He said, "Now, we talked, but we can't integrate this place like this."  This is the second time I heard integrate.  Now, I was this dumb, country boy, didn't know what integrate was.  And I said, "Boy, what is integrate?"  So this lady was about twenty-two years old, one of the go-go dancers, she said, "Bobby Rush [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.]," say, "we gonna integrate this place tonight.  I want you to come on stage, and I'm a get sick."  I said, "Get sick?  How you feel?"  She say, "I feel good, fool.  I'm gonna get sick.  I'm a come off the stage.  When I wink at you, you come up onstage with your guitar."  Sho' nuff, about--she did her eight minutes and something, and winked at me.  I jumped up on the stage with my guitar and done some Chuck Berry stuff, and the people just fell out, loved it.  This one guy was chewing on a cigar.  Aw, he just fell out, ha, ha, ha, laughing.  About two o'clock that morning, "Bobby Rush, Bobby Rush, come to the office."  I just know I'm fired, I'm going up there and get my little money but when I walked in the door, there was a guy standing in the door with a machine gun in the other door, the guy standing with two big pistols like this (gesture), bald head guy, white guy.  So I walked in, and he turned around--this guy was sitting and turned around.  This was the same guy I saw in the club, laughing at me, like he was happy.  He said (makes sound) (imitates patron), "Hey, kid."  I said, "Yes, sir."  "You afraid of me, kid?"  I said, "No, sir."  "Ha, ha, ha, ha, you integrate my place."  Now, I find out he--it's his place.  He say, "You go, you're--the kid is okay, kid is okay."  So, "Pull your chair up here, kid."  He hit me on the leg, boom.  "Kid, me and you, kid.  We gonna make a lot of money, kid.  You wanna make a lot of money, kid?"  I said, "It depends on what I got to do."  Say, "Let me tell you something, you don't tell me what to do.  You do what the hell I tell you to do, okay, kid?"  I didn't say anything.  I don't know who he is or what.  He said, "Hey, (Unclear)," (Unclear) was the guy who owned the place.  "Come here, (Unclear), this kid is okay.  He works for me, okay."  I said, "It's okay with you, kid?"  I said, I did like that, (gesture) okay.  He say, "Kid, I say it's okay with you."  I say, "It's okay."  "This kid is okay, ha, ha, ha, ha.  He's a good kid."  (Unclear) went on back out.
Speaker 1: Now, (Unclear) owned the place.
Speaker 2: (Unclear), naw, (Unclear) was the manager of the place.  I didn't know at the time.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: This Chinese guy, (Unclear) was his name.  He managed the place.  Apparently, he's the owner now (unclear).  So he gave me a card.  He said, "If you need anything, kid, you call me."  So later on, I found out who this is.  His name was Caesar Capone [ph.].
Speaker 1: Al Capone's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Caesar Capone, it's got to be a brother.  So I don't know who this is--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --now, you know.  So I goes home, and tell my wife, I said, "I got this card--," we're trying to buy this house.  We both young.  I'm like twenty-one years old, trying to buy this house, twelve hundred dollars I need, I get eight hundred dollars up.  She said, "You there working for that guy.  Why don't you ask him for the money?"  I said, "Oh, yeah, give me that card."  So she goes in, and she had washed my clothes and found that, a card he gave me.  It was in my pocket.  We ironed it out, took it to my lawyer, Tate.  Lawyer Tate [ph.] was a black guy.  I say, "Lawyer, this--," I said, "I think I got my money for this thing.  This guy gonna give me the money."  He asked me, I said--put on the desk.  He said, "Oh, get out of here with that card."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: He run me out of his office.
Story_ID: 660982
Speaker 1: So I have to go by Chess [Chess Records] to record, and I would see Muddy Waters and John Lee Hooker and Bo Diddley.  The next day I went by to see them, and by that time, the whole town know that I'm working at Bourbon Street [Chicago, Illinois].  I don't know nothing about no Capone.  So when I walked in, everybody looking at me.  Why they looking at me?  Oh, Al Capone's boy (gesture).  I goes in, say I wanna record--cut some stuff down there.  And the other guys say, "Well, whatever you want, Bobby Rush [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.], whatever you want."  And I find out that because of they thought I knew them, they give me what I want.  So I used that to my advantage.  I looked around, and they say, "Hey, how is it down there with the boys?"  Say, "What boys?  I'm just working at Bourbon Street."  I don't know nothing about who it's owned by.
Speaker 2: You don't know anything about the mob.
Speaker 1: Naw, I don't know nothing about it.  But they thinking I know--'cause you everybody see me coming, you know--
Speaker 2: If they'd known you had that card, they would have (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --they would have given you the whole place (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But anyway, that, long story short, they--I didn't know about it.  But I stayed there with them, and I was able to, to work down there myself, and I got Redd Foxx a job, Sammy Davis, Jr., and all the guys, you know, which come through there, [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory.
Speaker 2: But you were the first?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And you brought them in.
Speaker 1: Dick Gregory was the next black man, then Redd Foxx and then Sammy Davis, Jr.
Speaker 2: So when you found out who Capone [Caesar Capone (ph.)] was, what--
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know who--I didn't--but I had heard of Capone, but it doesn't--it didn't ring no, see, but it didn't ring no bell to me.
Speaker 2: But you realized it eventually though, didn't you?
Speaker 1: Oh, after a while, but I didn't know who I was talking to you when he goes, "You scared of me, boy?"  I didn't know who I was talking to.  I didn't have--I didn't know that, you know, you know.  I, I--but anyway, I used that 'cause--so now, this year I, I had the box set of the year.  If you noticed, I had the box set, the box set.  That mean masters.  If you Google Bobby Rush, I had the box set of the year this year and the Grammy [Grammy Award]--box set of the year and the Grammy.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Of seventy--seventy something songs, and I own the master of 'em, guess where I own the master of 'em?  There's no other blues black man own no--own two hundred masters.
Speaker 2: And you own two hundred masters?
Speaker 1: That's why--if you Google it, that's why you--that box set come from the masters I own, and thanks to the people I was involved with, that they thought I was involved with (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) They (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I laugh about it because I didn't know the people at all.
Speaker 2: But because they thought you were--
Speaker 1: They thought I were.
Speaker 2: They, they gave you your masters (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: Whatever you want, you got it.
Speaker 1: Well, I--well, you know, nothing from nothing leave nothing, so sometimes--but anyway, that's, that's a short story of that, you know.
Story_ID: 660983
Speaker 1: We're gonna put a pin in for now, Mr. Rush.  But final question for this session.  When you look at your career and you look at the young people who are doing music today, what advice would you offer them?
Speaker 2: Be--look in the mirror and be honest with yourself, be good at what you do; be firm about what you're doing because I base myself on what I'm getting ready to tell you, that you may not like my music.  You may not like what I'm doing, but if I'm good at it, you can say, well, "I don't like ol' Bobby Rush [HistoryMaker Emmett "Bobby Rush" Ellis, Jr.], but damn, he good."  Be good at what you do.  Be firm about what you're doing.  Be a man about your--what you say you're gonna do regardless of what deals you make.  And that'll get you over.  Make your deals, right or wrong, and live up to 'em.  And I tell all mens, all young people, that a root of what I do is the root of all music, and if you don't like the blues, you don't like your mama.
