Story_ID: 1325
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewing today for The History Makers Project.  Our Videographer is Mathew Hickey.  Observing is Steven Mudroch.  Sir could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Only if you don't call me sir.  It's Harry Edwards, no middle name.  H-A-R-R-Y, E-D-W-A-R-D-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 11/22/42, St. Louis, Missouri, Homer G. Phillips Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that's the historic Homer G. Phillips Hospital, right.
Speaker 2: No longer in existence, but a lot of people were born there.
Speaker 1: Yes sir, okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a sports consultant.  I was on the faculty at the University of California at Berkeley for 31 years in the Department of Sociology.  I did my Ph.D. work at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], master's degree at Cornell University.  I did my B.A. as a scholarship athlete at San Jose State University [San Jose, California] from 1960 to 1964.  I finished my Ph.D. in 1970 at Cornell.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 6th, 2011.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the Media Room at the San Francisco 49er's where I have been a sports consultant on player personnel issues and organizational development since 1985.
Speaker 1: Okay well we start with a family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.  But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Adelaide Cruise, A-D-E-L-A-I-D-E, C-R-U-I-S-E.
Speaker 1: All right, and okay I'm sorry, I forgot about your favorites.  There's something we always do before we really get into depth, we ask five lightweight questions that are now, you know I haven't done these interviews in a couple of months, that's why I forgot them.  So this is all on camera but I don't care (laughs).  But the five lightweight questions are:  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably my wife's grilled salmon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.  I mean that way I don't have to worry about the colors match anything (laughs).  I've never, I've never been patient with that kind of thing, so if it's black and a pair of jeans, I mean you cool.  If it's black with black with black pants, you cool, if it's black with a black cap, you cool.  I don't have to, oh, you know I've never had -- very simple.
Speaker 1: All right, do you, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: You know what?  I've always felt, and I'm thankful for it, that any time you on this side of the lawn, it's a, it's a great time of the year.  And beyond that, I love the winter, I love the spring, I love the autumn, love the summer.  I mean I, I, I'm just, I'm just happy to still be on this side of the lawn and, and learned that a long time ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my--I have a home on the North Coast [California] and we get up there as often as we possibly can, sit down, you know, do absolutely nothing and generally don't start that until about 4:00 in the evening.  Put on some John Coltrane, get a half a shot of Hennessey and watch the whales go by and the eagles fly and sometimes just sit and stare out at the cloud formations and the oceans.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, "keep the faith".  The greatest saying that came out of the 1960 Civil Rights Movement was not "we shall overcome" or "power to the people" or "black power" or any of that.  It was "keep the faith."  Because once the faith goes, nothing else matters.  And unfortunately in far too many instances, particularly in our traditional black communities, we have not kept the faith and the end result has been another disaster.  So yeah, I have a favorite phrase and mantra, "keep the faith."
Story_ID: 1326
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we get back to your mother's side of the family and the history.  I apologize for missing that part.  Your mother's name was Adelaide Cruise and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Mississippi, I'm not certain of the date.  These were not things that we, we spent a lot of time talking about and because she left the family when I was approximately nine years old, I never really got to knew her, to know her as an adult, as anything other than an adolescent.  So I know she was born in 1924, what the exact date was, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what town in Mississippi she's from?
Speaker 2: No I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother talk about how she you know, got to East St. Louis [Illinois] from Mississippi or what that process was?
Speaker 2: No.  She was, she left Mississippi I believe when she was around four years old and moved to a place called Fireworks, Illinois, which is outside of East St. Louis, and was raised out there by her, her parents.  And she left them when she was sixteen years old, had lived with her older sisters for a significant period of time prior to that.  So she never really talked very much about her parents, other than their names, which was Gertrude and Hiram Cruise.
Speaker 1: Okay so your grandparents on that side are Gertrude.
Speaker 2: Gertrude.
Speaker 1: And Hiram Cruise.
Speaker 2: Hiram Cruise, right.
Speaker 1: Can, can you spell that?
Speaker 2: G-E-R-T-R-U-D-E I believe is the way she spelled, the way her name was spelled, and Hiram is H-I-R-A-M.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know much about--did she ever talk about anybody else in the family?  Talk about the history of her side of the family or (unclear).
Speaker 2: No.  Since we were right there in East St. Louis, we got to know quite a few of our uncles and aunts on her side of the family.  And we--I do know that there were some brothers and sisters who were missing.  I know we had her older sister, who I'm not sure what her name was, but I believe that she was named after her mother.  I believe, but I'm not certain.  I know that she was murdered on a school ground not too far from where we lived.  She had a number of other brothers that we just--she had another brother by the name of Henry who is still alive, but we never, we never, we just never knew him.  There were two sisters, Flora and Ruby who lived, lived right up the street from us.  But we never had a great deal--there was some rift or something.  We never had a great deal to do with them growing up.  But they, they were in contact.
Speaker 1: So your mother came from a, a large family.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  There must have been--I, I think there were probably about nine of them, nine children.  We knew Horace and Hiram and Ruby and Flora, trying to think who else was--we knew those, we knew those four.  But there were--we knew, we knew of Henry, he was still around.  Fred died in a tuberculo--tuberculosis sanitarium in the late 1940's.  Walter died in a car accident.  He went to sleep in a car with a leaky exhaust pipe and died of monoxide poisoning, we knew him.  And these were all funerals that I went to as a early child, you know.  So it, it--and then there were, like I said there were some people who were missing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there a lot of relatives still in Fireworks?
Speaker 2: There's still relatives in East St. Louis.  All of my family for the most part is still in East St. Louis, who I have a brother and sister out here.  But everybody else is--all the rest are still in East St. Louis or in that area, in Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay now we always ask this question and on your mother's side of the family, are there any stories from that side of the family that are passed down about life when, you know they were coming of age, or life, or stories about the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: Oh I remember my grandfather, Hiram Cruise, her father, talking very--I want to say I must have been about maybe five, six.  Had no idea what he was talking about at the time.  And, and he did not talk effusively.  It was always little, short vignettes about being in the South and you know, what colored folk had to put up with and one thing or another.  I do not recall any extensive conversations beyond those kinds of periodic, far removed vignettes that he would talk about on those few occasions that I remember him coming to our home in East St. Louis.  But beyond that, I, I remember one thing about him.  He would never spend money if he could help it.  I remember him coming to our house at one point, he had walked from Fireworks all the way to East St. Louis, which is a, which is a long distance.  I mean we're, we're talking here eight, nine miles.  And my father gave him a dime to catch the bus back.  And he put the dime in his pocket, he wouldn't spend the dime to ride the bus back.  He said hey, money is hard to come by for a colored man.  He put that dime in his pocket.  I mean I, and I distinctly remember that.  So--and, and the, the, the part about it was it was in the winter.  And in the winter I East St. Louis, Illinois, I mean you're talking cold.  But hey he put that dime in his pocket cause money was very hard to come by for his generation.  He would have been the first, the real first generation born out of slavery.  And so you know, he did not go and put a, a dime in a bus ride when he could put it in his pocket because dimes were hard to come by.
Speaker 1: So was he, was his father a slave?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, absolutely, yeah.  Both my father, my grandfather's and my grandmother's parents came out of slavery.  They were born out of slavery.  But their parents were part of that last generation to be enslaved.
Speaker 1: Did they talk about that?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It's very seldom that you could get any conversation about anything beyond the fact that they felt it necessary to leave Mississippi and to move north.
Story_ID: 1327
Speaker 1: Was there an incident in Mississippi that precipitated?
Speaker 2: No, I think the thing that, that really pushed that for them was the First World War.  I mean I think that they, they--some people in the family had moved north and then as the war was over and the word got back that things were so much better in the North, I think that her folks moved up to Illinois in the mid to late 1920's and she was born, my mother was born in Mississippi, but she grew up in, in Fireworks, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know some of us have been in southern Illinois, you know, feel like we're down south, you know.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: But did they see a difference in how they were treated?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a, there's a distinct, there's a distinct difference.  I mean you--and look, you know Malcolm X used to say any time you south of the Canadian border, you're down south.  Which was his way of saying that any time that you're black in America, there's some racial issues to deal with.  I don't care where you are.  It was a, an issue of degree.  The lynchings, the murders and so forth that took place in places such as Mississippi, Georgia, Alabama, what they call the, the deep south, were so vicious, insidious and oppressive that a person's very humanity was constantly under siege.  In places like Illinois the issue was you were probably okay as long as you didn't get out of line.  As long as you didn't forget your place.  East St. Louis in 1917 had one of the worst race riots in the history of this country, that to a very large degree it still has not gotten past.  It's, it's, it, it--there's still residues of that in terms of East St. Louis now being for all practical purposes, a, an overwhelmingly black city as whites have fled to places on the outskirts and beyond East St. Louis's boundaries.  But that process of fracture started in 1917 with that horrific race riot where over 300 black people were murdered and you had about 3,000 fleeing across the Jefferson Barracks Bridge to St. Louis [Missouri] where they had literally set up refugee camps.  I mean so the difference between Mississippi and East St. Louis was basically one of a constant, ever present dehumanization in Mississippi, as opposed to being in East St. Louis where as long as you knew your place, you were, you were fairly secure.  But once things got out of hand as it were on a collective basis, there was no difference between East St. Louis and Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Yeah I'm glad you raised that.  I, I should have been thinking about that myself.  That East St. Louis riot in 1917.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: There's books written about it.  I got a couple at home.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Now you're speaking as a, you know, as a sociologist, historian on a level, and you bring sense to it.  But are there any stories in your family about the riot?  They came up around the end of World War I?
Speaker 2: Well they, there were members of my mother's family that came up around the, around World War I because of the jobs at the slaughterhouses and one thing or another, munitions factories and so forth.  But her specific branch of the family came up in--after that World War I period because she was born in Mississippi in 1924.  So they had not yet come up.  But you know, there are, there are--so there are no specific questions about 19--they most certainly were aware of it.  I mean I can remember my father and mother talking about East St. Louis used to be called Little Egypt, it was so nice, it was so beautiful downtown with the big civic buildings with the pillars in front and so forth.  And then during the, during the riot, all of this was burned to the ground.  It was burned down.  And they talked about the number of black people who were burned up in their homes and, and so forth.  so they talked about 1917, but it was not something that they experienced.  In point of fact, during--my father was born in 1912 and because of circumstances that his family was in in Pine Bluff, Arkansas, he was sent to Chicago [Illinois] when he was eighteen, when he was eight years old, which would have been about the same time that you know, around 1917, yeah 1917, 1918.  So--
Speaker 1: There was a 1919 riot in Chicago.
Story_ID: 1328
Speaker 1: That right, was in Chicago [Illinois].  So he was a, a, a young man up there and eight years later of course he was sixteen years old and in, in, in prison until he was twenty-eight for burglary and robbery and some other kinds of things.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now let me--I want to go to your father's side now.  Then we'll put them together.  But can, can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 1: It's Harry Edwards, same thing.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: He was born in 1912, and I believe June 12th if I'm not mistaken.  Either June 12th or June 26th, 1912 in Pine Bluff, Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now okay what do you know bout the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 1: My father was born to Iola Baskin when she was sixteen years old.  And the story that we got was that her--the guy that she had the baby with was a traveling troubadour, singer, juke joint entertainer by the name of Barksdale.  So my father's original name was Harold Barksdale.  When he left prison in 1928, he took the name of Harry Edwards from James Edwards who eventually married his mother, Iola Baskin.  And he took his name after he left prison.  And so it's kind of a, a convoluted situation on, on that side.  But James Edwards was not my father's father.  My father's father was an individual by the name of Barksdale.
Speaker 2: Now did, did Barksdale re-enter his life at some point?
Speaker 1: No.  After Iola became pregnant, he, he just disappeared.  He never knew him.  And so when she met James Edwards, who was a railroad worker, worked on the railroad all of his life, he was forty-nine.  At that time she was about twenty-two, twenty-three I believe.  That's when she sent my father to Chicago to live with her mother.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So all right, so well all right so he goes to Chicago when he's about twelve years old.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: To live with his grandmother.
Speaker 1: He went to Chicago, I guess when he was around eight or so.
Speaker 2: Eight, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah eight or so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he was with her until he was sixteen.  But that's when he got in trouble with the law and wound up going to--being sentenced to ten years for burglary, robbery and something else.
Speaker 2: Do you know if he lived on the south side of Chicago?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He lived on the south side of Chicago, that's where she lived.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's where she lived.  And they had some--they had a tumultuous relationship because she was a single woman and really didn't have a lot of time for a loose kid who was hanging around all the time, you know.  So at--he would come home sometimes at night and couldn't get into the apartment.  You know, she had locked the door from the inside.  You know she'd have company or she just didn't want to be bothered or whatever, he'd wind up sleeping in the hallway or on the street.  So this went on for a period of time until finally he took up with a, another group of guys who were struggling to survive and they apparently, from what he told me, broke into a fur company storage warehouse.  And what he thought a bunch of--one of the guys with him was like twenty-nine, there was one I think about twenty-two or something like that.  But they walked out with a whole bunch of furs and of course you find a young black men walking around with mink stoles and things in Chicago in 1922 or whatever it was--
Speaker 2: You may have seen the famous picture of Jack Johnson who was around--who was the champion in those days dressed in a fur coat all the way down to the floor.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  I mean that was, that was the style.  I mean they were doing the Lindy Hop, they were showing up big time you know with the, with the furs on and the big hats.  You'd have thought it was 1974 in New York with Clyde Frasier or somebody, you know.  So history just repeats itself.  But in any event, they--as soon as the word was out on the street that you had this sixteen year old kid with a whole bunch of furs, I mean the police knew that he was not in the fur import business.  And so it didn't take them long for them to, to catch him.
Story_ID: 1329
Speaker 1: Now what you described your father's [Harry Edwards, Sr.] condition and, and journey as a sociologist, you can just pretty much see where that's going to go, right?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, absolutely.  I mean he would have been lucky for it to have gone any other way and of all of the options that he was confronted with, that may not have been the worst.  Because he talked about other guys that he knew in Chicago [Illinois] who wound up being shot to death by the police, who wound up freezing to death out on the street, who wound up with all kinds of diseases and everything hanging out with the wrong crowd, doing the wrong things.  He wound up in state prison.  Cause he once, once he--after that first three years and he turned nineteen, they moved him, they moved him over to state prison.  He was no longer in juvenile.  And so he wound up in, I believe it was Joliet [Illinois] and that's where he learned, really learned to read, to write, to type.  He, he read voraciously poems.  He could recite everything from, you know, Thanatopsis to poems by John Dunn that he had--I mean he read everything.  And literally until the day that everything just kind of flew apart, I mean there were always scores, hundreds of books.  And every time you saw him, he was bringing a new book into the house that he was reading.  So he, he was a, he was a different kind of guy.  He was also in many ways one of the angriest people that I have, that I've ever been around personally.  He was probably the brightest individual that I've ever been around, just to know that, to know somebody who I really knew was sharp.  Not well tutored.  Because there are a lot of well tutored people who can pull it off.  But someone with just natural innate capacity to think, to talk, to analyze and so forth with no more than what was the equivalent of an eighth grade education.  And what this did was to build up in him I think a tremendous amount of frustration, of anger.  And I really wasn't able to wrap my mind completely around it until I read James Baldwin.  And books such as "The Fire Next Time" where he has these personal letters and, and, and these articles that he wrote to his nephew about all of those black men in particular, in our urban centers and rural backwaters who the Civil Rights Movement left behind.  Whose issues and challenges the Civil Rights Movement did not address because the Civil Rights Movement was for those basically who were either on or at least within sight of the integration ladder.  And of course what we're witnessing now in our urban centers with all of this violence and hopelessness and frustration and devastation is the projection of really what I saw in my father.  The, the, the issues that haunted my father, all of this capacity, all of this aspiration buried under frustration, desperation and ultimately hopelessness, explodes out the back end as violence, drug--I mean drugs, alcohol, broken families, out of wedlock births.  And I saw a lot of that basic, fundamental anger in my father.  It was a, it was a heck of an education for me to, to look back on those years of my conversations with him as I moved through college and into a Ph.D. and began to really read very, very broadly "Invisible Man", "The Fire Next Time", "The Negro Revolt" by Lewis Lomax.  Going back and looking at some--I used to wonder why my dad couldn't have been like Paul Robeson who was also raised basically by his father.  You know my mother [Adelaide Cruise] wasn't there, my father was the one that--why he could not--why could--why couldn't he have not been like Paul Robeson?  And then you thought hey, people are different.  Their circumstances and issues are different.
Speaker 1: Yes sir.  We're going to pause here.  We have to make a notation.  That's interesting.
Story_ID: 1330
Speaker 1: East St. Louis [Illinois] hasn't gotten past that yet.  A lot of people don't know that history.  Do not know the rootedness of what you see in East St. Louis today which not only ranks annually per capita among the top homicide cities in this country, but it also when you look at the city's institutions in terms of newspapers, theaters, so forth and so on, police department, state police has taken that over.  The schools, taken over by the state.  You know, it, it--that is rooted in 1917.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now we're, we're rolling again.  So we pick up your father's story.  He, he comes out of Joliet [Joliet Correctional Center, Joliet, Illinois] and comes back to--
Speaker 1: East St. Louis, (unclear) East St. Louis.  He did not go back to Pine Bluff, Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Why did he, okay, all right.  Okay so his mother [Iola Baskin] was still in East St. Louis, right?
Speaker 1: His mother was still in Pine Bluff.
Speaker 2: Pine Bluff.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, his mother was still in Pine Bluff.  So when he left Joliet, he did not go back to his grandmother's house.  He knew that wasn't going to work.  And at twenty-eight years old, I mean this is, this is like twelve, ten, twelve years later when he got out.  He went to East St. Louis and he took the name Harry Edwards because that was a break with the Harold Barksdale who went to, went to prison.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So Harry Edwards was the name that he took.  And that Edwards came from James Edwards who his mother in Pine Bluff married prior to sending him north.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Cause it was just tough to have a, an outside kid in the house.  It just made it difficult and so they--she sent him north to live with her mother, and that's where train left the track.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I got, I'm getting the--got my sequence a little off here.  But East St. Louis is someplace new then to his family.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 2: He doesn't have any relatives in East St. Louis at all.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: And what was the process--I don't know if you know, but I just thought I'd ask anyway.  Did he--was there--in those days was it necessary for him to do a formal change of his name, or did he just start calling himself--
Speaker 1: No.  He just started, he just started calling, you know every place you go you put Harry Edwards down.  I mean there was no Social Security, he didn't have a Social Security card, he didn't have a driver's license.  He didn't have a, a, a birth certificate per se, you know.  I mean he--there were no official papers other than the discharge papers from prison, which were in another name.  So if you move to a new town like East St. Louis, and of course he comes, he came to East St. Louis because outside of the south side of Chicago [Illinois], I mean he could have gone to Gary but he knew about Indiana.  He didn't want any part of that.  So he--East St. Louis was the next largest black population.  And of course there were people in state prison who he knew from East St. Louis, and that's how, that's how that connection came about.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  I just want to make that clear because I think people watching this in the future might think that you change your name and back in those days you didn't go to court and file a paper and pay some money.
Speaker 1: And on top of it, as far as Negroes, colored people were concerned, nobody cared, nobody cared.  I mean my mother and father took out a marriage license in St. Louis, which is in Missouri, and got married in East St. Louis, which is in Illinois.  But nobody cared (laughs).  So you could, you could say technically that they were never married.  Because if you take out a--you have to, you have to get married in the county where you take the license out.  But at that point, I mean we were just a generation or so away from black people jumping over a broom, you know.  And so when, when you really came down to it, if you walked into a place and said my name is Harry Edwards and this is my wife Adelaide Edwards and we've been married since 1940, hey I mean that's it.
Speaker 2: Who could contest it or who cared?
Speaker 1: Who cared to contest it?  For what?  (Laughs).  Legitimacy, passing on property, making sure that the papers are right in terms of the inheritance.  Are you kidding me?  (Laughs).
Speaker 2: The estate.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the estate, yeah so we're, we're talking the 1920's and '30s [1930's] and '40s [1940's] in, in a post-World War, pre-World War II years in America.  That period between World, the end of World War I and the beginning of World War II, 1939, very interesting period for black Americans.  They were beginning because of the jobs and so forth that came out of, and came with World War I, to move into institutional realms where legitimacy began to matter for the average colored man.  But not right then.
Speaker 2: That's another question about how he got there.  Is there--I know my dad during that era hoboed you know for a while.  Did he get a train ticket or did he just hop on a train?
Speaker 1: I think, I think he just took a bus down.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think he just got on a bus.  And got a ticket to East St. Louis, and that was it.  He got there, there were still jobs available at the slaughterhouse.  And so he he loved beef, tried to do a little boxing.  He's a pretty good athlete.  Tried to do a little prize fighting because the, the images, the heroes, the examples that were out there for colored men at that time were Jesse Owens and Joe Louis.  So I remember him telling me oh yeah, I ran a ten-five, 100 yard dash and, and I did some prize fighting.  And I never knew anything about how fast he could run, but I did talk to people around East St. Louis said oh yeah, your old man was a, was a, a pretty good athlete.  Said he could dance, he could, he could fight, he, he could punch, he could, he could move.  Said his problem was he wasn't too good at taking a punch.  So he (laughs), it didn't take him long to realize hey, you know I got to do something better than this.  And so he, he, he finally just, just gave it up and he wound up lugging beef at Swift Packing House.
Story_ID: 1331
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is--now, okay so we've got your mother [Adelaide Cruise] and father [Harry Edwards, Sr.] in the same locale now.  Is there a story about how they met that they tell?
Speaker 2: I think they met, he--my father loved to dance.  I mean he loved to dance.  And I think they met at, at a dance in East St. Louis.  She had come to a dance, 16 years old with her sisters Ruby and Flora.  My father was at the time I think she was about--he was if I'm not mistaken, twenty-seven, something like that.  He was about ten years older than her.  Believe he was born in 1912, she was born in 1924, about twelve years older than her.  And so he, they met at a dance, you know.  And within, I think within six months they were, they were married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did your mother do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother was a house--I never knew my mother to hold a job while I was small.  Once I, I got up around ten or eleven, she had left the house.  And I remember her having a job in a hospital cafeteria.  But for the most part, she was a housewife.  She was--my mother had eight children.  They had eight children between 1940 and 1952.  And it, it was, it was almost like every sixteen to eighteen months.  I mean she was having a baby.
Speaker 1: Well that's a, yeah that's a--
Speaker 2: So she didn't have a lot of time for a career.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.  That's right so, so you're the--
Speaker 2: Second oldest.
Speaker 1: Second of eight.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Second of eight, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  My sister was born in 1941, I was born in 1942, Donald the third one, was born in 1943.  In 1945 William was born, 1946 James, 1947 Suzanne, 1948 Denotra (ph.), 1949 I believe was Ruby who was the last child.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Not, not really.  I mean there are so many.  I mean I have memories of kids drowning.  That we used to go over and swim in the Mississippi River and they used to tell us to stay out of that river, that river is dangerous, there are undertows.  And I remember going over to swim despite the fact as kids will do with a bunch of kids and there were seven of us who went over there I believe it was.  And I know that one of them they never found, three of them they did find washed up down the river, two and three miles, hung up in the, the cattails and one thing or another.  And only thing that saved me was that I couldn't swim as well.  They were swimming out to this barge.  But this barge on that river is going, rising up and down.  And so the swim out to the barge, touch the barge and swim back.  It was only about a quarter of a mile.  But if you go out there and you reach to touch that barge and go underneath it, cause it was empty.  Just sitting on, just not riding that high, not riding that low in the water.  And with the, with the water being turbulent and going up and down, you go underneath it.  And once you get underneath there, you don't know which way is out cause the water is muddy, it's dark and everything.  So we had three guys that they found, some of them two weeks, three weeks--in August, down the river, hung up in the cattails.  I remember that.
Story_ID: 1332
Speaker 1: Another thing that comes to mind--I must have been about maybe, at that time I was probably eleven or twelve when the swimming thing took place.  Earlier than that I must have been about five, maybe six.  But I don't think I had started school yet.  But there was a, there was a old guy used to--he and my father [Harry Edwards, Sr.] used to walk to work together at Monsanto Chemical Plant.  My father had started to work two jobs by that time.  He was working at the packing house and he was also doing what they call shift work at Monsanto.  He'd go to work at either four in the afternoon until eleven or twelve o'clock at night until eight in the morning.  But this old guy used to come by the house every day when my father was working four to twelve.  And they would walk to work together cause it was right across the tracks from where we lived.  And he must have been in his, at that time which seemed ancient to me, he must have been in his late '60s, about where I am now, sixty-nine, seventy, somewhere in there.  And one day he was--my father wasn't, was on a different shift and he was--this old guy was coming back from work.  And a train hit him, train hit him.  Literally cut him in half.  And my father--when somebody came back and said hey, so-and-so just got hit by a train.  You got to be kidding me.  So my father ran out of the house.  And when he ran out of the house, I ran behind him.  He said go back there.  Get back home.  You stay here on the porch.  Don't come, you know cause he didn't--I didn't understand what he was talking about.
Speaker 2: And you were about five.
Speaker 1: Yeah about five, six years old.  Somebody got hit by a train.  Hey, I want to go up and see this, you know.  And so he--get back on that porch.  If you leave that porch, you know, he threatened me.  But he took off running.  And as soon as he got just about out of sight, I took off.  I went up there and so I was--I remember moving between all crowds of people up there and I was looking, walking between these adults things, wasn't nobody paying no attention to no kid up there.  Everybody look at this thing.  And I went up there and there was, a guy half of, just a half of a--cut in half, literally cut in half.  Legs was one place, he was laying someplace else.  And his eyes, I remember his eyes being open cause I ran up to where the biggest crowd was and was going through the people and looked at that.  Cause I had--you know I mean, how you gone get ready to put that together?  And I remember--and my old man came and said what you doing, what you doing up here?  Who's boy is this?  Somebody said who's boy is this?  You better get him out of here.  I told you to stay on the porch.  Now you get back, he ran me back.  I ran so fast getting back to that porch I didn't know what to do, and it was years before I would go up on those tracks.  It was years before I would walk--cause every time my oh man, you know, cause kids' minds work funny.  You know if something happens like that, it's always there and I guess it was maybe two years or something like that.  One day I just walked up on that track, right there--
Speaker 2: Was it across a trestle or something?
Speaker 1: No, it was just a track.  The Illinois Central Railroad ran right past our house.  I mean there was our house, the Eans' (ph.) house, my uncle Hiram's house, and then the tracks.  No barriers, no--I mean kids played, we played on the tracks.  We went up and picked up coal off the tracks.  Cause when the trains would come by, coal would fall off.  We'd pick up--get burlap bags and go up and pick up coal.  Wasn't supposed to do it, but we picked up coal.  I mean we'd go up and get railroad spikes and railroad iron and put it in the bottom of a burlap bag full of tin cans so that it weighed more when we put it on the scale over at Mr. Kenny's junk yard.  And so rather than getting a dime, we'd get eighteen cents, you know what I mean.  So the tracks were, were central to you know, life in, in that community.  I mean it provided coal in the winter when you didn't have money for coal.  Kids played up there, you know the whole nine yards.  So it, it was only probably I would say at the most 100 yards from, from our house.  And it wasn't just one set of tracks, there were four sets of tracks on that first little elevated berm.  And then you go down into a cornfield, go over and then right before you cross a second set of two tracks, you, you got to Monsanto Chemical Plant was right on the other side of that second set of tracks.  But this was railroad area here.  You know, cars would be parked up there.  It was almost like a railroad yard.  But trains came flying down through there with freight and coal, oil tank cars.  And this, this old guy was hard of hearing.  I remember asking my father once why he kept that cotton in his ears.  He said well he's hard of hearing and he's got, say his ears get infected.  So you see they put castor oil on cotton and, and stick it in their, in their ears.  Especially you know, when they were having some, some hearing problems or issues or something like that.  And so he was hard of hearing.  And this--I remember my father later saying, say he probably never, never even saws the train coming, never heard it, never saw it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 1333
Speaker 1: So, so, so there -- I have memories of that time, but they were--you know when you say a memory, there was, there was this kind of stuff, you know.  It, it wasn't like you know, Mayberry and going fishing, you know with the local sheriff.  It wasn't like you know, Beaver Cleaver and the kid--we broke a window or something like that.  I, I mean I have a memory of breaking windows when, when they--there were these old warehouses over by the Mississippi River and we went over and we used to throw at pigeons.  Well these warehouses, to us they looked like just a bunch of old junk warehouses, but there were people, there was, those were places where some local industries stored stuff and everything else.  But there were a lot of pigeons in there, cause they stored wheat and grain and all kind of stuff like that in these warehouses.  And we'd throw at the pigeons, but when we'd throw at the pigeons, we'd break the windows because that's where the pigeons were roosting.  I remember the police--they had lost so many windows over there that they start staking it out.  And so one day the police caught me and two other guys over there breaking windows.  We said we weren't breaking windows, we were throwing at pigeons.  Say come on, you're break windows, you know so these two white cops brought me home.  And they--I remember my father [Edward, Sr.] being on the porch when the police car came up.  And I got out the back seat and these two white cops came up and walked up to the front of the house.  "Said are you this boy's father?"  He said, "Yeah," he said, "yes sir I'm--that, that's my kid."  Say, "Well he's way over in Rush City in a warehouse, grainery warehouse, breaking windows.  Now we haven't got an assessment on what the windows cost and we're not concerned about that.  Don't look like you all have a bunch of money, but I want to let you know that the next time we catch him over there breaking windows, somebody's going to have to pay and he could wind up in a reformatory."  My old man say come here.  I walked up, cause I know this was going to be bad.  And he reared back, boom, I mean I, I dropped like a sack of potatoes.  I mean that old boxing--I understood what them folks was saying all them years that he used to box.  He--I dropped like, dropped like a sack of potatoes and the cop said no, no, no, no.  You don't--I mean you don't have to--he say you know, and so afterwards he said the cops--they was no, no, no.  Don't, don't do that, don't do that.  So afterwards cops had left and everything.  He said, "Boy," he say "you know why I knocked you down?"  I said, "Yeah because I was over there breaking windows."  He said, "No."  He said, "You come up here with two white police officers.  Them damn police officers will kill you, boy.  I knocked you down to save your life."  I said okay (laughs).  He said, "Don't do that no more,"  (Laughs).
Speaker 2: How old were you?
Speaker 1: I must have been about maybe nine, ten.  But I was big, was always big.  I remember I was among the first black class to go en masse to East St. Louis Senior High School.  The white, traditionally white high school instead of going to Lincoln, which was the black high school.  This was in--cause after Brown v. Board of Education, Topeka, Kansas [1954], they integrated the elementary schools, then they integrated the junior high schools, middle schools.  In--elementary schools in 1955, middle schools in 1956.  The high schools in 1957 in terms of mass integration, where all the dating took place.  That was the last to--cause if they could move some kids from the middle school who had been around white kids and everything and knew the rules and knew their place into the high school, it just made it easier.  But they also brought in athletes who were coming from the black junior high school.  So I was in that class, that first big class of 1957 that, that went into East St. Louis Senior High School and I remember me and Claude Webb and Don Brooks, all of us athletes sitting up in the English class and the English teacher came in and said you guys, you, you in the wrong class.  Say you in the wrong, you in the wrong class because I was about, I was 13 years old, I was about 6'5" [six feet, five inches], about 230 pounds.  Don Brooks was 6'3" [six feet, three inches], probably 195.  Claude Webb was 6'4" [six feet, four inches], probably 210, 215.  And so she, the teacher looked at me--white teacher, she didn't know what to do with this.  She say you, you in the wrong class.  I said no, they, they put me in, in, in this English class.  She looked at me, she said well how old are you?  I'm setting right there in the front, cause we sat right up in the front.  Six five, 240 pounds.  I said 13.  She said you, y'all got to go to the back of the room.  So I was always big and that's what my old man was really trying to protect me with way back then was that hey, cops come in here, they'll shoot you.
Story_ID: 1334
Speaker 1: Let me go back to the first days of school.  Well we always ask this one question and I guess we--I should ask it now.  What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  That's a pro forma question we ask.
Speaker 2: Well we lived, we lived about 100 yards from the tracks.  So there were leaks from rail cars and everything, we smelled that.  We lived about 300 yards from Monsanto Chemical Company, and it would get so bad, emissions from there that you'd have to cover your, you'd have to cover your face to breath, to just to breath.  Those were smells that I will never forget.  I mean we, we lived with stuff that today if there were emissions like that, they'd shut the plant down.  Monsanto Chemical Plant right--300 yards away, made it very difficult for us to even breath sometime.  But this was the South End bottoms, and nobody, you know, we didn't even have paved roads and sidewalks in some instances.  Other smells and so forth, I mean I can remember the smell of hogs being prepared to be cut up.  I mean we, everybody had--we had pigs, the Eanes (ph.) had pigs.  There were people who had cows and chickens in their back yard.  At one point we had 300 chickens in our back yard.  And, and everybody shared everything.  So sometimes the Eanes would get together and get ready to slaughter three pigs.  And I remember the smell of, of these hogs when they pulled them out of this boiling water.  Cause they had to get the, get the hair off of them, you know, and then the smell when they, when they cut them open to, to, to cut them up, you know.  And it was always, you know somebody to go around at the end of the day--and this would always be in November, in the winter and so forth so they wouldn't have to worry about the meat spoiling while they were preparing it.  And so at the end of that process, that next morning somebody would be going around well you better take this ham, here's a shoulder for you.  We, we killed nine chickens, here's one--and that's what, that's the way people lived.  And so I remember those smells.  There's nothing quite like the smell of a, of a chicken that's been dipped in boiling water so you can pull the, pull the feathers out.  There's a particular smell to that.  I remember the smell of dead dogs in the alleys.  Cause we had alleys back then.  And you know and somebody's dog would die, they would just drag him out to the alley, you know.  I remember the smell of outhouses.  We did not have inside plumbing.  I don't know anybody else that had inside plumbing that lived in our half of 17th Street.  When you get above, about midway that street, south of Wilford Avenue, you'd see people who had inside plumbing.  But we didn't have any inside plumbing.  The Eanes didn't have inside plumbing.  My uncle Hiram and Ruth and his wife Ruth didn't have inside plumbing.  The Johnsons didn't have inside plumbing.  The Howards didn't have inside plumbing.  So--
Speaker 1: How do you spell the Eanes?
Speaker 2: E-A-N-E-S.  Yeah they were probably the people that were closest to down there because Mans Eanes and my father both worked at Monsanto.  And so we were, we were probably closest to them because our, our fathers were, were closest.  But I remember the smell of the outhouses in August.  And it , and it was something that nobody--my--it wasn't that they didn't mind, it, it, it wasn't disruptive.  Because that's what they came from in the south.  That's what they did when they came north.  We didn't have sewers out there.  I mean there was, they would come out about once every two years or three years, and cut a trench right down the side, each side of the street.  And that's what took away the rain water and, and so forth.  Every now and then the Mississippi River, which was only about two miles away, would flood, and that wouldn't do any good.  But for the most part, the water ran toward, down toward the low end of the street, we didn't have sewers.  So I remember all of those smells and, and so forth.  And then there were some, there was some, there was some smells like chicken cooking on Sunday.  You'd come home from church, Reverend Green's church, and you'd walk down 17th Street and you would smell chicken cooking.  I mean everybody had Sunday dinner on.  You know, somebody would be making potato, sweet potato pies and, and you would smell this, you would smell this in the street.  I remember the smell of chitterlings after somebody done killed two or three hogs and they'd take around the intestines and the maws and all this stuff and you know some of the neighbors would get it and they would cook this stuff.  And you would--these, these smells would be out there.  So there were some, there were some rich and unforgettable smells that I, that I grew up with as, as normal.
Story_ID: 1335
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell me about your first experience in school.  What was your first school?  What was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: I went to Dunbar Elementary School.  Named after James Lawrence Dunbar.
Speaker 1: Paul Lawrence.
Speaker 2: Paul Lawrence Dunbar, the poet and writer.  Paul Lawrence Dunbar.
Speaker 1: So was this like a school for all the grades in the black community (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It went from, it went from the first grade, cause we didn't have a kindergarten.  Went from the first grade up to the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So these are, in these days these are segregated schools.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, no question.  Yeah totally segregated.
Speaker 1: You have all black teachers and staff?
Speaker 2: All black teachers, black principals.  The teachers lived in the neighborhood.  The teachers at Dunbar had taught all of my cousins who had grown up in East St. Louis and around that area.  So, so they--and they lived in the community.  They lived in the community.  When you got in trouble at Dunbar with Mr. Ducksworth, when you got in trouble with Ms. Swanson or Ms. Dosier, you were in trouble with the preacher, you were in trouble with Mr. Stacker, the mom and pop grocery store owner, you were in trouble with the old guy that shines shoes down at Buchanan's Drug Store, you were in trouble with Mr. Buchanan who was the pharmacist, you were in trouble with Dr. Jackson who was the doctor that treated all the people there, and you were most certainly in trouble with your mama and your daddy.
Speaker 1: Now these are all members of the black community.
Speaker 2: They're all members of the black community.  Everybody right there, everybody right there south of Broadway, between Broadway Avenue and the Illinois Central railroad tracks.  The only difference was some of them lived a little bit further toward Broadway and a little bit farther away from the railroad tracks.  We were almost right up against the railroad tracks.  But everybody was right there together.  Frank Summers, was the lawyer.  Jackson the doctor, Buchanan the pharmacist, Green the preacher, Marion Officer, the undertaker, the Ducksworth, the teacher, Hoosier the teacher, Dozier the teacher, Swanson the teacher.  They all lived right there in the community.  Everybody knew everybody.  And everybody was responsible and accountable to everybody.  And so it was a very, it was a very close knit community institutionally even though there were class differences.
Speaker 1: In the black community.
Speaker 2: In the black community.  I would never dare look at Mr. Buchanan, the pharmacist's daughter cause my old man [Harry Edwards, Sr.] lugged beef and worked--was a day laborer at Monsanto Chemical Company who got his pay in a little brown envelope in cash.  Mr. Buchanan's daughter would deal with Dr. Jackson's son.  So the class thing was there, but there was also a bond between negroes in East St. Louis because essentially we were all under the same system of segregation, discrimination and oppression.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What you to also describe in here is kind of a highly organized community it seems.  It's a lot of roles being played by people and black professionals, pharmacists, lawyer, you got a doctor.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  The people who ran East St. Louis, the whites who were the mayor, mayor and police chief and so forth, they knew exactly who to contact in the negro community to get something done.  They knew exactly what the power structure was in that community.  So it wasn't just a bunch of people out there because the--there was an actual--I mean they had debutant balls for the, the black elite in East St. Louis [Illinois].  The powers that be knew exactly who to contact to get things done, to get the word out, to get something cooled out or get something moving.  There were political organizations, Republican and Democrats.  There was a long history going all the way back to Lincoln of blacks supporting Republicans.  My father was tied into the Democratic party and in point of fact, rose to the level of a precinct committeeman.  I remember going to a meeting with him where he was trying to get sewers and lights, street lights in the South End, where he was trying to get paved sidewalks and something other than tar and rocks for paved roads in the South End.  But there was Arbor Gray who eventually became the Superintendent of schools in East St. Louis, who was a staunch, dye-in-the-wool Republican.  I mean in the tradition of Abraham Lincoln.  Going, you know that whole Springfield, Illinois Republican structure.
Speaker 1: Okay we've got to pause here and make another notation.
Story_ID: 1336
Speaker 1: All right, okay so we were talking about politics.  So black people voted apparently and their votes counted.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and sometimes they were, for that period of time, paid well for their vote.  I mean it was--my father [Harry Edwards, Sr.] used to get so upset.  He said hey you know, so-and-so took this precinct.  But I also know they put more walking around money out than so-and-so did.  And at that time, when you could buy a loaf of bread for twelve cents, when you could buy a quart of milk for a dime, when you could buy a pound of bologna for twenty-five cents, when you could buy a chicken for thirty cents, five dollars around November moving into the, the winter could make a lot of difference.  And so there was a lot of that that went on in East St. Louis [Illinois] at that item.  And but it, it always came through a structure.  Everybody knew who represented whom, everybody knew what the, what the, what the issues were, everybody knew where everybody stood because the community was just that, just that tight knit.
Speaker 1: Who would, who would you consider when you look back on it, who, who was the leader of the black community in those days?
Speaker 2: I think at that time there were a number of, of spokespeople for the African American community.  There was Ester Saverson  who eventually became the mayor [sic.][first black commissioner] of East St. Louis.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that name?
Speaker 2: E-S-T-E-R, S-A-V-E-R-S-O-N I believe.  There was an individual by the name of Leo Gooden.  Leo Gooden, G-O-O-D-E-N, they used to call him Big Leo.  Leo must have weighed about 400 pounds.  Very well spoken, articulate, politically savvy, intelligent.  There were others of that stripe who really had political savvy, were known all the way up to the state capitol because they could deliver East St. Louis in state elections.  There was Frank Summers who was a benefactor of mine, who was an attorney and was also the first negro Assistant AD, AG, Attorney General for the State of Illinois.  His name was Frank Summers.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his--
Speaker 2: S-U-M-M-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was the reason I ended up in California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is a--well what was the population in East St. Louis in those days?
Speaker 2: East St. Louis at that time I think had somewhere in the vicinity of 70,000 people.
Speaker 1: And the black population was?
Speaker 2: Black population was probably somewhere in the vicinity of I would say 30,000 back in the day, thirty to forty thousand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Somewhere around half of the population.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah and, and I think, I think anywhere from two thirds, anywhere from, I'm sorry, anywhere from a third to a half of the population.  As was the case in Chicago and Detroit and Kansas City.  There was a lot of moving in and out, and who was a resident--there were typically always more black people in East St. Louis than actually residence there because they would move in and out.  They'd move through.  I mean you'd have people living with people and then they would move to St. Louis, or move to Kansas City [Missouri], or move to Detroit [Michigan], or go up to Chicago [Illinois], then they're back eighteen months later.  You know I mean so it--but the, the population for the most part I believe was somewhere of that 70,000 people, 60 to 70,000 people, probably half of them were black and of course as time moved on, more and more to the point now that the population is virtually all black.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: But now they only have about 45,000 people.  Because folks move out and move on.  If you can get out, you get out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So many instances, unfortunately.
Story_ID: 1337
Speaker 1: Now in school, when you started school did you like school?
Speaker 2: I loved school, I loved school.  I loved school.  My father [Harry Edwards, Sr.] always talked.  He talked about books, he talked about stuff that he had read.  I'd seen books lying around the house.  I mean we lived in a place in a cinderblock, four room house that he had built himself.  And in every room, and not organized in any way.  It wasn't like you could go to the shelf and pull off you know, Dante or pull off you know John Dante.  Books were just laying around all over the place, it was a mess.  And, but it was not impossible just reach down and pick up a book.  You didn't have anything else to do, there was--we didn't have any TV to speak, you know there was no--so you just reached down and pick up a book.  In the winter, you can't go outside, there's icicles on the wall because that cement block doesn't have any insulation value whatsoever.  So if there was vapor on the, on the wall, I don't care if it was just some, you know, ten people breathing in there.  Sometimes you'd just reach down and pick up a book and start reading.  So when I got to school and, and really got into it, I loved school.  As a matter of fact, I skipped the third grade.  I went directly from the second grade to the fourth grade.  Because I was reading and doing math and that kind of thing at that level.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite teacher at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I loved Mr. Duckworth.  I loved Ms. Dosier.  Ms. Swanson was this little lady, and you could hear her coming two halls away cause she walked hard.  But she would come in and boy you could hear a pin drop in that room, people were scared to death of her.  She'd make an assignment and she'd come in, "Harry, where is it?"  (Laughs).  You know, no excuses.  No I lost it, I almost got it done, I forgot it and left it at home.  And when you didn't have it, put your hand out.  Pow, pow, pow.  This will help you remember next time.  I want that homework on my desk tomorrow morning.  And I mean you got it done.  And, and after I left, after I left Dunbar, I look back on all of my teachers and I said you know what?  This is the, this is the, this was, this was one of my real favorites.  Because as I moved into junior high school I got people who really, long as you were playing sports, they didn't care what you did.  And then by the time I got to high school, it didn't matter even if you were playing sports.  This was the first generation of negroes en masse at East St. Louis Senior High School.  They had no idea what to do with us.  They had no notion about what they should have been doing, what we should have been doing.  And so it didn't make any difference--and, and by being an athlete, it made it even more--hey, as long as you doing well on the field, you're cool.
Speaker 1: Expectation then--
Speaker 2: Low, none academically.  I mean I went through high school and I mean they never, I mean I went through high school--they, they never laid a glove on me in the classroom.  I went utterly unscathed by education.  It just--they had no idea.  And it wasn't that they were bad people, I'm quite certain that there were many good teachers there.  But they had no idea about what to do with us.
Story_ID: 1338
Speaker 1: Now you're in grade school, you're about in the fourth grade when your mother [Adelaide Cruise] leaves.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us something about her personality.  I know we talked about your father [Harry Edwards, Sr.], but what, what do you remember your mother's personality and, and what--did they, you know what was their issue I guess?
Speaker 2: Well first of all I think we have to put it in some kind of context.  My mother was a very, very simple woman.  Not simple in the sense of simple minded, simple in the sense of very simple things would have made her happy.  I never ever saw my mother reading a book.  And her and my father used to get into it as she used to say over all of these damn books, everywhere you look, these damn books.  On the floor, in the closet, on the bed, under the bed, you know.  Get rid of these damn books.  My father didn't, did not understand that coming from her, but she was a very simple woman, very simple things would have made her happy.  But here you had a woman who probably in terms of tutoring and literacy, dropped out of school the first year of junior high school.  Probably didn't have a lot of full year, complete education years in elementary school because she was moving back and forth between Fireworks [Illinois] and her parents [Hiram and Gertrude Cruise].  And when they would get into it, she'd move into East St. Louis with her older sisters, Flora and Ruby, and then she'd get into it and move back and so forth.  So you're probably talking about maybe a fourth or fifth grade literacy level in terms of actual tutoring.  You're talking about a man, ex convict who got most of his education, which probably came up to about an eighth grade level, maybe a ninth grade level, in Joliet State Prison [Joliet, Illinois].  And yet they're sitting out on the bottom side of East St. Louis, Illinois with all of those racial tensions and things that were there, he's trying to work two jobs.  Picking up his paycheck in a little brown manila packet, in cash.  Which typically as I recall came to about sixty-five dollars a week.  Cause he'd make thirty-five or forty dollars at Monsanto, pick up another twenty-five or so over at Swift's, working part time over there lugging beef.  I remember him before one election, getting $150 to get the vote out in that precinct.  And I remember him putting that money in my hand saying, "Boy I want you to put this in your hand.  This is more money than you probably gone ever have in your hand in your life.  I want you to feel this and see how it feel.  This is how real money feels."  About $150.  And so here you have these two and there's gone be some tension.  Cause there, there, there were inevitably--what amazes me is that here you have a woman who is perpetually pregnant, eight kids.  And here you have an ex convict making sixty-five dollars a week trying to raise, trying to support a wife and eight kids and still stay honest, not wind up going back to prison.  There were things that she wanted that he couldn't give her.  There were things that she demanded that he simply didn't have the latitude to provide.  And there were things in her that he wanted that virtually everything conspired against her delivering.  Babies take a toll on you.  Being at home all day with kids takes a toll on you.  So that growth, that yeah I appreciate books and so forth, and this and that the other, wasn't there.  So the thing that amazes me is that not that they separated, 1953, '54 [1954], somewhere in there.  I would have been about--'42 [1942] to '53 [1953], about eleven when she actually left for good.  Cause she had left in 1950 when I was nine or something like that, she had left a couple of times.  But this time she left for good.  The thing that amazes me is not that they ended up splitting up finally for good after twelve or thirteen years.  What amazes me is that they were able to stay together long enough to have eight children to begin with.  Because being a parent myself, you know and my wife is wonderful.  We've been married 41 years now.  With three great kids.  Never gave us an ounce of problems.  One Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] educated, Berkeley [University of California Berkeley] both all educated, corporate lawyer.  Second one Arizona [University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona] educated, Keck Medical School [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], medical doctor, Fatima down in LA [Los Angeles].  Son, computer science and engineering, working on a second degree so he can go and teach kids about technology now.  Wonderful kids.  I could not imagine being in the situation my parents were in with eight kids.  Under those circumstances in that city at that time.  What amazes me is that they managed to stay together for 12 or 13 years.  But my mother was very, very basic, very basic.  Tremendous courage, tremendous understanding of just the fundamental basics of life.  And she--I think became a--initially for the good, a, an, an anchor on my father.  Because he was more than capable of, you know hey, let's go out and get it done.  Let's get this done now.  Whatever it took.  She provided an anchor for him which slowed him down.  But over a period of years with all these kids and these responsibilities, and her being who she was and what she was, it became for him I think a kind of a drag.  It was no longer an anchor that stabilized him and gave him a base, it was a drag that just seemed to be just, just pulling him, pulling him down.  But it was inevitable I think and again, the thing that amazes me is that they were able to stay, stay together long enough to have eight kids.  Because in looking back at it, I've had three of the most wonderful kids in the world.  And you know my wife's educated, Deputy Superintendent of Schools for thirty years.  I'm on the faculty at Berkeley for thirty-one, doing all other kinds of things, never had the financial issues and so forth and so on.  And I'm gone tell you something.  The biggest single responsibility that I've ever been faced with is, is family and these kids.  So I, I've become very understanding of my parents' situation and of them eventually separating.
Story_ID: 1339
Speaker 1: Now did she, did all of you all, all the siblings stay together?  All the brothers and sisters stay together?
Speaker 2: No.  When she, when my mother [Adelaide Cruise] left, most everybody except me went with her.  But at the time I was moving into junior high school.  Because I moved in, I went to junior high school early.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the junior high school?
Speaker 2: Hughes-Quinn, Hughes-Quinn Junior High school.  Named after a black educator in East St. Louis.  Hughes was one educator, Quinn was another.  So they named it Hughes-Quinn Junior High school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At one time it had been Lincoln High School, the building itself.  But then they built a new Lincoln High School and that became the junior high school.
Speaker 1: So it was a black high school then?
Speaker 2: It was a--the black high school was Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That's where everybody went.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you stayed.
Speaker 2: I stayed with my father [Harry Edwards, Sr.] because I was moving into junior high school and playing football, playing basketball.  And I remember the conversation that I had when my mother came back in the middle of the night to get all of the kids.  I mean because she didn't have any--the only way that she could really press him for any kind of support was to have the kids.  And I just told her, I said hey I'm not, I'm not--why would I leave here?  Say yeah this is terrible, this is horrible.  But I had enough sense, but I know what's here.  And boy she jumped on me.  She was so angry.  She was so bitter about that.  And in point of fact, it was 1965 before I ever saw her again or speak to her.  From 1953 to 1965.  And I was coming home during the summer and stopped by where she lived in Rock Island, Illinois to see her.  And that was the first time I had seen her since that night.  I was on my way home from Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] during the summer, and coming back to California and stopped by to see her.  But that was the first time I had seen her since that night.  But everybody else packed up and, and left.  I mean and and, I, I never blamed them for leaving.  I mean the windows were out of the place.  I mean when you're in a place where the windows are knocked out and pigeons are living in the kitchen, dead of the winter.  I mean we used to--we used to call, we used to call the place "The Fort."  Because if you couldn't take a stand, you couldn't, you couldn't make it there.  (Laughs).  So we used to call it, we used to call the house the, "The Fort."  And, and of course as time passed, my--within a year or two after she left, my father had taken up with another lady and had a nice place.  He could go over there and come home from work and sleep.  He'd come home to where we were and see if there was food, see if there was, you know, is there enough coal in the basement, put some cardboard up to that window.  Get a, get a ice pick and chip this ice out of the, out of the refrigerator cause there's some ham hocks back in there.  (Laughs).  It was, it was hard, but we were essentially raising ourselves, you know.
Speaker 1: So it was you and your--
Speaker 2: Me, well initially it was me.  Initially before my mother came back to get the kids, it was all of us was there, all eight of us were there including, including a one year old.  Yeah including a one year old, Ruby.  So we were doing the best we can.  There were, there were women that my dad knew who would come by periodically and kind of help us out.  He even got a housekeeper between 1950--first time she left was about '52 [1952] I believe and was gone for about a year, and we had a housekeeper.  I can't remember, I can see her face now but I can't remember her name.  She was there for about 18 months.  But she was what they called at the time Mohammadan (ph.), Mohammadan.  People used to talk about well them Mohammadans.  And what it was--
Speaker 1: She was a Muslim.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a Muslim, one of Elijah Mohammad's people.  And very interesting.  It--she--I was about ten I guess and she said you need to come on by and listen to what--we got a preacher coming through here who's going to be talking about some, some things.  No, I don't want to do that, I don't want to do that.  I'm not interested in that.  So anyway she--whoever it was came through and she came back and she was just effusive.  She was just all over the place.  And ultimately she would--after the other kids were gone and everything, she would still come by and clean the house up cause old man kept her around, kept her, you know gave her a few dollars to come by and cook every now and then and do some things.  And so I got to know her real well.  I can't think of her name to save my life now.  But she invited me by her house again.  I mean I was at that time I must have been my first year at East Side by that time.  And she invited me by her house again.  And she said these preachers are coming by.  And that was the first time that I saw Malcolm X.  He used to do the circuit from Chicago [Illinois] and go around East St. Louis [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], Kansas City [Missouri], New York and so forth.  He'd travel around trying to establish these local Mosques.  And it, it was, it was very interesting.  I didn't know anything about any Mohammadans.  They used to call them Mohammadans.  And so in any event, we, we--for most of that time, from the first time that my mother started leaving until she finally came back and just took everybody but me.  We were raising ourselves cause my father was trying to work two jobs, he had a lady someplace else where he would go and sleep.  Cause he couldn't come up in all that madness during the, during the day you know.
Story_ID: 1340
Speaker 1: How did it--how do you feel about that and was it different from what was going on with other people you knew in the neighborhood in those days?
Speaker 2: It was different in content.  It was not necessarily different in outcome.  We had neighbors--I mean I have to believe they'd have been better off if somebody had left.  I mean we had people would get into it and kill each other, you know.  We had people would be drunk all the time.  You know we, we--I mean it was, it was different in, in substance but, but in terms of the impact.  These, these were tough times.  These were very, very difficult times for black people.  And even in a segregated community where you had a lot of structure and institutions and, and viable, mutual aid systems.  The train could leave the track.  I mean people were in just that bad of shape.  And there was nobody coming around from Social Services to see what was going on.  There was nobody coming around from Child Welfare and Advocacy to see what was happening.  You were on your own.
Speaker 1: Well was church a big factor when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: No, not--it, it was--we used to have to go to Reverend Green's Baptist Church every Sunday up until I guess I was about six when things really started getting rugged and then after a period of time it, it just got to be too much.  We didn't have the clothes to wear.  We didn't have the, the bathing areas where everybody could get a bath, put on their Sunday best and go to church.  So once we got past four or five little kids, stair step kids and it--we started getting older and start getting bigger and there more of us, it just got to be too much.  And every now and then somebody might get up and say hey, you know, Ms. Eanes and her two daughters, can I go to church with them?  But that would be all that it was and of course most of the time, hey you know, what is that?  What has that got to do, what has that got to do with, you know, with getting me out of this mess right here?  (Laughs).  So go down there and like my old man [Harry Edwards, Sr.] used to say well you go in there now and all he wants to do is put his hand in your pocket.  So you know after a period of time you know hey, I'm not--so we didn't, we didn't, we didn't indulge that.  We probably would have been better off if we had, but even that would have had to have some stable, organized family base.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you--so who provided like the moral base, I mean foundation for your family basically?  Or what, what (unclear) or individuals or--
Speaker 2: That's a tough one.  I mean that, that's really a tough one.  As far as the moral base, I think my father did the best that he could do.  He was the one that was there.  And I'll never forget something that he said early on.  It wasn't, you know don't do what I do, do what I say.  He say hey, boy I'm gone show you a whole bunch of things that you don't want to be.  I mean he, he was just straight up with it.  Other than that, he'd talk about people like Ralph Bunch.  He always said you're going to college.  He had no idea.  I mean he couldn't afford to send me across town on a bus to get to, to get to East St. Louis Senior High School.  I mean he didn't, you know, cause he wasn't there.  I was just walking over there and catching a bus back when I had the money and--but it was intermittent.  And he, but he'd always said you're going to college and you are, you're going to, you gone be somebody.  I'm gone show you a whole bunch of things that you don't want to be.  I mean so it, it was that kind of thing.  And then there were people in the community, Frank Summers this attorney up the street, literally almost adopted me in the sense that he said I want you to come up and cut my grass.  Cut the grass in front of my--he had a lawn, which was (laughs)--you know we didn't have a lawn.  We had dirt in our backyard.  Where we lived, people didn't have lawns.  He had a sidewalk on, in front of his house.  That was, that was the upper end of black society in East St. Louis.  And I would go up and cut his lawn and then he'd say come on in and have lunch.  And he would sit down and talk.  What do you want to do with your life?  Where do you, what do you want to be?  Where do you think you--what, what contribution are you going to make?  You just can't be living, you got to make a contribution.  And he, he would, he would constantly have that conversation.  I had no idea what he was talking about.  I mean like I was--and then when I went to East Side, East St. Louis Senior High School, he used to bring me by more regularly.  You know eat lunch, come over and have dinner with us.  He'd come by and pick me up.  Come have dinner with us.  And I'd sit down with him and his wife.  And it's interesting.  His son in 1956 I believe it was, went to the University of California at Berkeley, which was a rarity at that time, which was a rarity at that time cause blacks went to Arkansas, Pine Bluff.  They went to Lincoln over in Jeff City [Jefferson City], Missouri.  They went to Langston Hughes in Oklahoma.  They went to South Carolina A&T [sic.] [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  That, that's where black people went, even the educated elite.  He sent his son to Berkeley.  And he had a freshman year there.  Went back, started sophomore year and they found him dead in his dorm room at the University of California at Berkeley.  And when they got through with the autopsy and all of the specs, he had a congenital heart disease.  And Frank Summers felt, always felt a little bit guilty about that because he had always pushed the boy to be an athlete.  He had always pushed him because the heroes back then, think of this.  We had three, Jesse Owens, Joe Lewis and Jackie Robinson.  That's the way you--and if he, if he could be a great athlete, then he, he had a shot.  So he always felt a little bit guilty about that.
Speaker 1: Okay we're gone pause here again for a second.
Story_ID: 1341
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So we were talking about three black sports heroes that all black kids--I know in the back of the comic books there's a picture of Joe Lewis standing there, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we--those, those were three heroes.  My, my father [Harry Edwards, Sr.] bought me a pair of boxing gloves when I was like five years old.  He said I used to box, you can box, you-- Joe Lewis, I mean that's the man.  He's the strongest man in the world.  You want to be like Joe.  Jesse Owens, I grew up, Jesse Owens was one of my heroes growing up.  And of course Jackie Robinson.  I mean that was--when you said Jackie Robinson, I mean you, you, you were talking about the world as far as my father was concerned, you were talking about the world.  These, this is what, this is what we had, these were the heroes we had.  And so Frank Summers had always pushed his son in that direction.  So when he wound up dead and they found out he had this congenital heart thing, I think it, I think it, I think it, it, it hurt him a little bit.  And he began to--he felt a little bad about that.  And so I mean he, he pushed--
Speaker 1: Well what did his son play?
Speaker 2: He played tennis, he was basically a tennis player.  He tried to get him into track and field.  And you know from what he told me, he just didn't have the make-up for it.  And so he ended up just hoping he was a, a good student.
Speaker 1: Now, now did Mr. Summers idolize Paul Robeson?  Cause you had mentioned him before.
Speaker 2: He never mentioned--
Speaker 1: Robeson was (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, he never mentioned Paul Robeson to me as an athlete. He mentioned Paul Robeson to me as a political figure, and what they did to him.  And he used to always talk about Jack Johnson and Paul Robeson almost in the same breath.  That you can't even mention their names, you know he used to say.  So he, he, he focused on what he felt were constructive role models, and that would have been Jesse Owens and Joe Lewis and Jackie Robinson.  Of course as I did research and, and, and helped to pioneer the sociology of sport and began to look at this history, you find out, I found out that Jack Johnson and Paul Robeson and the Harlem Globetrotters and the Renaissance Five and Jesse Owens and Joe Lewis were at the very foundation of what emerged going forward in terms of black sports involvement and outcomes and even were at the foundation of what ultimately became the Civil Rights Movement under the auspices of Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. So
Speaker 1: So let me go back and ask you this too.  I didn't ask anything about, about popular culture that much in terms of media and stuff like that.  I don't know if you--so if you could maybe just tell us about like what, what kind of information you were focusing on as a kid in terms of the radio or newspapers.  I don't know if you got the Pittsburgh Courier or the Defender.  Or if you, if you--the radio, movies you know.  What are those--
Speaker 2: You know I was quite a, I was quite, I was into junior high school really before I understood that there was a real broader world beyond what I knew on South 17th Street at Dunbar Elementary School and at Hughes-Quinn [Junior High School].  I mean I was, I was in, you know I was not really cognizant of white society because we got the East St. Louis black newspaper.
Speaker 1: Was that the Post Dispatch?
Speaker 2: No, no that's the St. Louis--we got the East St. Louis Crusader, and later Clyde Jordan started the East St. Louis Monitor.  Those are two black papers.  We read Jet Magazine.  We of course got Ebony Magazine and for those on a little bit of the saucy side, there was Sepia.  And that was the world that we looked at.  That was the lens on the world for us.  And so the East St. Louis Journal was a paper that would carry the results of games in a box score with--for Lincoln High School.  But for the most part it focused on the East St. Louis Flyers, and the other white schools in the area, Belleville, Caseyville, Granite City.
Speaker 1: Now in those days now, did the Lincoln High School play other black high schools around the area or in, in the area?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they played, they played black high schools in Missouri, predominantly black high schools.  They would even go down to Tennessee and play high schools.
Speaker 1: They weren't allowed to play the white high schools.
Speaker 2: Well it wasn't that they were not allowed to play, the other schools wouldn't schedule them.  They would not schedule them.  They were first of all, their first excuse in many instances was that there would be race riots.  The next thing of course was what happens when we get beat?  Because there was a history demonstrating that Negro athletes could perform.  I mean Jack Johnson and Paul Robeson and Jesse Owens and Joe Lewis and the Harlem Globetrotters and the Renaissance Five, the Negro Leagues had proven that negro athletes could perform.  So there was that concern  And so between those two things and the possibility of having to go home and home, that is you play one game at their place, the next year you play at the Negro school, they didn't want any part of that.  So it wasn't that they didn't want to play these white schools, it was that the system was such under segregation where the white schools would simply never schedule them.
Speaker 1: I just want to make that clear cause people in the future are not going to understand.
Speaker 2: No, it's like trying to explain today colored people having to ride on the back of the bus.  I mean my white neighbors, Dr. Edwards you got to be kidding.  I said no (laughs).  Just don't understand.
Speaker 1: Right.  So when you were, okay so you went to middle school at Hughes-Quinn and then, then, so did you all have all the sports in middle school?  Did you play?
Speaker 2: We had football, basketball, there was some track, but we didn't have a track so that was, you know a few sprints and a few people who ran the distances.  There was some cross country.  But for the most part, there was basketball and football, and that's what we really lived by.  You'd have some kids that would play baseball, but there was no place, there was nobody to play.  And so in junior high school, you'd have some kids playing baseball, but it would be basically just a baseball team, they go and you know, maybe play the, the, the freshmen at Lincoln or something like that, you know.  But for the most part it was basketball and, and football and we would have maybe seven games in a season against various junior high schools, but it wouldn't be anything huge, you know it just, it wouldn't be anything huge.  We'd even play as we got into the integration phase and they began to integrate the junior high school, we'd play Belleville or we'd play over here in Cahokia, Illinois, some junior or Centralia
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 1342
Speaker 1: Now was Buddy Young a hero when you were growing up in, in Illinois?
Speaker 2: You know Buddy Young went to University of Illinois.  The hero for me growing up, coming out of the University of Illinois was J.C. Caroline. I mean he was just a fantastic football player, played both ways, yeah. And, and he was just a tremendous, tremendous athlete. So he was the guy that everybody knew about and then later on in the, in the '50s [1950's], course Ollie Matson came out from San Francisco[California] with the then Chicago Cardinals. And he was a big, he was a big hero for us.  We--
Speaker 1: He just passed last week.
Speaker 2: Oh, I know.  Yeah Ollie just, just died. That was a fantastic story that they had up at the University of San Francisco when he and Berl Toler were the only two blacks on the team. Both of them starters, All Stars and I think it was--university didn't want to play them, University of West Virginia in a bowl game unless they left the negroes at home and the, the players from the, from the University of San Francisco say hey, we don't play the bowl game then.  And the players literally voted not to play, not to play the game.  Bob Sinclair, all of those guys voted, hey we don't play the game then. So it's a nice history there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Berl Toler went on to become a referee, right?
Speaker 2: Went on became, became one of the first referees, black referees in the National, in the National Football League.  Know him very well.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I just wondered if Buddy Young had been (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew about Buddy Young, I knew about Buddy Young but Buddy Young as a running back was special.  I mean he was special.  But when you get a guy going both ways the way J. C. Caroline did, I mean that--playing defensive back and also running back for the Bears.  I mean and, and, and the Bears were, were, were our team.  I mean in, in--there was no, there was no St. Louis Rams or St. Louis Cardinals, there was the Bears and the, and the Cardinals in Chicago.  And you, you know it's like the [Chicago] Cubs and [Chicago] White Sox, you pick one or the other.  And so that, that was, that--J.C. Caroline was the, was the, was the guy for, for us back at that time as kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So I'm just--so now when it comes time to come to--to go to high school, now this is where integration.
Speaker 2: Yes, 1957, 1957.  And I did not even live in the district where if you were black you went to that high school, to East Side High School.  I lived in point in fact, I was so deep in Lincoln's district that to go beyond where I lived you, you were beyond the city limits.  So it was some arrangement that enabled me to go to East Side, and this was largely Frank Summers and Leo Gooden and a number of other people, Ester Saverson saying yeah, if you want to send your boy to East Side, he can go to East Side.  Telling my father that and that's how I wound up going to East Side.  I had no idea even how I was going to get out there, much less where it was.
Speaker 1: Was it because of athletics that they, they all--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --recognized you?  I mean the, the black community, Attorney Summers and Mrs. Saverson.
Speaker 2: It was my father, he knew them, they knew him.  It was my own persona, whatever that was at twelve, thirteen years old, and the fact I think that I looked people in the eye when they were talking to me.  And that was something that a lot of kids at that time didn't do.  Matter of fact, black people were taught you don't, you don't look folks in the eye, you know--it's--each other, yeah.  But you know--
Speaker 1: Today this is true.
Story_ID: 1343
Speaker 1: And even kids, you know.  You can run into kids today.  You talk to them and they, they look, they won't, you know--but I always, you know.  And then with the, with the size and everything you know and looking people in the eye.  So I think that, that people saw something there and I would, would talk.  Because we always talked in our house.  My father always talked.  We always had discussions.  He always let us know what was going on, what's happening here, what's happening there, what did, what does he mean by that?
Speaker 2: Now this is, this is significant too because it's so many people that grew up during the time that you grew up and even the time that I grew up, which was about seven years later, where parents were telling them, said you know, speak when spoken to, shut up when grown folks are talking, and all that sort of thing.  And it was very--they were dismissive of young people's questions and ideas and you do it because I said do it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well one of the things, one of the benefits that came from my family splitting up and my mother [Adelaide Cruise] leaving, was that if my father [Harry Edwards, Sr.] didn't talk to me, especially when it was just he and I there, he didn't talk to anybody.  So we had to talk to each other.  So we'd be sitting up and something would be going on around Eisenhower [U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1953-1961] ending the Korean War [1950-1953].  And he would talk about that.  Say boy look at this.  I'm gone tell you what's going on here.  Nasser [President of Egypt Gamal Abdel Nasser], nationalizing the Suez Canal [1956], let me tell you what's happening.  Look at what's going on here.  You know I remember the day when Uncle Sam would go in there and bomb him and blow him up and take it back.  He said hey, the world's changing.  Pay attention here, the world's changing.  I mean I remember, I remember him saying that.  So one of the, one of the benefits of this thing breaking up was that if he didn't talk to me, he didn't have nobody, he didn't have anybody to talk to.  And sometime he'd come in and just a book laying over in a corner on the floor would catch his eye.  He'd say boy get, bring me that, get that book over there.  Have you read this?  No I haven't read it.  Well you need to read this.  You need to read it.  Let me, let me, let me read something to you.  He'd turn to page 213 or whatever and he'd go through and start reading and say now that's important to know.  That's--but you got to know the--what came before to really understand this.  You know he, he'd do stuff--that, that's what--that's the kind of exchange we would have.  So I think that in leaving that situation and interacting with people like Mr. Summers, interacting with people like Ester Saverson and Leo Gooden and Buchanan the pharmacist and so forth, that there was a different persona that was projected.  But a lot of it was that they were just into helping young negro kids.
Speaker 2: Now were you a good student in school?
Speaker 1: I was a good student in elementary school.  By the time I got to Hughes-Quinn my first year, I went out for football and there was all these kids from all these different other places, cause not all of them went to Dunbar.  Hughes-Quinn was the catch basin for all of the black elementary schools on the south side.  And by my second at Hughes-Quinn, hey half of the people who came out, came in with me, were gone.  They had dropped out of school.  They were--because I was young, I was like eleven, something like that cause I had skipped a grade.  Maybe even ten, I had skipped a grade in elementary school.  Ten or eleven, somewhere in there, they were like twelve, thirteen, fourteen, some of them, some of them even sixteen because they came up from Mississippi and that's what their grade level was so we would have people in junior high school who were nineteen years old.  We'd have people in junior high school--I remember one guy in junior high school who was twenty-two years old.  But they were in there to get the education.  Nobody thought anything of it.  Because hey, if you're here to get an education, what difference does it make how old you are?  So--but what that did was it created a different kind of climate.  People had different examples and contacts and connections where you had that kind of grade gradation and so forth in a junior high school.  So by the time my second year came around, a lot of the people that I came into school with my first year, had dropped out.  And I remember (laughs), I remember going home to--and telling my father that I wasn't going back to school because Shine and Half Head and Long Head, a whole bunch of other people done dropped out of school.  He was reading the paper.  And he said--he let me set there and talk for five minutes about who had dropped out and who wasn't come back and so-and-so was here last year and he's gone and such-and-such is out of school and so forth and they ain't doing nothing there anyway.  And then he looked up, he setting there looking at the paper.  He, he looked up and said you through?  I said yeah.  Turned the page on the paper and said you going to school if I have to send you in an ambulance (laughs).  And that was it.  It never came up again.  It never came up again.  He said no, you going to school if I have to send you in an ambulance.  And, and, and he meant every word of it.
Speaker 2: He didn't care anything about what Half Head was doing.
Speaker 1: He didn't care anything about what Rail Head was doing, what, what, what Headquarters was doing, Half Head, all these buddies we had and these nicknames.  He didn't even care.  He said hey, don't bring me that.  He said you're going to school if I have to send you in an ambulance.  And, and, and he meant it.  There was, there was--cause when he, when he really, really got serious, he would get this, he would get this Barry White bass in his voice and you knew hey, that, that's the end of that one.  That was done.  So I went on, I went on back to school.
Story_ID: 1344
Speaker 1: So, so I have to ask this question too just because I, you know I just wondered, I wondered--I know in my little town we had a YMCA.  Was there a Y or, or a, or a settlement house or someplace where kids played?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Not, not, not for--the YMCA was segregated in East St. Louis.  The--we had, what we had in East St. Louis was two theaters.  We had the Harlem Theater and the Deluxe Theater.  We could go to the Majestic on weekdays from Tuesday to Thursday, and we had to sit in the balcony.  We couldn't go on Friday, Saturday, Sunday.  Monday the theater was closed.  So we had Lincoln Park, which is where the baseball teams, the Negro League baseball teams would come and play.  And that was really about it.  The rest of it was juke joints, Cosmopolitan, the Ruby's Lounge, Palm Club.  I mean but, but there--I mean you saw everybody there.
Speaker 1: What did you say the major strip was in St. Louis, the street?
Speaker 2: The street that I lived on was 17th Street.  The street I lived on was 17th Street, but the street where all the businesses were, the Manhattan Club, the theaters and so forth, was Broadway.  And then there was a group of entrepreneurs who were on 15th Street between Broadway and Bond Avenue.  I mean they had a hat shop; there, they had--where people blocked and cleaned hats, cause everybody wore a hat back then.  You had a barbeque stands there.  Right of 15th and Bond you had the Rock, Rock Drug Store, which, which is where they had all of the records, you could buy records there and all this kind of stuff.  So there was--Broadway was the main strip, and then you had 15th Street and to a certain extent on Bond Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So now at the high school, now this is your first experience with integration, right, in a school?
Speaker 2: My first experience with white folks.  I mean I had never been around white folks in my life.  And you know it's interesting.  It took me about three months before I could tell them apart.  It was, it was unbelievable to me.  Cause I had never, I had literally never been around whites.
Speaker 1: Now this is serious.  This is not a joke or anything, this is serious.
Speaker 2: I couldn't tell them apart.  They all had the crew cuts, they all wore the double thread shoes with the little skinny leg pants and the, the button down collars and everything and so forth, and sounded the same, looked the same, talked the same.  And I, I you know and, and what got me into really getting into them as individuals was participating in sports because they were on the football team, they were on the basketball team.  And after I got to know them as individuals, it's not, it's the, the physical features alone that gives one distinctiveness.  It's the personality and the relationship that generates that distinctiveness.  And to a--between not having had that contact with whites at all, on any level, and really withdrawing when I got into an environment that was so hostile to me.  Nobody spoke, nobody said how you doing, nobody said what's happening, nobody said how's your dad doing?  You're just there, so you withdraw.  You, you put, you put the barriers up.  So not only is there no personal relationship, you're looking at them through a number of defensive barriers and not until the personal relationship begin to develop, and I began to take those barriers down, could I literally tell them apart.  But you know something?  They couldn't tell us apart either.  Because they would walk up to me and say hey, Webb.  I'd say I'm not Webb, I'm Harry, you know (laughs).  They couldn't tell us apart cause they didn't know what to do with us.  But that's of the, that's part of the process.
Story_ID: 1345
Speaker 1: That's true, very true.  Okay so you said you didn't really concentrate very much on, on academics.
Speaker 2: Once I left, once I left junior high school, which was the--a lot of things happened in junior high school.  I remember in 1955 I believe it was, we were in Mr. Crawford's woodshop and these kids were passing around this, this Jet Magazine.  And everybody was oh, man, oh man.  Somebody said hey Harry, you got to come see this, man.
Speaker 1: This the centerfold, or--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: No.  This is the picture of Emmett Till in his coffin.  And I looked at it and first I recall, I mean I had had that experience before.  You know when we went down to the river when they found them kids down there and said we gone show--this is what swimming in this river will get you.  I want you to remember this so you can pull--you can smell, you could smell it a half a mile before you got to where they pulled them out at.  I had had that experience before at the railroad track when this old man got hit by a train.  And I didn't expect, you know everybody was passing the Jet Magazine around.  I'm sitting up there working on my flower box in woodshop.  Said oh Harry, you got to see this man.  So I'm, oh let me see--oh, what is this?  You know, and what, what the hell, what is this?  And so I remember going home and telling my father [Harry Edwards, Jr.], said hey you know what?  Did you see this Jet Magazine, this Jet Magazine thing, you know, or this, this kid, this, this fourteen, fifteen year old kid.  Wasn't much older than I was.  I said look at what they, why did, why they do that?  I mean where was his daddy?  Where was his--and my father said yeah I saw it, I saw it in the barbershop a couple of days ago.  I said what, well what, where, where are these people?  Why would--what's going on with this?  And he said well he had no business down there.  He's from Chicago [Illinois].  He had no business down there.  Down there messing with them damn people.  They, they, they don't like Negroes.  They been doing that for 300 years, you know.  And that was the very first time, cause I thought that my father--I thought my daddy was about 6'3" [six feet, three inches], was about 230 pounds, and had a thirty-two inch waist.  And he was just an imposing man for that time.  And I thought he was the strongest man in the world, there wasn't nothing he couldn't take care of.  Had the body, had the mind, had the voice, had--and for the first time it dawned on me.  That was the very first time that it dawned on me that there was some things going on in this country, in this world that not even my daddy could protect me from.  And that, that, that changed me in a fundamental way, changed me in a fundamental way.  It, it, it meant that I was on my own at some, on some levels.  And it also meant that there was some things that you know, that, that I was gone have to handle from that point on.  I mean that, that's when I really began to move away, to break with my father.  And I remember when it really came to a head, it's, it's amazing.  I must have been about thirteen years old.  This time, like I said I was big, I mean I was blown up to 6'5" [six feet, five inches], about 240 pounds and it wasn't like I was lifting weights and running, it was just big, always been just big and muscular, just like him.  And it used to be we'd get into it and he'd whap, you know, boom, boom, you know.  So I was thirteen years old.  I think it was my first year in high school, my first year in high school.  And, and, and something had happened.  I think I had taken a car or something like that.  He came home and it was parked somewhere where he hadn't left it.  I didn't have a driver's license, didn't have anything, had no business driving.  And so he came in the house.  Didn't I tell you not to drive that car?  Get out here and kill somebody. We ain't got nothing, you ain't got no driver's license, we ain't got nothing.  I told you not to drive that car.  And he went to swing and when he went to swing, I grabbed him.  I said uh-uh.  I said we gone have to talk about it.  And he stopped and he looked at me.  And I remember tears came to his eyes.  And he relaxed and said boy you ain't got not business driving.  You won't be able to get a driver's license until you sixteen, seventeen years old, and I can't pay for no accidents.  That was the last time.  But it started with that Emmett Till thing.  Because from that point on, he was no longer the biggest, strongest, toughest man in the world in my eyes.  So in junior high school a lot of things happened between my second year in junior high school and my first year in high school, where I just transitioned away from a lot of things.  And also away from academics.  One when I got to East Side, they didn't care.  Most of my teachers didn't care.  They said hey man look, we, we didn't ask for this.  Didn't know what to--and it wasn't that they were bad people.  How do you deal with that?  A court edict from Washington, D.C. drops this on you in East St. Louis with that history and that background and these people, and now you got to deal with it.  They did the best they could I'm quite certain.  But hey like I said, I left high school utterly unscathed by education, they never laid a glove on me.
Speaker 1: Okay we're gone pause right here again for a second.
Story_ID: 1346
Speaker 1: Okay I just wanted to ask you like what, what is--how did they decide what kind of grades to give you and--
Speaker 2: Well the first had to decide what class they were gone put you in.  And we tended to go to class, Ms. Klute's (ph.) English class I was assigned to for three straight years.  Well Ms. Klute was also the head of the cheerleader group.  She was the one that taught and monitored and the faculty member that oversaw the cheerleaders for basketball and football.  The other classes that I took were classes that were required and every class that I took that was required, there were a bunch of other athletes in there.  Some--they, they you know I, we had to have a foreign language, had to pass a semester of foreign language.  It took me three semesters to pass Spanish One.  And I remember Mr. Delanore (ph.) who was a pretty straight old dude.  He came into class one day I didn't have my homework, didn't know where my textbook was, hadn't done anything when he asked me about the assignment.  I never did even look up.  And he walked over to me and he said, "You know what Edwards?  He said you could do anything that you wanted to do, that you want to do, you have that kind of intelligence.  But you know what?  You gone end up right back here in East St. Louis on the street just as sure as you don't begin to apply yourself."  This was my Spanish teacher.  He was rare.  Mr. Delanore, I'll never forget him.  For the most part, they put us in classes where we gone get a passing grade.  My senior year I had, I was about six credits short in terms of what I had to take.  They put me in a pre-flight aeronautics class with Mr. Konig (ph.).  And what, what I did in that class along with about fifteen other football players, was to read Sports Illustrated magazines, sports magazines, talk about the games coming up, talk about what was happening on the professional level.  And at the end of the thing, he'd give us a test, here are the answers.  Come back tomorrow, get ready to take the test.  Take the test, okay you got a B minus.  I also took a cooking class.  They put me in a, there was nothing left so they put me in a cooking class that I could pass and still stay eligible and get out.  I took a cooking class.  And I remember they had a, they were making blueberry muffins.  And I was in there with about--in this one section, without about nine girls, a couple of negro girls, all the others white.  So of course I'm gone spend my time talking and lollygagging and clowning and messing with them and, and what happened was that my muffins burned up, in fact almost set the oven on fire.  So the teacher said no, no, no.  You got to go someplace else.  So I went back and took Mr. Konig's pre-flight aeronautics class again and got credit for that.  And that's, that's--just moved on out, just moved on out.  Out of the school, "graduated".  So they did what they needed to do for those of us who were obviously you know, requiring greater direction, supervision, instruction, attention.  They did what they needed to do to move us through the system.  Most of the guys that I was there with wound up on some kind of football scholar--a lot of them went to the historically black schools, Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] in particular.  But others like Cloyd Webb went to Iowa [University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa], Donald Brooks went to Purdue [Purdue University, Hammond, Indiana] where his brother had gone.  I had, I visited Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], Drake University [Des Moines, Iowa].  I had a letter from USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles] out here because I was a discus thrower.  We came in one, two, three in the state discus I believe.  And when I got ready to decide on where I was going to go, Frank Summers told me hey, you know what?  You need to go out to California.
Speaker 1: Now, now this, this--before you get to that point, I just wanted to ask if you--now were you like--did they have like All City designation and what did you play in football?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  You got--I played offensive tackle, defensive tackle, little defensive end.  They--those were white positions, especially the tackle positions.  So you didn't find a lot of blacks getting All State, those were white positions.  You know you played running back, you can play little defensive back, you can play a little tight end, so forth and so on.  But those were white positions, especially at East Side [East St. Louis High School].  So you didn't get a lot of recognition, All State and track a field, because I graduated in January I only had a half a season of basketball my last, my last year.  But I had a number of those athletic honors, but I never could figure out why guys got honors and some guys didn't.  You know I, I never could figure that one out.
Story_ID: 1347
Speaker 1: Did you, you ever have any conflict in terms of with the coaching staff in terms of, of race?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. I had, I had conflict on a number of levels.  I mean I (laughs), in the black community, men had moustaches. You know I mean we always had moustaches. I mean I don't care whether you're, whether you're talking about jazz artists. Black men wore mous--moustaches. And so growing up, you know once you began to get hair, I mean that's a sign hey man, I'm getting, I'm getting real here, you know, I'm getting right, you know.  (Laughs)  And so when we went over to East Side, we just, just kept the moustache on.  So my coach said what is that?  You know  that do mean, what is that?  This is basketball coach Pick Dana (ph.), All American basketball player, University of Illinois, head basketball coach, East St. Louis Senior High School. Said what is that?  I said what do you mean, what is that?  I said that's a, that's a moustache. My daddy got a moustache, my, all my cousins got moustaches, my uncles got moustaches, my grand daddy got a moustache (laughs).  He said well we don't wear moustaches here.  He sent me to the Principal's office, Worth Downing (ph.), used to be the football coach.  So he says if you come, principal tells me if you come back here tomorrow and you got that moustache, I'm gone dry shave you.  So I went home and told my old man [Harry Edwards, Sr.].  I said hey, I said Pops I said I'm gone tell you something.  I said they told me that if I come back to school with this moustache that they gone dry shave me.  My old man looked up and said well who said that they were gone dry shave you?  I said Worth Downing, the principal at East Side and Pick Dana said I can't come back out for basketball until I cut it off.  So he said well don't cut it off.  Said I'm going back up to the school with you tomorrow.  So I walk into the school, we didn't go to class or anything.  We went straight to the principal's office.  And so my old man looked at the principal and said I understand that you told my boy here that if he comes back in here with a moustache, you gone dry shave him.  And he said yeah well we have a rule around here that, that students can't have facial hair.  He said hey, wait a minute.  I don't care about that.  He said this is what I want you to understand.  If you dry shave him, I'm coming in here and dry shave you.  So he looked at my old man, he looked at my old man and said well you know if, if it's that important to you, and, and if that's where you're coming from on it, we, we can, you know we, we can let it go.  But we do have a rule around here.  He said I respect rules.  But you don't tell my son that you gone dry shave him.  He said I been in places where they dry shaved people.  And he was talking about that experience that he had in jail where, you know the guards would go in and, and just, just shave a guy.  So that was the end of that one.  So my whole time during, and it finally got to the place that they let, if a black kid wanted to wear a moustache, if he was wearing a moustache, he had a moustache, you know.  And so that was, that was, that was one of the, one of the problems.  But for the most part, they, they let us, they let us alone.  The only other area where I can remember there being a, an issue--it came down to the coeds.  Came down to the coeds.  There was some guys there that dated, some that dated some of the--not girls going to that school, but white girls from other schools and other areas.  And they would actually show up with them at a football game, they'd bring them to a football game and they playing on the field and everything.  Then they're leaving afterwards and one thing and another.  And boy you talk about rubbing people the wrong way.  It was, it was ugly.  I mean it really got ugly.  And so all this stuff that I had been reading about, you know it's not the color of your skin or who you are or where you live and so forth, only how well you play the game, and from that you get respect.  Early on I learned the hard way that that's not the case.  Because when Avondis (ph.) Jackson showed up with his white girlfriend, this an All State running back, All State hurdler.  He was gone.  So hey, next thing I know Avondis is in the military [United States Military], he done joined the Army.  So you know, and I remember my father used to say, "Hey, you know, not only do they not want you dating them girls, they don't want you looking at them girls.  Say you can find yourself in deep trouble for just reckless eyeballing."  That was one of his, one of his statements--"You go over there, you keep your mind on your business and try not to raise a whole bunch of issues.  We don't need to deal with that."  So that, that was that kind of stuff, there was that kind of stuff going on.  And every now and then you know, somebody would slip and drop an N bomb in a casual conversation or a Sambo bomb, or one of those kind of things or let me feel your hair.  You know I mean that, that kind of stuff.  That, that was the environment.  But these were people with a particular cultural history and heritage trying to come to grips, to make sense of, to make functional sense of a situation that they didn't ask for, probably didn't support, and were in no way prepared to deal with.
Story_ID: 1348
Speaker 1: Now I, I, I was--okay. [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now I, I take it that, I assume that you all like followed the Civil Rights Movement in your household.  Your, your father [Harry Edwards, Sr.] probably followed it fairly closely.  What, what were you thinking of the activities of Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in those days?  1960 he would have, you know the--I guess he'd been in Montgomery [Alabama] maybe so then, I don't know, what--
Speaker 1: My father was leery of the early Civil Rights Movement, 1956 the Montgomery bus efforts and so forth and so on.  And as I thought back on it over the years, I think that he was looking at it through two lenses.  One, the lens of a man with the responsibilities and obligations that at least on a nominal level he had.  And two, he saw the beatings, the killings, the cops turning on, and he, he, he--what if those were my kids?  What if those were my children?  What if that is happening in this community?  And I think that he was leery of it.  That was not a set of responsibilities and obligations that he felt up to.  And even after I became involved in the Movement, much less you know involved with the Black Panther Party and Olympic Project for Human Rights and all this other stuff.  He was fearful, not of--fearful for me, fearful for me.  And I think that that was the way that he looked at that.  I think he admired that generation.  Because Dr. King was twenty-six years old when Montgomery happened, the bus strike happened.  He looked at that younger generation and said wow, you know, man that's taking on a bunch.  And he was, he was fearful of it.  He was, he was, he was leery of it because that's not the way that things had been done with his generation.  He didn't understand that like me and all of the guys that came in the '60s [1960's], that movement in the, in the '50s [1950'] was breaking with their political, civil rights fathers and mothers and as often happens, those fathers and mothers find it frightening in some ways, at some levels.  Not because of the action taken, but because of their concerns about that generation that has undertaken that struggle at that level.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So when you're a senior in high school, what was your world view, or what were you, and also like what were your prospects?  What did you see yourself becoming?
Speaker 1: When I was a senior in high school, I didn't have a--in 19, as late as 1960, I did not have a civil rights focused world view.  This situation is what it is.  What my father taught me is that you don't have to put up with it.  Even though he was leery of the organized mass effort on an individual basis, he'd walk right up in, in the high school and told this white principal hey, you dry shave him, I'm gone dry shave you.  But that was not a focus.  I was still essentially where the, the generation immediately before had been, which is when you come out of high school.  If you're, if you're a black male, you, you have about three choices.  Two of which are shaky.  The first is you can go to work at the packing house loading skins or hair, what they call the hair house, lugging beef.  You can join the military [United States Military], or you have the skills, you can become an athlete.  And the two things that you were really left with if you didn't want to just go out there and stand up next to your father at Monsanto Chemical Plant or at Swift Packing House, was the military and athletics.  I was fortunate enough to have some athletic options.  And so as the guys I played football with left and went to Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and Iowa [University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa] and Purdue [Purdue University, Hammond, Indiana], Iowa State [Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa], Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and so forth, Frank Summers sat down with me and said first of all, you got to get out East St. Louis, and you got to get out of the Midwest.  If you're at Purdue or if you're at Iowa, or if you're at Iowa State, or if you're at Indiana,, you gone end up coming back here and the next thing you know, you're married here, you got a family here.  Now you're here teaching over at Hughes-Quinn or over at Lincoln.  And you want, you, you have more prospects than that.  You need to get out of here.  He literally in 1960, wrote me a check for $500 and said hey, go to California, go and talk to the people at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles] and see what your options are.  Well course when I got out here, first thing the people at USC asked me was have you taken the college admissions test?  You know, I didn't know anything about any college admissions test.  My, my, my dad didn't know anything about a college admissions test.
Story_ID: 1349
Speaker 1: So now, now did they bring you out?  Did they pay for you to come out as a recruitment?
Speaker 2: Frank Summers, well I had--Frank Summers paid, cause I hadn't given SC, I--all the deadlines, all the dates, everything had passed, plus it was January.  Cause I graduated in January.  So in order to get the thing at SC, I would have had to dealt with that--the--either that February coming up, or I would have to have dealt with it the year before to come in and enroll in January.  But in any event, they said hey, we got time.  Have you taken a college admissions?  Well we can't do anything until you take the college admissions test, cause we have to see what your scores and so forth and so on and this and that the other.  By that time, you know when it came down to the math and the reading and the literature and all the other stuff, I couldn't even--you know what?  I looked at the first two pages, I said hey, forget this.  You know, I, I can't do this.  You know it was, it was like, it was like going someplace that you're all excited about, yeah this is a good idea.  I think this is going to work, especially you come out in January and people are walking around in shirt sleeves and oranges on trees and folks walking around in shorts and everything and I'm coming out of East St. Louis where when I left out of there that January, it was sleeting.  On a, on a train coming to Los Angeles [California].  And so it's like going to a place where you have been all--you all ready to go and everything, but when you get there, they want four pieces of ID, three with pictures and, and two with a copy of your birth certificate on the back.  I mean what you gone do with that?  You know so they pushed this in front of--hey, well you got to take the college admissions exam.  I said hey, you know what?  I can't do this.
Speaker 1: Had you ever been out of East St. Louis [Illinois]?  I mean, I mean any distance to--
Speaker 2: Except to, no.  Except to go up to Champaign [Illinois] for the state track meet, or to go down to Centralia [Illinois] to play a football game, that was it.  So this was really, this was just blowing me away.  So what happened was they said hey look, said we got some community colleges which are good schools, and after you go there for a year, you can come here and you don't have to take the college admissions exam, you just transfer.  But you got to have passing grades.  And since it's January hey, you, you--just get all your paperwork done this spring and everything, you know, you in good shape.  It's gone set you back about a year, but as a freshman, you can't participate in football anyway.  You can't participate in track.  So they had three schools, they had LA [Los Angeles] City, they had Bakersfield Community College and they had Fresno City College.  Fresno's, in Fresno I had relatives.  My father's mother and her husband James Edwards, had left Pine Bluff, Arkansas and moved to Fresno.  So I said well I'll go to Fresno and that way I don't have to pay for rent, you know.  So I moved in with my grandmother, James Edwards, her husband was dead by then, 1960.  And I moved in with her, and went to Fresno City College.  And because it was January to June, Id id what I always do, I went out and participated in track.  Set a school record, which I think was finally broken after forty-one years or forty-two years, something like that.  Set a national discus record at the Fresno Relays, played on the basketball team.  And, but after six months in Fresno.  Now you have to realize I'm coming out of East St. Louis.  You talk about culture shock.  I'd never been around Latinos, never been around Asians.  They were talking about going and getting--doing--do you want to work during the summer?  I said yeah I want to work during the summer.  I want some money for the fall.  Well we going out and cut grapes.  I said going out and cut grapes, what does that mean?  Well we just go out and just cut the grapes off the vine and put--I went out one day to cut grapes in Fresno that June.  It must have been 115 degrees, there were these Latino farm workers, me, my cousins were out there with them, 115 degrees, gnats in the morning, spiders on the vines.  Every now and then you see a snake run through there.  You see ground squirrels running through there.  No, no shade anywhere and as far as you can look, grape vines.  And these--everybody starts off together.  But I looked up after about a half hour, them Latino farm workers was so far I could barely make them out, up the road.  And they, they, they done already filled up.  You got 25 cents a pallet.  They, they'd already filled up about thirty pallets.  I'm still working on my first one.  I went by and said hey you know, I can't do this (laughs).  I can't do this.  I went back to the shoebox and I had a basketball scholarship to San Jose State [San Jose State University, San Jose, California], and that's how I ended up at San Jose State.  Yeah I couldn't, I couldn't do that.
Story_ID: 1350
Speaker 1: But at Fresno City College [Fresno, California], that's where I also became a student.  I reconnected with what was so much fun and so enjoyable in elementary school.  And my first year of, of junior high school.  So I became a student at Fresno, at Fresno City College and that's how I ended up at, at San Jose State.  But the, the other thing is Frank Summers wanted me out of East St. Louis [Illinois] because I had had some run-ins with some, some of the gang members, Blue Tam Gang, the 19th Street Pirates.  Had had some run-ins with my, my, my disposition at the, at the high school, East St. Louis Senior High School was to say the least, cranky, you know.  I mean I, I just and, and I just didn't have that, that level of trust that you have to have in coaches and teachers and so forth to do well and to show up energetic and energized and ready to learn and ready to play.  I, I, I looked at this whole situation with a very jaundiced eye.  But you have to realize that I was living with another adult man, my father [Harry Edwards, Sr.], who talked to me every day about life and reality and other people and circumstances.  So even though I was thirteen, fourteen years old, fifteen years old, sixteen when I graduated, when I left East Side, as far as my mind was concerned I may as well have been forty-five, I may as well have been--cause I looked at things--I didn't trust anything.  You got to show me that it's right.  So even when I came to California, my, my next--okay well what's my next option.  Don't tell me about well we'll get this together and you I my corner.  I didn't want to hear it.  You know because here, here's my goals, here's what I need to do.  But that came from that, that--those years of nobody but me and my father being in the house.
Speaker 2: Okay so, so after Fresno City College, you, you, you didn't, you, you really didn't finish that, that program.
Speaker 1: No, I was there for one semester.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: One semester.  That heat, the grapes, the, the whole, you know and I had, I, I had a great career down there.  I left there with a B plus average.  I really gotten, got into--I mean taking English and history and even took a math class and sociology and social science.  I had a great athletic experience down there, set a national discus record, set the school record, had a great relationship with the coaches and so forth, played a little basketball.  But I, I couldn't.  Fresno looked like a dead end for me.
Speaker 2: Okay so it was the influence of Attorney Summers who got you to go north, northern California.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: Further north to San Jose State [San Jose State University, San Jose, California].
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  And I told him, I said hey look, I got a, I have a basketball scholarship to a four year school.  He said what is it, where is it?  I said San Jose State, and he said how do you spell that?  And so we were talking and everything and he said so you're going to San Josie.  I said yeah, they call it, it's pronounced San Jose State, because nobody had ever heard of it, you know.  Of course in 1960 after the Olympics everybody had heard because that's where Ray Norton was and Bob Porner and all these guys were in Rome.  And when that thing blew up, now everybody knew about San Jose State.
Speaker 2: Yeah the '60 [1960] Olympics, yeah that, that--'60 [1960] Olympics was in Rome.
Speaker 1: Was in Rome, that's right.  And, and show you how, how life is.  When I came up to San Jose State in June of 1960 to look at the place, is this what I really want to do?  They had a, the, the boxing coach here of the Olympic team was Julie Menendez.  Julie Menendez was a boxing coach and I believe he was also the soccer coach.  But he's from East St. Louis.  And so when I came here and the basketball coach, Stu Enman (ph.) say hey, we got a kid here from East St. Louis, that's your neck of the woods.  He say yeah East St. Louis, yeah well let me, let me, let me--have him come around.  We're practicing this evening over at the gym.  And so when I showed up that evening to meet Julie Menendez, he had a, had his boxing team working out.  One of the guys on the team that was working out was Mohammad Ali, Cassius Clay at the time.  I thought he was insane.  He was talking, skinny dude, about 170, looked like about 170 pounds, but quick, fast.  And we had another kid there by the name of Harry Campbell, who was also on that team.  He, he ended up getting beat to death in the ring in 1960, I think it was 1962.  But I met him there because he was a San Jose State guy.  This was when boxing was an NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] sport.  So he was a San Jose State guy working under Julie at San Jose State.  So it, it was interesting.  I had come up from Fresno just to look at the school and everything and talk to the basketball coach and he say well you're also a track athlete.  I said yeah, I, I threw a discuss a little bit.  He said yeah, I saw where you set a national discus record.  You know what?  He said remember Stu Enman saying that hey, that's a, that's a, that's a different kind of combination, basketball and then weights, throwing the shot and throwing the discus.  I mean football and the discus or the shot put, yeah.  But basketball, said if you get a guy who can both throw the discus and play basketball, you have a pretty good athlete.  I said well I hope so, I hope so anyway.  But it was, it was, it was a fascinating time during, during that period because I, I never knew that, that people like Mohammad Ali and the track team and all the--at San Jose State, that all this would come marching back years later.
Speaker 2: Okay we have to pause here again for a second.
Story_ID: 1351
Speaker 1: So San Jose State [San Jose State University, San Jose, California], 1960, now did you play, now if I remember correctly, Rafer Johnson was the big hero--
Speaker 2: UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles].
Speaker 1: Of the Olympics, '60 [1960].
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And that's the big, let us say goat if you would, was a sprinter Ray Norton from San Jose State.  We had--he had been touted as the world's fastest human that whole previous two years.  I mean he was a phenomenal track athlete.  And he got over there and they had a kid that the American press had never built up, never built up.  The American people didn't even know about him.  And the only thing we knew about him at the beginning of the 100 yard sprint, 100 meter race, was that he had a heck of a start.  But they never, you know everything was Ray Norton the world's fastest human and so forth.  He did, he had the world's fastest time.  But I don't think he had ran against this kid.  Kid by the name of Armin Hary out of Germany.  Had a lightening start.  And by the time Ray Norton got out of the blocks and straightened up, Armin Hary was way out in front.  He came in sixth in that race, didn't even medal.  Then they get to the 200, or the 220 I forget which one they were running at that time.  And again there's a kid that the Americans don't know anything about cause the American press is all about the American athlete and here's Ray Norton, the world's fastest human.  We know that he, you know so forth and so on.  But there's a kid from Italy that in point of fact, they were making fun of cause he wore a beret and shades and had these long black socks.  By the name of Libio Beruti, 200.  He came out of the blocks, whew, Ray Norton came in sixth.  Then they get to the relay.  The 4x100 relay, and somewhere or another somebody ran out of the zone.  They were out of the zone when they got the stick.  Norton got the rap for that one, took off too soon, disqualified.  They got to the 4x200, each one running 200 yards, and they Dave Sime, this was his last chance to get a, get a gold model.  One of the great sprinters in the history of this country.  Norton again ran out of the, ran out of the zone, disqualified.  All this came back to San Jose State.  And when you go back and look at it, it was--you know you, you can say what you want about the 100 and the 200 and all the rest of that.  But it was an issue of preparation, not an issue of capability or guts or courage or anything like that.  It was an issue of preparation.  But that was--after seeing this great thing in June when I came up, what I saw at the Olympics was wow.  But there was another sprinter, Wilma Rudolph, who just took things by storm.  And Cassius Clay who became the talk of the Olympics.  They started calling him the "Louisville Lip."  But that was my first contact with them.  It was at San Jose State at that point between the time I enrolled in San Jose State and the time that I left Fresno City College.
Speaker 1: Yeah sort of a cosmic meeting of people.
Speaker 2: Right, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Now did you know Rafer Johnson?  He won the decathlon.
Speaker 2: I met Rafer Johnson one time down at a meet at I believe it was at UCLA.  They had a competition between him and a guy by the name of C.J. Chang, C.J. Yang, who was a great athlete out of Taiwan.  And they were the, the competition going into the Olympic games and I was extremely impressed with the athleticism and the almost stoic personage of Rafer Johnson, the way that he approached his craft as a seventeen year old discus thrower.  He was a senior at the time I believe at UCLA.  President of his class, president of his, this integrated fraternity, a different kind of guy and I was very, very much impressed with him.
Story_ID: 1352
Speaker 1: Okay so now you said, I have a note in here that, that--about a March on Washington takes place in '63 [1963].  Now this is around--did you get a chance to go?
Speaker 2: No.  In 1962, 1962 I was the only black student enrolled in sociology as a major because at San Jose State [San Jose State University, San Jose, California] if you were an athlete, you had basically three options to major in, physical education, probation and parole, or social welfare.  I wanted to major in sociology so I petitioned to major in sociology and they finally let me in provisionally as long as I walked around with this little blue card that I picked up every Friday from the athletic department and had all my professors sign it saying that I was doing passing work and so forth and so on.  That's what I did to major in sociology.
Speaker 1: Why sociology?  Why did you--
Speaker 2: Because I had already learned that there was a deeper reality going on than what the average person observed, was involved with, and dealt with on the surface of social relations.  I had learned that much by the time it came time for me to declare a major.  In other words, beginning with my own family, I knew that what most people just take for granted as being, yeah that's my family, that's my mom, that's my dad.  I knew that there was a deeper dynamic going on that I wanted to understand, and not just that.  I had fund that the family was related to education, was related to politics, was related to economics, was related to the military.  I wanted to understand that.  I did not want to major in social welfare so I could go out and help families like mine.  I wanted to understand the family as an institution, and what were the dynamics that gave rise to families like mine.  Not just in the biographical context of what was going on between my mom and my dad, but within the institutional context.  How can it be families like this and then families like Beaver Cleaver that I had seen on TV?  So I wanted to major in sociology.  They first tried to talk me out of it.  Said I don't think you can do the work.  I don't think you can do the work.  I said I can do the work.  They said well you're going to--we'll let you in provisionally.  The coach, coach, my basketball coach Stu Enman, literally walked me over to the Sociology Department.  We sat down in the office of the Chairman of the Sociology Department and talked about it for a half hour and he finally said we'll let you in provisionally.  But the first time you come back and this card is not filled out, you're going to have to change majors, back to social work and we can do that within the department, wouldn't even require any paperwork.  And that was the auspicious for the next three and half years that I went to San Jose State.
Speaker 1: Now this is, I just want to raise this.  This is a--the Bay area it seems--I don't, I don't think you had any black sociology teachers at San Jose State in those days, did you?
Speaker 2: We had one, James Blackwell.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: Who was, there was one--he had come down from Washington.  He had wanted to become Chair of the department and so forth, could never get it done.  And he finally left, he finally left.  And I remember him telling me that this is not right.  This, this is not right.  They had sociology, social work, probation and parole all as one department.  So you'd see some negro students there, but they weren't in sociology.  Couldn't get them to open it up.  Couldn't get them to get serious about it.  But after my freshman year, he was gone.  After that first year at San Jose State, he was gone.
Speaker 1: Did you have him for class at all?
Speaker 2: No, never took a, never took a class from him, he wasn't around.  Because when I was there my first year, you don't take major courses, you take general education classes and after that, he was gone.
Story_ID: 1353
Speaker 1: Now did you have a sense in those days of black activities in sociology or the history of black folks in sociology?  Like a DuBois [W.E.B. DuBois] or somebody like that?
Speaker 2: I had a sense of a professor who was the first black President of the American Sociological Association.  I had a sense of people such as C. Eric Lincoln, Wrote "The Black Church in America".  Had a sense of W.E.B. DuBois most certainly, "Souls of Black Folks", Harvard University, 18, in the 1890's, early 1900's.  I had a sense of a, a number of other people who were on the periphery of sociology, who would most likely be called social scientists.  But there was no--I mean even W.E.B. DuBois was, was, was more of a social historian than just a sociologist.  I mean he dealt in politics, he dealt in movements, he dealt in history, Souls of Black Folk.  You know these studies of the Philadelphia Negro and so forth that he--I mean those, those are classic sociology studies, but they are also of so much historical and political import that it's hard to talk about him as a sociologist in the sense of sociology of the black church, sociology of the black family, sociology of black education or, or anything along those lines.  And, and also during that period, there was no defined black emphasis in sociology.  That's why W.E.B. DuBois was largely seen as being outside of the mainstream.  C. Eric Lincoln was seen as being outside of the mainstream.  You could--there was an author who wrote a bestselling classical work called "Protestant, Catholic and Jew" [sic.] [Protestant, Catholic, Jew] and never mentioned the black church.  Wasn't necessary, hey what has that got to do with anything, (laughs) on religion in America.  So, so there was no black sociological emphasis per se that was seen as legitimate in the mainstream.  So there was, there was not that element of sociology that I found pertinent and particularly moving relative to my own career aspirations.  Even when I went to write my dissertation on--I wanted to write my dissertation at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] on the sociology of sport.  And I can remember going to Stride, who at that time was chair of the department, saying there's no such thing.  I said that's why I want to write it.  He said well that, that's physical education, this is sociology.  I said we have in sociology, and I told him, I said we have in sociology entire dissertations, books, studies built around the analysis of dyads and triads.  Two person and three person relationships.  But you gone tell me that 100 million people watching a Super Bowl is not sociologically relevant.  Something's wrong with that picture.  And so he said well okay, well you can do it, you can do it.  But I, I don't--course ultimately way up the road, he had left Cornell and gone to the University of Florida and he invited me down to do a, a series of seminars on the sociology of sport at the University of Florida.  And on the way back to the airport we were driving along on the way back to the airport in Gainesville, and he said Harry you know something?  I said what's that Professor Stride?  He said the biggest mistake of my professional career was not listening to you when you said there's something sociologically relevant about sports.  I should have been on top of that.  I said well we all make mistakes.  (Laughs).
Story_ID: 1354
Speaker 1: Also it strikes me just from somebody that's looking at the, at that time period in the--
Speaker 2: 1960's.
Speaker 1: --general sense of what was going on then.  Something about the Bay, Bay area that is a lot of black social scientists brewing up.  They got like (unclear).
Speaker 2: Nathan Hare.
Speaker 1: Nathan Hare.
Speaker 2: Yeah Troy Duster.
Speaker 1: Cobbs and Greer.
Speaker 2: Cobbs and Greer, all came out of this area.
Speaker 1: All came from the Bay [the Bay Area, California].
Speaker 2: With a black emphasis.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 2: With a black emphasis.  That was brewing.  In 1963 when the March on Washington took place, I was in sociology and they had invited a guy to come here and speak.  Sociology was part of the sponsoring department, by the name of Lewis Lomax, who wrote, "The Negro Revolt."  I'd never heard of him.  Had never read, "The Negro Revolt," because in our stream of sociology, you didn't read stuff like, "The Negro Revolt."  But I went because I was the only Negro student in the department, I was assigned to be with Lewis Lomax and kind of make sure that he got to the building on time and that he was where he was supposed to be when we were eating dinner and so forth and so on.  So I got to talk to him, but more important than that, I got to hear him speak.  And to understand that Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and nonviolent direct action and Congress of Racial Equality and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC] and so forth, was really a kind of revolt against the litigation, legislation, organization type of tactics of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and to some extent, the Urban League.  And as I got more and more into that by 1963, hey I was just, just watching to see well what are they really talking about?  What's really going on here?  And, and it was Lewis Lomax who I ultimately became very good friends with, who really first opened my eyes to the broader potentialities and realities of, of, of sociology.  Because I remember him saying directly, well all I'm doing is sociology.  They don't want to talk about it, but that's what I'm doing.  And so when '63 [1963] came around, I didn't go back there, I was in school.  I was getting ready to continue to compete in, in, in athletics in August.  But I most certainly was cognizant of it, aware of it, on top of it, not all of it.  Some of it I didn't really get to understand until you know, I got back to New York and began to go down to Audubon Ballroom to hear Malcolm X speak and ultimately to talk to other people who were active in the movement and understand what the role of the, the unions were.  What the role of the various churches and denominations and ethnic groups were and how Charelston Heston [sic.] [Charlton Heston] and, and Marlon Brando and all these people could be involved and so forth.  Cause I, I, you know, as a, as a, as an eighteen, nineteen year old, that's a lot to put together.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the televised march, so many people saw it.  Those were the days before cable TV.  You had three--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Had three networks.
Speaker 2: Right, CBS.
Speaker 1: And all the networks carried it.
Speaker 2: Carried it live.  Carried it live in black and white.
Speaker 1: Walter Ruther (ph.), United Auto--
Speaker 2: Yeah, United Auto Workers, the, the, the two large, the two large unions, AFL-CIO, you know and, and, and it wasn't until--and didn't pay any attention to it at the time.  Years later that I understood that in the main part of the, of the presentation at the March on Washington, there were no women speaking.  The only one that had any time at the podium at all was Mahalia Jackson, Mahalia Jackson and she sung a hymn.  It was you know all the so-called, "Big Five," you know.  They, they didn't let Ben Rushton [sic.] [Bayard Rustin] speak cause they didn't-- he organized the movement but they didn't want to send the wrong message relative to homosexuality.  James Baldwin was initially scheduled to speak, but then they--maybe we don't want to do that either.  And on top of it, he had this book out called, "The Fire Next Time," which said hey, you guys are leaving behind something that's eventually gone blow up in all of our faces and they didn't know what he might say, so he didn't get a chance to speak.  So all that stuff came later, though.  But at the time I was just like everybody else, glued to, to the television and most certainly to Dr. King although I had no idea, no notion that those words, I have a dream, forget the rest of it, which they typically leave out, would become so seminal and so--such a dividing line in terms of the past and going forward for this society.
Story_ID: 1355
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now, now you're at San Jose State [San Jose State University, San Jose, California] until--
Speaker 2: 1964.
Speaker 1: Sixty four, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now that, then you, you started in the Fall of '64 [1964] at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]?
Speaker 2: At Cornell, I--
Speaker 1: Now how did you, now, now going to grad school is a big deal too.  A lot of people stopped with, you know you're an athlete.  You could have stopped and said well okay I'll be a high school coach or something, you know.  Why did you continue?
Speaker 2: You know that, that last year--what was, was fascinating for me in so many ways.  On March the 3rd the San Jose Mercury came out with an article, Harry Edwards, a basketball, track star, San Jose State, has been awarded a Woodrow Wilson Fellowship to Cornell University.  And that was the same day that I was taking my little blue card around with all of the signatures on it.  So I walk into the Athletic Department and hand this card to Harry Anderson, who was the assistant athletic director.  He says Harry you didn't, you didn't, you didn't have to take this card around.  You been taking this card around all this time?  Why didn't you tell us that you were doing A minus, B plus work?  That were you in line to get a fellowship to an Ivy League university?  I said hey, nobody ever asked.  They just assumed that hey, this is this--cause I was the first Negro to graduate within the time period of his eligibility since 1951, this was 1964.  And he said well why, why, why Cornell?  I said because I want to go to the same schools that the rich, the wealthy, the influential send their kids to, and that means Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], Cornell, Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia], so forth, Ivy League schools.  You think you going to be able to do the work there?  I said I have absolutely no doubt I'll be able to do the work there.  And so even though I--with the Woodrow Wilson, you can apply anywhere and I had been accepted Oregon [University of Oregon, Eugene], Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] , Chicago [The University of Chicago], a number of other graduate schools, great graduate schools with histories of focusing on race and ethnicity.  I chose Cornell because Robin Williams was there, who was one of the big names in American race and ethnic studies.  And that's where, that's where I wanted to go.  That's why I went there.  When I got there of course, the reception was, was a little bit different.  I walked into the room, Gordon Streib (ph.) was the chair of the department like I said and he--I walked in and I had my Woodrow Wilson letter and I had the essay that I had written in the Woodrow Wilson competitions, because they start off with about 50,000 applicants, whittle it down to 15,000 and finally they give out about 1,500 Woodrow Wilsons around the country.  And I had my essay and all of that kind of stuff, whipping out.  I walked in to and I said well my name--I walked into the office at, in, at, in the Department of Sociology at Cornell.  I said my name is Harry Edwards, I'm a Woodrow Wilson Fellow here and I'll be starting this Fall and I'm just trying to get some idea about how the department is organized and you know, what the expectations are.  And he was sitting at his desk.  He didn't even look up.  He said yeah I know who you are.  Can you read, can you write, have you ever written anything longer than a letter?  I said excuse me?  He said, he said this is a graduate research institution.  And we always let a number of risk people come in.  I said well look, I'm not a risk.  I said I'm going to get this done.  He said it takes an average of about eight years to get a Ph.D. out of Cornell University.  Are you ready to, to put in that kind of time?  I said hey, you know, I'm not gone take eight years.  I don't know what would take eight years to get through and get a, get a, get a Ph.D., but I'm not, I'm not a risk.  And I, and, and I made him my Chair.  He was the Chair of my master's thesis.  He was the Chair of my Ph.D.  He, him, Robin Williams was on my committee, and William Whyte.  The, the man who wrote, "Organization Man," and a number of other classic pieces in American sociology.  He was in the Labor Relations Department.  And he turned out to be a good chairman, although I never quite made a believer out of him.  He always I think kind of saw me as this ex, black jock who, you know, was coming in, gone write on the sociology of sports, something that didn't even exist.  He never quite bought it until years later.  But I made him the chair of my department cause I knew that if I can get it past him, it's gone be right.  Because there's no way he gone let me out of here without it.  And, and by the time I had left Cornell, I had published two books as a student, "The Revolt of the Black Athlete," and, "Black Students", and 28 articles.  And my dissertation was published as the first integrated textbook on the sociology of sport.  But I--all of that is due to Gordon Streib.  When I walked in that day--
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: S-T-R-E-I-B, and he's a great guy.  He, he turned out to be a very honorable, nice, he's a nice guy, almost too nice, gentle.  But I knew that for me to get out of there, I was going to have to get it past him.
Story_ID: 1356
Speaker 1: Now this is something that--this choice to even go to graduate school and do all this.  Now instead of you know, playing for the, the 49ers--
Speaker 2: Well in, in 1964 the NFL [National Football League] was draft--they had twelve rounds and they were drafting a lot of basketball players.  I was not a basketball player.  I was a football player playing basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay NBA [National Basketball Association]--
Speaker 2: Yah, and I put, I put so many people--I mean I put guys in the hospital.  I mean broken noses, closed eyes, teeth knocked out.  Anybody came into the paint, you know what?  Get the gurney ready.  I mean we, we played defensive basketball at San Jose State [San Jose State University].  If we beat a team 46 to 39, we really shelled them, we bombed them.  Because we were--there was no clock then.  And you could, you could literally play defense and just shut a team down for five minutes.  That was the basketball that I played.  So when, when the NFL was drafting people like Cornell Green, an All American basketball player from Utah State [Utah State University, Logan Utah], P., P. Jent (ph.) drafted by the Dallas Cowboys.  Minnesota and San Diego were, were two teams that sent me letters asking if I would be interested in entering the draft.  This was in February of 1964.  And I have those letters to this day and it's really interesting to look at them because you can get a season ticket at the San Diego Chargers for $36.  But in any event, the Minnesota Vikings said we will pay you $1,500 signing bonus, your salary would be $9,500.  San Diego was willing to pay more, but they already had two great defensive ends, Ernie Ladd and a guy by the name of Earl Faison who I had met at the University of Indiana [sic.] [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], tremendous athlete.  And they were the two highest paid defensive ends in the, in the, in, in professional football.  Ernie Ladd made $28,000 a year, Earl Faison made $25,000 a year before taxes.  My Woodrow Wilson Fellowship was for $36,000 a year, only $22,000 of which went to the school for tuition and fees.  The rest, the other fourteen was a living stipend and I didn't have to lift anything heavier than my pencil.
Speaker 1: Now put this in perspective.  Now in those days my brother came out of Central State and got a job as an Accountant with General Motors, 1964 he was making $8,000 a year and it was considered good.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: He bought a house.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  You could buy an Ickler (ph.) tract home for $20,000 a year.  You could buy a brand new Cadillac for $3,000.  You could buy a brand new Buick for $2,600.  You could get a Chevrolet for $1,500.  And you know school teachers were making like $4,000 a year.  So to, to, to have that kind of money on the table going to grad--course my father [Harry Edwards, Sr.] and I fell out about this.  He flew out here for my graduation, for my graduation from San Jose State because I was graduating with honors and everything and the school automatically sent a notice to the parents' home if you were graduating with honors.  So I was graduating with honors and so forth, had won this Woodrow Wilson, was getting ready to go across the stage.  And my father flew out a couple of days early, and he said now I saw those letters that you, that, that you said you had from San Diego and from the Minnesota Vikings.  Now that, that's a, that's some good, that's, that's, that's some good careers.  You want to--I mean that's what, you know, Joe Lewis and Jesse Owens and Jackie Robinson, you know, they, they made the way for us to get that.  I said I'm not, I'm not going into pro football.  What you mean you're not going into pro football?  Where, where is that coming from?  I said I'm going to, going to graduate school.  You been in school ever since you left, left East St. Louis [Illinois].  You been in school.  I said I don't want to be a pro football player.  I want to be a sociologist.  Oh, so now you want to be one of them things that Castro [Fidel Castro] is.  I said no, no, not a socialist (laughs), a sociologist.  Well what is a sociologist?  And so we go through this, you know, we go through this madness.  And his basic thing was honest.  He wanted me to be at Minnesota or at San Diego so when the games came on TV, he could sit in some beer joint in East St. Louis and said yeah, that, that's my son.  Sitting right there at the end of the bench.  Now if somebody--it ultimately came down if somebody had told him that by the time I reached forty-five, fifty years old, whatever, I would not only have the Ivy League Ph.D., but four Super Bowl rings and be with the 49ers, be right there at the end of the bench where he wanted to see me, during the Super Bowl and everything else.  And at one point he did say how did you know?  How did you know?  I said I didn't know.  But I knew what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're gone pause here again. [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
