Story_ID: 314167
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview is being conducted with Dr. Felton James Earls [HistoryMaker Felton James Earls] in the Department of Society, Human Development and Health [Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences] at the Harvard School of Public Health [Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health], located at 1430 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts, and the date is December 9th. The interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden, the videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Dr. HistoryMaker, would you give me your full name and would you spell your full name for me?
Speaker 2: It's Felton J. Earls, F-E-L-T-O-N, first name, E-A-R-L-S, last name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Can I make one comment?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: And this is just editorial comment that I--my major appointment is in the Department of Social Medicine [Department of Global Health and Social Medicine] at Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts].  A secondary appointment is the one that you gave at the School of Public Health (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. That's fine. I'm--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --glad you put that in--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --thank you very much, yeah.  I had that another place also, that's good.  Yesterday when I talked to several of your colleagues and friends and said I was going to meet you today and interview you, they referred to you as Tony.  Where did Tony come from?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Felton [Felton Earls, II], my [paternal] grandfather's name was Felton [Felton Earls], and growing up in a household where there were two, two of us, and a, and a memory of three of us, you might say, I, I actually adopted a number of nicknames, you know, other ways of calling me.  One was Little Felton, and as I grew up I really sort of grew out of (laughter) having my mother [Ethelyn Lefebvre Earls] and somebody else call me Little Felton.  My cousin, who I was closest to, Herbert [ph.], Herbert was about six months younger than me, as, as I remember, called me Tonney [ph.], and that nickname kind of mellowed, and I incorporated it, and as I grew up and people would ask me, "Is there something else we can call you other than Felton?" I took Tonney and made it into Tony.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: And it stuck.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  Dr. Earls, what is your date of birth and where were you born?
Speaker 2: January 20th, 1942, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Story_ID: 314168
Speaker 1: As I said earlier, we're going to move on, beginning with your, your family history and with your immediate family, of course, and would you give me your mother's name, where she was born and when, and is she still living?
Speaker 2: My mother was, was born in Louisiana.  I think she was born in New Orleans [Louisiana], but I'm not, I'm not totally clear about that because my [maternal] grandparents came from a place called Alexandria, Louisiana, and they went back and forth for a number of years before settling in, in New Orleans.  Her name is Ethelyn, E-T-H-E-L-Y-N, Lefebvre, and it's L-E-F-E-B-V-R-E.  She died about four years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, and her birth year, her birthdate?
Speaker 2: Her birthday is September 23rd, no, 21st 1921.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where did she grow up?  Where was her (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She grew up in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: In New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, went to school there.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her growing up years?  Did she talk to you about those years, or any special stories that she told you about her childhood?
Speaker 2: Well, it was difficult and difficult in ways that did not make for easy conversation.  The family was poor.  My grandfather was enlisted, so the, the story that she would tell, and this is also a story that my grandfather, her father, told me so, there're two sources to it, that she embellished one part of it.  He told me the other part of it, but the story I remember that was told over and over again about her growing up years was his role in the [U.S.] Army, that in the Second World War [sic. World War I, WWI] there was a need at some point in 1918 and 1919, just before she was born, to strengthen the American force, or strengthen the allied forces in France because the Germans were coming in and somebody came up with the idea of enlisting black Creoles from Louisiana and so he was recruited into this group of black soldiers, went to France, fought effectively and bravely, as the stories go, and the group that he was with, the battalion or company that he was with, got a medal of honor [National Order of the Legion of Honour] from the government of France.  Now, here's where the story really begins: he comes home with this medal, and for many of the years that my mother is growing up, she's aware of how proud he is of the accomplishment, but how, in some ways, it's worthless to his being able to find steady work and provide for the family.  Now, over the years he was a very persistent but gentle man, and over the years he did eventually find a job in--as a civilian employee of the Army and I would say that during my time of knowing him, beginning in 1942, that my recollection of him is that he not only was proud of his World War II--World War I accomplishment, but had finally gained a foothold in American society.  He had a job, he was earning retirement and most important for me is that he had an automobile.
Speaker 1: Give me his name for the record would you?
Speaker 2: His name is Clarence Lefebvre.
Story_ID: 314169
Speaker 1: I answered a question about my mother [Ethelyn Lefebvre Earls] by telling you a story about my [maternal] grandfather [Clarence Lefebvre] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's okay.
Speaker 1: --because my mother was very proud of her father.
Speaker 2: Let me stay with your maternal grandfather.  What was his work, his occupation?  What kind of work did he get?
Speaker 1: He worked--
Speaker 2: When you were born what was he doing?
Speaker 1: --yeah, well he worked in what is called quartermasters; I think in, in the [U.S.] Army, this is food procurement.  And during, during much of the time that I knew about him going back and forth from work and I actually went to one of the places he worked at, at an Army camp in, in New Orleans [Louisiana]--right outside of New Orleans, that it was very much--the, the place that he worked in was very much like a supermarket.  In fact, I, you know, I never really thought about this very much.  It was kind of the first big store I think, I'd ever seen in my life, but there were all kinds of things there that you could buy if you were qualified as an Army personnel, to, to purchase there at a reduced cost.  So there was food, there were clothes and his job was to manage that environment.  So I think it was a pretty important job.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, it looked like a pretty important job.
Speaker 2: Let's come back to your mother.  Did she share anything more with you about her growing up years?
Speaker 1: Well I know where she went to high school and I think she was, she, she was an interested, good student in, in high school.  She went to a high school called McDonogh No. 35 [McDonogh No. 35 Senior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  That there are many--that McDonogh [John McDonogh] was somebody who contributed to public education in Louisiana and benefitted by having schools named after him and they were--and 35 was, was a good high school; she told me that, you know, that of the schools in New Orleans, it was the one that kind of was a prestigious school.  So just being there was a mark of success, commitment as a student.  And during her high school years she did well, the stories she told me; and came out of high school with a sense of aspiration.  Now, that aspiration was not articulated in terms of going to college because that's not what people did, I mean that's not what girls did, but her aspirations were such that it led her to meet a man who was college-educated and who she could converse with and on, on a, more or less, level playing field and, and, and in whom she could admire the educational accomplishments, so that led her to meeting my father [Felton Earls, II].
Speaker 2: I see.
Story_ID: 314170
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your maternal grandmother.  You've talked about your [maternal] grandfather [Clarence Lefebvre], you know, yeah.  What was her name, your mother's [Ethelyn Lefebvre Earls] mother (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her name was Beatrice, and the--her maiden name was Daley, D-A-L-E-Y [Beatrice Daley Lefebvre].
Speaker 1: Did you know her?
Speaker 2: Oh, I knew her very well.  Yeah.  I, I, I consider myself fortunate because I knew three of my grandparents very well, I mean, you know, every day, you know, certainly every week and when we get to my paternal grandmother [Alberta Earls], lived next door to--but anyway, my maternal grandmother was a, was a dominant figure.  My, my memory is that she was a large person and beautiful and articulate and strong-willed.  My cousin who I said gave me the nickname, Herbert [ph.], was raised by my grandmother; that, that at some point she to him from Mildred [ph.], my mother's sister because Mildred was having some problems and Herbert seemed to be a very strong-willed boy (laughter).  And I remember that, that, that Beatrice took Herbert under her wing and meant to control him and, and it was her destiny to control him, not, not Clarence, I mean Clarence was overwhelmed by Herbert and the decision to take him to the house, but this was Beatrice's reason for being in many ways.  That's the kind of person she was.
Speaker 1: How do you remember your mother in terms of her personality, what was she like?  How do you remember her?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was kind, extraordinarily sensitive of other people's feelings, and reflecting that all the time.  I was her first child, and her only child for seven years, and I, I think we were extraordinarily close.  And I think I incorporate it.
Speaker 1: I see.  Tell me about your other sibling or siblings?  Yeah, their names and roughly when they were born (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, so I have seven years later, Carol came along, my second, my first sister, her name is Carol Franklin [Carol Earls Franklin] and she lives in Detroit, Michigan now.  Two years later Philip [Philip Earls] came along.  Philip lives in Newport News, Virginia, Virginia Beach [Virginia], actually, and, and then eighteen years later, Lynne [Lynne Earls Scroggins] was born.
Speaker 1: Len or Lynne?
Speaker 2: Lynne, L-Y-N-N-E, was born.  I, I remember that I was a, a, I was a freshman in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] when Lynne was born, so that's my second sister, and third sibling, and she lives in Atlanta [Georgia]--
Story_ID: 314171
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, his name, and when he was born and where?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Felton, II [Felton Earls, II], so I'm Felton, III [HistoryMaker Felton James Earls], and he was born September 27th, 1915.  Again, I don't know for sure that he was born in New Orleans [Louisiana], but he grew up in New Orleans and never really talked about a rural connection, unlike my mother [Ethelyn Lefebvre Earls] and Clarence [Earls' maternal grandfather, Clarence Lefebvre] and Beatrice [Earls' maternal grandmother, Beatrice Daley Lefebvre] who would make reference often to the rural parts of Louisiana that they had come from.
Speaker 1: What did your father tell you about his growing up years, any stories that you remember, especially that he would tell and share with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, my father was a pretty quiet, self-contained person and he, he didn't talk very much about his growing up.  I inferred much of what I know about my father's growing up from my grandmother, his mother, who at various times would, would just kind of open up to me, you know, and talk about the past, about her history, about raising my father and about--there wasn't much detail, but about her relationship with Felton the first [Felton Earls].
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she from, your--his mother?
Speaker 2: Well, she was from a rural part of Louisiana as well, and I can't really remember the name of the little town, but it's all around--they all came from around Alexandria, Louisiana, which is about a hundred miles from New Orleans.
Speaker 1: And her name, your father's mother?
Speaker 2: Alberta [Alberta Earls].
Speaker 1: Alberta?  Okay. What about his father, your paternal grandfather?
Speaker 2: Well he's the mystery man that, that--Alberta had a tough time with, with him and didn't go into detail about what that meant, but there was--there were a number of years in which he was in and out of the picture.  So it sounds like by the time that my father's memory would have served him for many years, that his father, my grandfather, was mostly out of the picture, and so he considered himself as growing up without a father, but with uncles, my grandmother's brothers, who did quite an adequate job of substituting, so many of his connections, though again, not discussed in much detail with me, were--many of his connections to men as mentors and guides, and that sort of thing were through Mack [ph.], my Uncle Mack, and Oscar [ph.], the two brothers of, of Alberta.
Story_ID: 314172
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up in New Orleans [Louisiana]?  How far back can you remember?  What were some of the incidents that still, you can still think of as a youngster (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The earliest memories, you know, we, we lived--I think I was born in public housing, project called the Erato Street projects [Calliope Housing Project; B.W. Cooper Apartments, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Could you spell that for me?
Speaker 2: E-R-A-T-O, and that's the way people in New Orleans pronounce that word.  It, it was a new public housing and I remember it being a, a good place.  My father [Felton Earls, II] was a manager of the project and so there was something special about that.  I, I don't know exactly how that translates into prestige, but, he was somebody who was known in the community, respected in the community and our household benefitted, you know, in some ways from that.  So, I, I remember that as being a good place.  And I, you know, I have memories of how it looked and, but mostly I have a memory of being pretty secure, you know, in that setting.  Now, I was born in 1942, in '44 [1944] he went to the [U.S.] Army, he was enlisted in the Army and went to the Pacific, the Philippines, and was away for a year.  I, I don't remember that so much--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but I do remember him coming back.  So I was about four years old, and I remember that there was a certain amount of disruption associated with that, that we had--he went to various Army posts, so he didn't come back to New Orleans.  He went to Georgia, someplace, Fort Benning [Georgia], I think it was.  Then he went to Oklahoma and my mother [Ethelyn Lefebvre Earls] and I followed him to some extent, I mean, we went to Atlanta [Georgia], we went to wherever Fort Benning is, we went there, and then we went to Oklahoma and then we came back to New Orleans.  And it kind of seemed like we were in a, in a tizzy (laughter), you know, trying to keep up with this guy.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you finally came back to New Orleans with your parents, you settled?
Speaker 2: Well, it's complicated, that we got back to New Orleans and--he came back to New Orleans in '45 [1945], '46 [1946], and, and then in '48 [1948], I'm estimating, he got a job, he got his first new job being back on this side as a postal clerk and his job was to, to sort mail on the train between New Orleans and Houston [Texas], and so again, he was on the road traveling and we were trying to keep up with him, and so I have a very vivid memory of, of the date at which the family decided to move to Houston because he was spending more time in Houston and I actually went the first grade in Houston and--
Speaker 1: In Houston, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and a lot, you know, that's when my memory starts to consolidate, you know, is that; and we came back to New Orleans a year later.
Story_ID: 314173
Speaker 1: Quickly tell me about that first year in Houston [Texas], you started school, grade one, kindergarten (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: --what do you remember--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, first grade--
Speaker 1: --what do you remember about that year?
Speaker 2: I, I remember that it was, you know, I enjoyed being at school, but I had, I had a feeling of being displaced and, you know, that unlike other kids that there was something uncertain about my being there, I mean, looking back on it, it was because it, it was sort of like any day we could make the decision to move back to New Orleans [Louisiana].  So I remember some incidents that I got into, you know, sort of fights with kids, or having little accidents here and there and my, my thinking about that is that it was a, it was a reflection of insecurity I had about not knowing where I, where I was, you know.  Now, I also think I was reflecting a lot of my mother's [Ethelyn Lefebvre Earls] distress, and I think that what I'm telling you now about my memories is all mixed up with comments and feelings that she had as well.
Speaker 1: Did she work and have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --an occupation (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --she didn't.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think ever in my growing up she worked outside the house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you come back to New Orleans for grade two?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What school did you attend?
Speaker 2: McDonogh (laughter) No. 6 [John McDonogh No. 6 School, New Orleans, Louisiana], in this case.
Speaker 1: And you were there for how long, through grade six, grade eight?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--I think it was--I went up to middle school, so grade six and then I went to a school called Samuel J. Green Junior High School [New Orleans, Louisiana] and went to ninth grade when the big trauma in my life occurred, and that was a decision my father [Felton Earls, II] made to move to Memphis, Tennessee and so we were, you know, let me use the word plucked out of New Orleans, and our family moved to Memphis and, and, and that's where they stayed for right up to the end of my father's life, thirty years, forty years, and I, and I went to high school in Memphis.
Speaker 1: In, in high school, okay.
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 314174
Speaker 1: In New Orleans [Louisiana], your elementary [John McDonogh No. 6 School] and junior high school [Samuel J. Green Junior High School] years, were there any particular teachers that were particularly influential in your life at that time, any teachers you recall[AB1]?
Speaker 2: Two teachers, one was a third grade teacher and my, my memories are--her name was Mrs. Halsey [ph.].  I, I did very well in third grade.  It was, it must have been some kind of transition in my educational career because when I came back from Houston [Texas] there was some doubt in the New Orleans public school evaluation that I was ready for second grade, and so there was this sort of tentative placement of me in second grade, but a warning to my mother [Ethelyn Lefebvre Earls], I suppose, my father [Felton Earls, II], that if I didn't make it then I'd have to repeat that grade, I'd have to repeat second grade.  Well somehow I made it through that year, got to third grade and it was like the heavens opened up, every--you know, sun came through.  I really belonged there.  This teacher loved me and I settled in to being a good student--
Speaker 1: That's good.
Speaker 2: --so I think that, you know, that, that served me well for the rest of my educational career.
Speaker 1: Who was the second teacher that you remember fondly (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The second teacher, the second teacher was a French teacher I had that, that--in New Orleans you were required to take French in whatever grade it was, fifth or sixth grade, and I remember this guy as being one of the most eloquent men I had ever seen, that, it must be because you spoke French and English.  But it was something about his dress and his, his demeanor that reflected a really cosmopolitan person, you know, a person who wasn't like other people in our community and I found enthralling in many ways, so.  I, I didn't do that well, you know, I don't remember, I knew a little French, but it's not like he started me on a pathway of using, you know, of becoming proficient in the language.  It was more just a kind of ambience of this man as a teacher in a classroom bringing much more of the world to the classroom than I'd ever seen before (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 314175
Speaker 1: Up through your middle school years, before you went to Memphis [Tennessee], how do you recall segregation in New Orleans [Louisiana] as a child and an early teenager?
Speaker 2: Confusing--and it was confusing partly because of skin tone.  That, that--in junior high school [Samuel J. Green Junior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] often I'd take a bus from school back home, and the buses were segregated and there was a portable sign that one could move back and forth on buses to--depending upon the proportion of blacks who were on, on the bus, and frequently I'd get on the bus with my schoolmates and some of them could pass for white, and so they would play a game with the bus driver and with us, you know, sort of showing us that they could sit in front of the sign while we had to sit in back of the sign and so forth and, and that caused some tension you know, some rivalry, some--not fights necessarily, but it was, an, an uneasiness, you know, that, here we all are sitting on this bus playing this game, you know, this race, skin tone game, basically, and isn't it ridiculous, I mean, who came up with this screwed up idea you know, of dividing people like this.
Speaker 1: In your late elementary grade experiences [at John McDonogh No. 6 School, New Orleans, Louisiana], and moving into middle school, did you have at that time any notion or thought about what you wanted to be as an adult career-wise?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I mean maybe third grade or fourth grade I got a chemistry set.  My father [Felton Earls, II] for Christmas, you know, bought me a chemistry set and boy, did I ever get tracked into the, the magic, you know, it was like magic that you could mix things together and create new things and that you had to calculate it and you know, it wasn't just something that would happen without your being conscientious about it and knowledgeable about it.  So, yeah, I, I was tracked into science pretty--
Speaker 1: You were.
Speaker 2: --pretty early.
Story_ID: 315290
Speaker 1: Dr. Earls [HistoryMaker Felton James Earls], a, a turning point in your life came as you explained when your father [Felton Earls, II] took work in Memphis, Tennessee, now this was the end of your junior high years [at Samuel J. Green Junior High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Would you tell us about that transition?
Speaker 2: Well it was, it was disruptive to me that I hadn't planned this, it wasn't my decision, you know, and it was fairly abrupt, as, as I look back at it.  I'd started ninth grade, which is the upper level of junior high school in, in New Orleans [Louisiana] and felt, you know, like I was gaining control over the city, over my life, over girlfriends, over you know, other kinds of activities and so forth, and so to be suddenly plucked out of that environment; and, and I also loved New Orleans.
Speaker 1: What did you like about it?
Speaker 2: Music, food comes right behind music, but music, and there's a whole story about my Uncle Oscar [ph.], I'll show you a photograph of--I started playing clarinet when I was five years old.  There, there's a lot of music going on in my environment, you know.  So I got to, to Memphis and it seemed to me that I'd gone back in time, twenty, thirty years, you know, like before I was born, that people didn't talk right, they didn't celebrate; there was no Mardi Gras, there was no carnival, there's no jazz, there's dull food, a lot of emphasis on sports, you know, like basketball was more important than music, you know, how could that be?  So I didn't feel like I fit, fitted in and that given that this wasn't my choice it, it was tough.  It was a big high school.  I went to a much larger high school than I was in, and rather than being at the top of the rank in ninth grade in junior high school, suddenly I was at the bottom of the rank in ninth grade in, in a conventional four year high school.  So the first year I was in--and the other thing is that it, it was sort of like they had a dress code at this school that kids were not to wear blue jeans and that sort of thing and I found it very difficult to get into that, to that.  I didn't understand it very well, but I had a tough time in ninth grade.  I, I think I eventually adjusted and, and did all right at, at, at the high school and benefitted from being at the high school in some respects (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What high school did you attend in Memphis?
Speaker 2: It's Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Why did your father relocate there?
Speaker 2: Well it was job-related.  He had been in the [U.S.] Postal Service since 1947 or '48 [1948] and, and, and had earned officer status in the United States Army under Dwight Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower], who was a general and who desegregated the Army; and had kept certain connections with Republicans and had a large black Republican network of accomplished people in the South.  Through that network he kept gaining status in the post office department and it--the move to Memphis was to become a regional manager of several states in the South, so it was a big promotion for him.  And I remember that we moved in 1955, and I remember very distinctly the--the encroaching election in 1960, where Richard Nixon [Vice President Richard Milhous Nixon] was running against John Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  My father's stake was with Nixon.  If Nixon had won that might have been a chance for him to go to Washington [D.C.], you know, in the post office department and the tension in the house was, was, was quite significant, and, of course, the outcome was surprising to many people, but a little devastating to him.
Story_ID: 315291
Speaker 1: You graduated from Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee] in 1959 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-nine [1959], yeah.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959].  What came next in your life following high school graduation?
Speaker 2: Well, I had all kinds of aspirations about college, you know (laughter).  I ended up going to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  It wasn't my first choice.  My first choice was Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], but the high school had--my high school had made a decision not to send my transcript to Northwestern.  I, I didn't know that, so I did all of my parts of taking the exam, scholastic aptitude exam and paying money that I'd earned for matriculation fee and filling out the application and having my parents [Ethelyn Lefebvre Earls and Felton Earls, II], you know, fill out their part of the application and that sort of thing.  And, and then as--as payday encroaches, you know, and I'm not getting letters at all, I, I, I went to, to the principal's office, a guy named Blair Hunt [Blair T. Hunt], and said, you know, "I'm confused, I know I've done all of my part to complete this application." And so the secretary says, you know, quietly, she said, "I think you have to see Mr. Hunt about this."  So I went to see him and he told me that he had made a decision not to send my transcript to Northwestern because he, he didn't think we were ready to function in a school like that.  So I lost the opportunity to, to go to Northwestern that year and I did get a scholarship to some other schools, including Dillard [Dillard University] in New Orleans [Louisiana], which is where my father went, but I, I wanted to venture out in, in the world, so I went to Howard.  That, that was the, then the, I almost said the next best choice for me, turns out it was a wonderful choice for me, so.
Story_ID: 315292
Speaker 1: Tell me about your undergraduate years at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  What did you major in?
Speaker 2: Chemistry (laughter).
Speaker 1: Chemistry, okay.
Speaker 2: I--you know when I was in eleventh grade at Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] I was named Mr. Chemistry, I mean, I was obsessed, you know, there's no question about that.  I measured in--I, I, I majored in chemistry and, and took every chemistry course that you could take at Howard and for all practical purposes saw myself becoming a professional chemist, never really thought very much else about things.  I, I kind of took a little biology and required courses in other places, but my passion was in chemistry (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were some of the memorable chemistry professors that you had?
Speaker 2: Oh, there was a guy name Hakala [Reino W. Hakala], never quite figured out, you know, he might have been Polish or Lith- I think it was it Lithuanian actually, but he was my freshman chemistry teacher and it was--that freshmen general chemistry course was a dividing point.  I remember him coming in class and you know, there might have 150 people in the class, students in the class, and he began the first lecture by saying he wanted, he wanted the, the students to get to know each other; "So would you turn to the person on the right and introduce yourself and then alternatively turn to the person on the left."  He said, "Now you know some of your classmates."  He said, "Now one of those people you just met will not be here next semester," (laughter) and it was sort of, you know, uphill from that point on, but--I'm blocking the name of, of the other guy, but two of us--a guy who went on to be the first black student at Johns Hopkins medical school [Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland] and I made the top grades in the chemistry class for that year and we were encouraged to stay in chemistry, you know, and take physical chemistry and biological chemistry, organic (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Beyond your science studies at Howard, outside the classroom, what other kind of things did you like to do?  Were you involved in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I got, I got pulled into civil rights, you know, and part of it was growing up in Memphis [Tennessee], that in the late--well when I moved to Memphis, in 1955, I think I was telling you about how much I didn't like the food and the absence of music, but I didn't tell you that while my father [Felton Earls, II] and I were driving through Mississippi, I mean this is the way that I remembered it, you know, up Highway 55 [Interstate 55 (I-55)] or 61 [U.S. Route 61 (US 61)], you know, from New Orleans [Louisiana] to Memphis and my sort of agonizing, where the hell am I going, you know, where is he taking me, that when we got to Memphis and read the paper we read the story of Emmett Till, that it was in the summer of 1955 when we were moving to Memphis that the Till story broke and that convinced me, you know (laughter), that I had not gone north (laughter) by driving 350 miles from--but at any rate, I, I got pulled in to civil rights action in Memphis while in high school, and by the time I got to Howard in '59 [1959], '60 [1960], the, the movement was now really crystalizing, I mean, so I marched, I did sit-ins in Washington [D.C.].  When I'd come home I marched in Mississippi, and much of my extracurricular life at Howard was, was surrounded by trying to make sense out of what my role would be in, in the movement; I mean, how far could I go, you know, how, how politically, you know, was I willing to lose time from school and that sort of thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 315293
Speaker 1: After graduating from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] with a degree in chemistry, what came next in your life?
Speaker 2: I went to medical school, and it was a lot of pressure from my father [Felton Earls, II] to not go into, you know, in, into a company or graduate school in--in chemistry, that, that he put a lot of pressure on me to go to medical school as a way of, of giving me more of a foundation to make a choice about what I really wanted to do, you know.  It was almost like going on to graduate school again.  So I gave in to the pressure and applied to two medical schools.  One was University of Tennessee [University of Tennessee College of Medicine] in Memphis [Tennessee], and the other was Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and I, you know, I mean because I hadn't taken much biology and whatever, I didn't really think I had that much of a chance.  I--my heart wasn't in it.  We went to the University of Tennessee, there had never been a black student at University of Tennessee before and they, they kind of looked at me and looked at my father and said, "We're not willing to take the risk, we're not kind--we're not ready for this yet," meaning you know, in so many words, that's what they said and I was relieved to tell you the truth about it (laughter).  I got in Howard and couldn't wiggle out of it, so I went to medical school.
Speaker 1: How do you remember those years at Howard medical?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't want to be in medical school.  I, you know, I wasn't terribly excited about taking care of sick people.  It wasn't a passion of mine.  The--the science was what I was really interested in.  I also on one November day my freshman year in medical school, was sort of sitting there in a class, again of a hundred, 120 people or so, and the messenger ran into the classroom and told the instructor a guy named Montague Cobb [William Montague Cobb] was the anatomy instructor, ran into class and told Cobb that president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] of the United States had just been assassinated, November, 1963, and we didn't believe it, but coming out of that classroom and understanding that it really had happened was another shock about the social, political world in which I lived.  This is another layer on civil rights, and it, it you know, I mean, aside from the issue of taking care of sick people, that there was, there was a big issue upstream in life about how this society was organized, what was happening in the world and somehow being in medical school was a long way from embracing and trying to solve and being a part of the solution, of those upstream problems.  So I, you know, I mean it's hard to drop out of medical school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --you've--there's a big financial obligation that you're making and whatever, so I made it through medical school.
Story_ID: 315294
Speaker 1: How do you remember Dr. Cobb [William Montague Cobb], he was a friend and he was a friend and colleague of mine.  I knew him well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, now, now, well--
Speaker 1: How do you remember him?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember him as an actor more than an anatomy teacher.  And one of the reasons that the class didn't believe him--you see what happened is that the messenger ran down the steps and gave Cobb a, a message, you know, just to read and Cobb, you know, and Cobb did one of these, you know, Shakespearean poses and we said, here he goes again, you know, he's about to break into some, you know, soliloquy from 'Hamlet' or something like that to teach us some anatomy lesson, so when he announced to the class that it, John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] had been assassinated, our first reaction was that, damn, he's gone too far.  I mean this (laughter)--what play did this come from, you know.  But that's--I mean, I remember this guy teaching anatomy in a way that was way up here, you know; that it was so eloquent and penetrating and thoughtful.  Let me just give you one rhyme that he would say: he would say, "Why does a polar bear sit on a cake of ice?"  Now, that, that forever, forever teaches a medical student that spermatogenesis occurs at somewhat lower temperature than body temperature, which is why one has descended testes. And he would just do that all the time, you know (laughter), teaching you very important principles through metaphors, through soliloquies, through--he played the violin in class at times, what a wonderful teacher.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was a beautiful man, interesting man.
Story_ID: 315295
Speaker 1: You graduated from Howard medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], and you weren't particularly interested in taking care of six people--sick people and you didn't do a residency then, you didn't go on.
Speaker 2: No, I went right into a laboratory, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where?
Speaker 2: University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin].  I went into brain science, neurophysiology, and for all intents and purposes that, you know, I sort of saw the possibility of, of doing a post-doctoral fellowship and coming back to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and teaching physiology at, at Howard.
Speaker 1: Why neurophysiology, why did you zero in on that (unclear).  What had influenced you?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd been interested in brain chemistry.  I mean, I was--that, so my chemical interest in medical school ended up being biochemistry of the nervous system, and, so I, I, I went into brain sciences, and even though I was doing electrical, experiments on electrical parts of the nervous system, my interest was still basically in, in chemistry.
Speaker 1: So at the University of Wisconsin you got an advanced degree, another degree there, or you--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't get an advanced degree.  I worked in a laboratory as a post-doctoral fellow and got very good training.  I mean it was one of the best places in the world to be.  And I--the plan was for me to stay there for three years and there, there would be no doubt that coming out of that laboratory I could get a job almost anywhere I wanted to.  So, you know, I was doing important research.  I was publishing papers.  I didn't need a Ph.D.  I mean I was in the right place to get the experience.
Speaker 1: You were there three years or less?
Speaker 2: Well, another catastrophic event occurred, you know, equivalent to Emmett Till, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was that?
Speaker 2: --John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], and that was Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Story_ID: 315296
Speaker 1: I was in a lab [at University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] doing my work when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed and because I grew up in Memphis [Tennessee] I knew instantly the balcony of the Lorraine Motel [Memphis, Tennessee].  You know, I knew where it happened.  I could picture that.  I use to pass through all the time walking to high school, walking to Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: How did you feel at that very moment when you heard what had happened?
Speaker 1: That, you know, that the world had just ended, that, that I was, I mean I spent a lot of time in the '60s [1960s] migrating back and forth between Malcolm X and Martin Luther King and, and had, and Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was a good place to be because King came, Malcolm X came.  There, there was a lot of intellectual understanding and interpretation of these two points of view.  When, when Malcolm was killed in '65 [1965], what we saw was a convergence, meaning that Malcolm was becoming universal, he was becoming international, and, and it seemed that cutting off his legs was, you know, in part motivated by the fact that this guy's going too far, and that's exactly the case even more powerfully represented in King.  King was now making connection between poor white people and poor black people, between discrimination and racism in the United States and the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War].  And so his assassinated--assassination, you know, I interpreted as calculated and on a mission of the government of the United States, that's the way I saw it.  And, and that, and that one could not remain an ordinary citizen of the United States and, and not react to this.  And it would take your whole life to react to it.  I couldn't stay in a lab and react to this.  I had to do something else.
Speaker 2: So what did you do?
Speaker 1: Well I was confused, you know (laughter).  I looked at what my skills were.  I tried to figure out a way to be useful, to be connected.  And I decided the most useful thing that I had was this M.D. degree, so I went to Harlem [New York, New York].  It was my imagination of where I was really needed and, and decided to bite, you know, the bullet and--that's a strange metaphor, and do an internship, make myself into a doctor, but a children's doctor, who, who would be invested in the next generation of American citizens.  And, and in that way pick up whatever pieces of Martin Luther King's effort I could and try to apply it to the idea that this society could, could become a better society.
Story_ID: 315297
Speaker 1: And so you did a residency in pediatrics?
Speaker 2: So I did an internship in pediatrics and you know, I met various people and ended up deciding to do psychiatry and came here to Boston [Massachusetts] in 1970 to start a residency in psychiatry at Mass General Hospital [Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Now was that child or adult, because I read two different things in your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, you know, you have to do adult first--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --before you do child.  So I was pretty convinced that I was going to be a child psychiatrist, but you have to do adult--
Speaker 1: So what was--
Speaker 2: --you have to train in adult psychiatry first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I started at Mass General, did my adult psychiatry there and then went to London [England].
Speaker 1: How long were you at Mass General?
Speaker 2: For two and a half, three years.
Speaker 1: And that was what time again?
Speaker 2: It was 1970 to 1973.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and then I went to London for a year to do child psychiatry and then came back here.
Speaker 1: I see.  How did you find Boston when you came to Mass General?  How do you remember the city when you first came?
Speaker 2: I was disappointed in, in the city.  I, you know, I, I was completely unprepared for the remoteness and the coldness of people.  I'd speak to people; they wouldn't speak back.  I'd ask directions and people would deliberately give me the wrong directions I thought, you know, and kind of feel good about the fact that they had steered me in the wrong, in the wrong way, and that, for a period of time I, I thought that it was something about me, you know, that, that maybe because I was from the South and maybe because my, my, the, my speech was different you know, that they could locate, they could reference me outside of Boston, but then I started to notice that that's really the way they treated each other, and that this was a kind of endemic cultural thing in New England, you know, that people really didn't engage each other very much spontaneously.  So I, I must confess I never (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In fact--
Speaker 2: --liked that very much.
Speaker 1: I realized how cold my home city was, New Bedford [Massachusetts], Boston, when I first went to New Orleans [Louisiana].  That was my very first trip to the South was--
Speaker 2: Really.
Speaker 1: New Orleans.  I worked for Xerox [Xerox Corporation]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I'll tell you about it later, you know.  And then I made more travels into the South and then I could compare and I said, "Woah, we are not, you know, friendly people here,'--
Speaker 2: Yeah, sort of like not civilized, you know.
Speaker 1: --because I found the South so open and relaxed, you know with blacks and whites--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 315298
Speaker 1: Let me back up because this is very important and I, I missed--jumped over it.  You met your wife at the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Her name and just tell me about--a little about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her name is Mary Carlson.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We, we met in 1967 in this laboratory of neurophysiology and the way that we met, I mean we ended up being in the same office, but before I got to the lab, I was still in Washington [D.C.] at Howard [Howard University], I had made up my mind that I was going to move out to, to Madison, Wisconsin, the director of the lab told me that, knowing that I was from New Orleans [Louisiana], that there was another person in the lab who was from New Orleans, so you know, that this is an important connection to make (laughter), you know, you're going to Madison, Wisconsin.  So when I got to Madison, I, I remember going into the office with the other postdocs and said, "Now who is from New Orleans?" and it turns out it was Mary, that she wasn't from New Orleans, that she'd gone to Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and had lived in New Orleans for several years and had just moved back from New Orleans to Madison, Wisconsin.  She's actually from Madison, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: So she had moved back home to be in this laboratory, and it turns out that we had lived on the same street that, that she had lived about a half a mile on Chestnut Street from where I grew up, so that was kind of interesting, you know, and that got (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what year did you get married, you and Mary?
Speaker 2: We got married three--we got married in 1971, so you know--
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-one [1971], okay.
Speaker 2: --we got to know each other and she went through my meanderings about what I'm going to do, I not, you know, I mean she realized and was with me.
Speaker 1: So she was here in Boston [Massachusetts] when you were here at Mass General [Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and she was with me in the lab when I made a decision to leave the lab and to leave science.
Speaker 1: What did she do while you were at Mass General doing your--
Speaker 2: She worked at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], she got--she stayed in brain sciences and so she got a job at MIT.
Speaker 1: And did she go to London [England] with you also?
Speaker 2: She did, yeah, and our daughter--my second daughter, I have a daughter by a former marriage of, of Mary's, my first daughter, Leigh [Leigh Earls Slayne].  My second daughter, Tanya [Tanya Earls], was born in London.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In 1974.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is Tanya doing today?
Speaker 2: Tanya and her family, her husband and my granddaughter, whose name is Zinzy [ph.], lives with us, so we share a house in Cambridge [Massachusetts] and she teaches at Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, which is the high school in, in Cambridge.
Speaker 1: And your other daughter Leigh, how do you spell Leigh?
Speaker 2: L-E-I-G-H.
Speaker 1: And where is she?
Speaker 2: Leigh lives in Newton [Massachusetts], so not very far away.  I see her all the time with her husband and three grandchildren.
Story_ID: 315299
Speaker 1: Dr. Earls [HistoryMaker Felton James Earls], you completed the adult psychiatry residency at Mass General Hospital [Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts], and then what was the next step, where did you go from there?
Speaker 2: Well, my interest was in doing research in child psychiatry and it probably reflects a kind of orientation that I talked about a long time before and that is that my, my interest never was deeply organized around taking care of patients.  My issue was how does one do research that addresses not just sick children, but what in society drives them to not do well in life.  So I looked around with mentors and various other people about where could I go to really train myself to be that kind of child psychiatrist, and at that point in history it was London [England].  So I went to the Hospital for Sick Children [Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children] in London to do my training in child psychiatry with the understanding that I'd be a researcher, that I'd come out of it with research experience and publications and skills and that sort of thing, that I could come back to Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], or someplace like that and, and do research.  So I went to the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine [London, England] to do--to study epidemiology and statistics in public health.  And while I was in London for a year and a half I did research.  I did a little bit of patient care, but 75, 80 percent of my time was either taking courses in epidemiology or actually doing research, or (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the nature of the research that you did there?
Speaker 2: The research was on the problems that West Indian children were having as immigrants, first generation immigrants in London.  So I chose a community, did a random sample of, of immigrants and there were immigrants from Pakistan as well as from the West Indies and those from the West Indies from all over the English-speaking West Indies.  And I did a study of the behavioral problems of three-year old children living in this part of London.
Story_ID: 315300
Speaker 1: And then you, when you finished that work, your coursework and research [in London, England] you came back to--?
Speaker 2: I came back to a faculty position at Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], so the understanding was that if you succeed in developing these skills and publishing your work and so forth, I would get a faculty appointment at Harvard Medical School.  I came back in '74 [1974], '75 [1975] and, and joined the faculty and took up doing research here in, in the United States.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about those, those research experiences upon coming to Harvard, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well my first independent research project was to do a study like the one I'd done in England with preschool children, but in this case I had to choose a population that I wanted to study and I chose to study children in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  Now these were children who were year-round residents.  I mean, living in families of year-round residents.  And I did that because it's a captive population that I could, I could get the birth records of every child born on Martha's Vineyard and then track that child with, you know, almost 100 percent accuracy because most people born on the island stayed there for, you know, ten or fifteen years until they graduated from high school.  So to me it was a kind of captive population that, that I could keep track of everybody during the time that they were growing up.  And I had very good support from the school department and from local doctors on the island, so that I could get records from the police and from the schools and from the doctors to have a kind of complete history of these kids.
Speaker 1: I live on Martha's Vineyard.
Speaker 2: You do?
Speaker 1: Full time.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well I know the Vineyard pretty well (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I--I'm a year-round resident, been there for forty years, not full-time I moved there in 1995.  I had a Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] fellowship in New York [New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I moved to the Vineyard to write--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I live there, and so I've been involved.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: This is fascinating (unclear)--
Speaker 2: My, my studies were 19--I started in 1976 and studied every child born on the Vineyard from 1976 to 1981.
Speaker 1: Jeez, Rufus Shorter was the superintendent--
Speaker 2: I know Rufus--
Speaker 1: He was the superintendent--
Speaker 2: --and I know his wife [HistoryMaker Vera Thelma Shorter].
Speaker 1: --I know Vera very well.
Speaker 2: Rufus was one of the people, when I said the school was supportive--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --well--
Speaker 1: I'm sure he was.
Speaker 2: He is.
Speaker 1: I will see her tomorrow, Vera, yeah.  That's fascinating, Martha's Vineyard, children.  What other research projects were you involved in, in your first stint here at the medical school, before you went to Washington [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that was, that was pretty all-encompassing because I also had to spend the winters on Martha's Vineyard to, to do this work.  I also in my residency at Mass General [Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts], I became very concerned about the inmates, the health of inmates at the Charles Street Jail [Boston, Massachusetts], which was our neighbor.  And I, and I became concerned about that because we would see a fair number of psychiatric emergencies in the emergency room, usually inmates who had tried to hang themselves, and--on, on going into the jail, which is a whole story in, unto itself, I discovered there really was very poor healthcare and no mental healthcare for inmates.  So, I worked on that as a research project for a number of years, but it was very difficult to, to get information and get support from my colleagues, so it was more of a frustrating effort than a successful one I think.
Speaker 1: Did you teach courses at the medical school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did teaching, but that wasn't my career, as a teacher.  I mean I taught because you had to teach, not because I wanted to teach.  I wanted to do research and that was my passion.
Story_ID: 315301
Speaker 1: Why did you go to Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] and was it 1980 (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To do research that, that, that--in 1981 I got a grant from the, from the National Institute of Mental Health.  There was a career development award it was called, and it basically paid 100 percent of my salary and freed me up to do anything I wanted to do, I mean to go places other than Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] to gain experiences that I might not have if I stayed here.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: The, the world's leading epidemiologist, psychiatric epidemiologist was at Washington University in St. Louis.  Her name is Lee Robins [Lee N. Robins].  And I wanted to spend a year working, working with Lee, and so, and, and the family agreed to that.  So we went out to St. Louis [Missouri] with that in mind, that, that we would spend a short time. But what happened is that they, they started celebrating my accomplishments and the medical school, the dean of the medical school and the chair of the Department of Psychiatry started making, you know, started making overtures as to what it would be like if I stayed and directed the Division of Child Psychiatry [Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry] at Washington University and they, they did the same thing for my wife [Mary Carlson], you know, that she would have a much bigger lab and more support.  And so we kind of looked around and we were kind of stunned, you know.  That, at Harvard you're just another shrimp in the ocean, you know (laughter). That it, it--not only would I be able to do my research, because Washington University was a very research-oriented university, but I'd have this kind of authority and prestige to really shape a child psychiatry program in, in a way that I wanted to do, with absolute support from the medical school.  So I, we took the offer to, to join--to leave Harvard and to join the Department of Psychiatry and we were there for, not one year, but seven years.
Speaker 1: Seven years?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your overall major achievement during those seven years, how would you capitalize that?
Speaker 2: Well, I did a lot of new research projects, you know.  So the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] project was winding down and I, and there was a lot of research going on at Washington University.  I worked with Lee Robins to do studies on adolescent health.  I did studies on children exposed to disaster.  There was a big flood in the Missouri, Missouri [Missouri River]-Mississippi River basin and I had a chance to do disaster--you know, one of the, we did one of the first studies of children's response to flooding as a disaster.  I did studies on children whose parents were alcoholic.  So, it was a very fruitful, productive seven years in which I branched out from the preschool work that I was doing, I mean the work on preschool children I was doing, and successfully engaged in a number of other research projects.
Story_ID: 315302
Speaker 1: So you returned then to Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] about 1989?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we kind of went out to St. Louis [Missouri] thinking that St. Louis was in the Midwest, and after about a year or two, started to realize that St. Louis was southern, more southern than it was Midwestern.  People's attitude about race and interracial couples and that kind of stuff was, was way behind what it would be in New York [New York] or Boston [Massachusetts].  We didn't like what was happening with our kids [Leigh Earls Slayne and Tanya Earls] that much, even though they were going to very good schools and just decided you know, that this was not where we wanted to spend the rest of our lives.  Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] also, was changing a little bit.  It was getting much too biological for me.  My interest, I mean I respect and I think biology is, is extraordinarily important, but that's not my interest.  My interest is how society functions and how to improve that.  The university was becoming less and less committed to what I was committed to, so I decided to come back to Harvard on a sabbatical.  For seven years I'd earned this sabbatical from Washington University to look around again, not necessarily to come back to Boston, because we did not have a love affair with Boston at all, but we had contacts here and friends here and the kids wanted to come here and that sort of thing.  So I came back to Harvard and the dean of the School of Public Health [Harvard School of Public Health; Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts] and the dean of the medical school and various other people lined up and made an offer to us as a family that we couldn't turn down, so we came back.
Speaker 1: Here you are.
Speaker 2: And here, you know, 1989 I came back and been here since, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 315303
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your major current research, the Chicago [Illinois] project [Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods].  We'll talk some of the other research activities, but let's talk about that one.
Speaker 2: Well, it was a major event, you know, that I got involved in this research, I mean, partly because I was an accomplished scientist. There was a concern in the late '80s [1980s] and early '90s [1990s] that crime and violence in particular, were out of control, too many homicides, the crack cocaine epidemic was driving a lot of this, and that people started talking, people in criminal justice system, police and parole officers, and that sort of thing, started talking about tough kids unlike they had ever seen before.  And, and the term super predator cropped up as a label, you know, on the kinds of crimes and the kinds of people, usually young black men who were committing these crimes.  So I decided I wanted to get into this, you know, because that's not the way I saw it and I, I wanted to get into this mix, and an incredible opportunity arose, partly because of my connections at Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] to, to do what would be a landmark study that the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] and the MacArthur Foundation [John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation] and the National Institute of Mental Health combined interest and said, we would like to find the most outstanding scientist--social scientist in the United States or the world for that matter, to conduct a study someplace in the United States that would set it right, you know, to say what really are the contributions of individuals, families and, and communities to this problem that we have, so that ten years from now we would be in a position to have knowledge, not just opinions about what causes violence and how to address it.  So from 1989 really, to now, gradually over a period of time I organized groups of scientists, chose to work in Chicago after moving around the whole United States and thinking about, you know, Baltimore [Maryland] and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and Los Angeles [California] and whatever, and from '94 [1994] to 2002 we did a landmark study.
Speaker 1: In Chicago?
Speaker 2: In Chicago.
Speaker 1: Why Chicago and not Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well, Chicago is big and as a city it represents so many crucial elements of American society.  It's--it's got a large black population that is organized at the neighborhood level in terms of income.  So you have wealthy black neighborhoods as well as lots of poor black neighborhoods.  You have lots of immigrants from Mexico.  You have Puerto Rican neighborhoods.  In fact, it's the only city in the United States that has both Mexican and Puerto Rican neighborhoods, at least that was the case when we started.  And it has whites who represent various stages of immigration to America, from Germans and Polish, to Italian and so forth.  So, Chicago is America and in a sense we really wanted to dig in and understand one place, rather than doing a national study and trying to study the--every place.  Chicago was sort of paradigmatic of what America is, what it's been and what it's becoming.  And, and the--that demographic picture of Chicago has served us very well.  In other words, I think, we think we made the right decision by going to Chicago.
Story_ID: 315304
Speaker 1: What was your process and what were your, your measurement tools as you began to look at the neighborhoods [in Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I knew a lot about measuring mental health and problems in children and their, their mothers and fathers, for that matter.  What I didn't know much about is, is how to measure neighborhoods, that basically our thinking about neighborhoods was, was based on who lives there.  So, if it was a black neighborhood and people were poor, you'd, you'd call that a black, poor neighborhood and you'd used income statistics and race statistics as if it was, you know, a reflection of what happened in that neighborhood.  So the challenge in a way was to develop measures of communities that were independent of the composition of the people who lived there, and they wouldn't be biased by the composition of people who lived there.  So, we developed measures for this study of trust and reciprocity of, you know, taking care of other people's children, not just watching out for your own children, sharing resources, and a number of other kinds of measures; and did a study in Chicago [Illinois] in which we, we measured, in detail, characteristics of individual kids and their families, but also of their neighborhoods; and then asked the important question: now that you know all of this about a person growing up, what contribution does the neighborhood make to their outcome, independent of differences that they have as, as people, and their families have, in terms of how they're raising them?  And most people thought that, look, you're not going to find very much, you know, that--that what's really important is the discipline of parents, you know, or the caretaking of parents, or something like that; or some kids are just born incorrigible and there's nothing that even a good parent can do.  What we found in, in a very robust, scientific way, was that neighborhoods are very important.  And that they operate in a number of ways, I mean one way is that if people are fearful they're not going to monitor other people's children very much, if the schools are not--if parents are not engaged in the school, the schools are not going to function very well.  Peer groups become gangs in those kinds of neighborhoods and gangs, you know, develop a life of their own.  So there are many ways in which neighborhood influences are profound, have profound impact on kids, particularly as they get into adolescence.  And I think the Chicago study [Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods] documented that as well as any study has ever done.  And we have, we started producing findings in 1997 and over the last decade, I think we've had enormous impact on public policy--
Story_ID: 315305
Speaker 1: In what ways have your findings affected policy and practices in Chicago [Illinois] and other big cities at this point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the first way was that we published a paper ['Neighborhoods and Violent Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy,' Robert J. Sampson, Stephen W. Raudenbush, and Felton Earls] in Science in 1997 that demonstrated the importance of community characteristics like the ones I just told you about.  We call that collective efficacy; some people call it social capital.  The then-director [Jeremy Travis] of the National Institute of Justice converted our Science article into a one-page brief that he sent to every police precinct in the United States and said, you, know, basically that the federal government wants you to take cognizance of this research [from the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods] because it has very important implications for what we call community policing.  You know, and the impact was varied according to people's readiness to take up community policing.  But basically what the article did was legitimize community policing as a way to go.  And many places in the United States now have very strong community policing programs that have at least a scientific base in some of the work that we did.  But you know the work has gone much further than community policing.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: For example, I just gave a keynote address to the Urban Libraries Council, so these are a group of librarians who work in cities who are interested in, in what, what contributions do libraries make, or can libraries make, to this thing that you call collective efficacy.  Can libraries, or do libraries, function as an important resource in the community that strengthens the caretaking, the monitoring, the supervision, the career goal setting of children, of course they do.  Another organization that's been very interested are people who are, who do urban planning and are particularly interested in land use for recreational purposes, for gardening.  A few years ago I gave a keynote address to an international convocation of urban gardeners, and what they see is that gardening brings together generations in neighborhoods.  So, you know, it just keeps multiplying.  Anybody who really cares about the growth of cities has some reference to the kind of work that we are doing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The article in Science--that was co-authored with Sampson?
Speaker 2: By Robert Sampson and Stephen Raudenbush.
Story_ID: 315306
Speaker 1: Would you define, for those who will use your interview, collective efficacy, could you define that as a theory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we think of collective efficacy as the willingness of people to take needed action to benefit the neighborhood.  So, it's more than trusting your neighbors, or more than being willing to share resources with, with a neighbor.  It's the willingness to take social or a political action that will prevent the problem perhaps from occurring or correct something which is a deficit and we give concrete examples.  In, for example, do you think, we ask neighbors or residents or whatever, do you think that people who live around here would intervene, would do something if they saw a child, saw a teenager disrespecting an adult in the streets, or starting a fight, or using drugs?  Do you think that people who live in this neighborhood would do something if the city decided to remove a fire station?  So there are a string of questions like that--that we measure and then form a scale of how active, how action-oriented people think their neighbors are.  So we're not asking them if they would do it, they're asking--we're asking them, what is their perception of the action orientation of people who live around them?  We then make a scale which goes from like blood pressure, you know, from zero to a hundred, and we use that value to correlate with other health outcomes.  So how many homicides have there been in this community?  How many people with asthmatic attacks have reported to emergency rooms in this community?  What's the birth rate of children born in this community?  And what we have found, to our surprise, I might say, is, is that the correlation of collective efficacy with multiple kinds of health outcomes is always in the positive direction.  It's always that collect--the stronger the neighborhood in terms of its action orientation, the safer and healthier the environment is for children growing up.
Story_ID: 315307
Speaker 1: You have done, or you're currently doing, some work in Tanzania looking at the psychological impacts of HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] on children?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'd like you to talk about that, that research initiative, and is there a connection between your Chicago [Illinois] project methodology and what you're doing in Tanzania?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah, I mean so, in, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Could you talk about that?
Speaker 2: --in, in Chicago, we were working with what, at the time, was considered to be the most serious epidemic in American society: violence.  We discovered, I might say, I mean I don't think we knew; Chicago looked pretty bad to me when we started this research.  I didn't think there was much collective efficacy as social capital in a city like Chicago.  So I think we surprised ourselves with how strong the community effects were.  And we were convinced that we had done a good job of measuring it.  So finding that it's important we knew was based on good, solid measurement.  So we had something there, you know, and, and I looked around at how policymakers, how police and gardeners and librarians and urban planners and that sort of thing were taking up this finding and using it, and I mean, very much stuck in my face as a, as an epidemiologist is the HIV/AIDS epidemic.  I mean if violence was the American problem of the 1990s, then HIV/AIDS has become the world's problem and certainly the African problem in this--for the rest of this century I, I would assume, without a vaccine being, you know--for a long time we dwelled on the possibility in the 1990s, that a vaccine would come along, but about '98 [1998], '99 [1999], it became clear that there's not going to be a vaccine for a long time.  Going to have to deal with this epidemic behaviorally.  And so, what we very deliberately did was to go to the NIMH [National Institute of Mental Health] and say, look, you know, we've discovered something in Chicago, and my hunch is that it's applicable anywhere, under any circumstances, wherever people form communities that we can measure this thing called collective efficacy.  I, I want to do a study in Africa that goes beyond what we did in Chicago [in the Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods].  In Chicago, all we did was observe that this occurred, in other words, there were lots of communities and lots of poor communities in--poor communities in Chicago that had high collective efficacy and low violence, despite the stereotyping.  What I'd like to do is to design an experiment in Africa, so find an African city and experimentally see if I can increase collective efficacy in, in a group of neighborhoods that would translate into lower risk for HIV and less stigma for those people who are already infected.  And so for the last three years we've been working on the slopes of Mount Kilimanjaro in Moshi, Tanzania, it's a city of about 150,000 people and we are applying what we learned in Chicago in an experimental design in Moshi.
Story_ID: 314194
Speaker 1: Another activity that you've been involved in is the Harvard South African Fellowship Program [Harvard South Africa Fellowship Program].  Would you tell us what that's about and what your involvement and role has been; how it relates to earlier interests and things that you experienced?
Speaker 2: Well in the 1980s, I mean, partly being a former resident of Boston [Massachusetts], living in St. Louis [Missouri], I became involved in the Anti-Apartheid Movement, the international Anti-Apartheid Movement with a focus on Missouri, you know, and the university [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] that I was working at.  And the issue was how could we bring the divestment campaign to Missouri congress [Missouri General Assembly], the Missouri university system [University of Missouri System] and Washington University as a private institute and the City of St. Louis?  And for nine or ten years while I was living in St. Louis and even after I moved out of St. Louis, my wife [Mary Carlson] and I, you know, sort of led a campaign that effectively got Missouri to become the twenty-fourth state to divest pension funds and the university system and the City of St. Louis.  When I came to Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] I discovered this program that had been around for twenty years or so and was a--was Harvard's answer to divestment.  Harvard never divested.  Rather it invested constructive engagement, I think it was called, in bringing mid-career, disadvantaged Africans to Harvard to study.  And it was a blemish, actually, for those of us who were involved in divestment because our concern was not individuals, it was structural reform, but as I stayed at Harvard I--and South Africa was liberated and now is being transformed--I made a decision a few years ago to direct the South Africa Fellows Program as a way of helping to construct--re-construct that society.  So every year we screen carefully in South African and bring six to eight mid-career professionals to Harvard to study for a year. And I've done that now for the last four or five years.  And it's kind of a connection, you know, with the new South Africa given my efforts to bring down the old South Africa--
Story_ID: 314195
Speaker 1: We have four or five kind of wrap-up questions.  The first is, is there anything else you'd like to add to this interview that I've not asked you about?
Speaker 2: The only thing that resonates throughout my whole life is music, you know (laughter), and I don't think I told you very much about the fact that I play music.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: I've played music since I was five years old, and by the time that I was about twelve, playing clarinet, and flute and saxophone, discovered that I wasn't very good, that my ears weren't very good and that particularly for improvisation, that I was handicapped, I mean you know, it's sort of like a crippled person.  The problem with not having good pitch is that there are no crutches, I mean, it's a hard problem to overcome.  And so I really think of myself as somebody who was destined to be a musician, who, because of a handicap, ended up being a scientist.
Speaker 1: You are not doing any music today, are you listening?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm listening all the time.  I go to jazz performances and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you like to listen to?
Speaker 2: Well, lots of people, Sonny Rollins, you know, is somebody who I've been close to for, I mean musically close to for forty years now.  Sonny is seventy-six, so I catch him every time I can.  But I like, you know, I mean Miles Davis is on my wall.  I, I love Keith Jarrett, you know, it's a whole cluster of people who I follow very closely.
Story_ID: 314196
Speaker 1: Beyond your work as a medical scientist what would you--what do you still want to do that you haven't done, outside of your professional career (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, my, my hero (laughter)--we also haven't talked about who my hero is, my hero is Charles Darwin, you know (laughter), and in fact there was a book that was just published called 'My Heroes' ['My Hero: Extraordinary People on the Heroes Who Inspire Them'] that's a project [The My Hero Project, Inc.] something like yours, that goes around interviewing people about who their heroes are.  And my story about Charles Darwin is in this book.  I also discovered that Wynton Marsalis' hero is Duke Ellington, which I think is perfect, you know.  What I haven't had time to do is write and reflect, or reflect and write and this is what, I mean, I admire Darwin because at an early stage of his career he collected all of the data he really ever needed and spent time away from the academy, you know, not being a part of the university, not going off to London [England] to the national, to the Royal Geographic [Royal Geographical Society, London, England], or whatever it was, but carefully assembling his notes and his understanding and as a, and as, and as a product of that, changing the world.  I mean Darwin to me is the greatest scientist who ever lived.  Now I'm not going to change the world, you know, but I admire the capacity of a person to take themselves out of the pressures and be able to construct and assemble a complex issue, you know, in a way that uniquely fits your understanding of it.  I'd like to have the opportunity to do that in the next part of my career.
Story_ID: 314197
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you have done already that you think you might have done differently during your lifetime?
Speaker 2: It's a good question.  I, I, you know, in 1974 I left--I was in London [England], but I really had no strong intentions of coming back to the United States.  Another part of my history which we didn't talk about is that from 1970 when I went back into medicine, you know, came out of the lab [at University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], I was drafted and I knew there was no way I was going to serve in the United States Army, that was just completely out of, you know, off the page.  And so for three years I struggled in court to define myself as a conscientious objector and it was hard, I mean I ended up winning in a lower court and the Army appealed it and I basically had to either go to jail or report to active duty.  And I, and I did finally convince the Army in 1973 that I was conscientious objector and I got an honorable discharge.  But in going back in life to that time, partly because its civil rights and partly because of the, of the activism, you know, that, that I had to marshal to become a conscientious objector, I was, I had to find myself as an activist.  But I made a decision that being a scientist, I mean, my, having a primary identity as a scientist was what I was going to pursue.  And so living around Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King] and a bunch of other people, you know, who I admired, made it very clear to me that I was making a different decision, that I was going to stay in the university, that I was going to put my efforts into publishing papers and collecting data and that sort of thing.  And I'm not totally satisfied with that.  I, I think that the issue of war, of people fighting and killing each other and, and the more civilians and the more children that are killed in these kinds of wars that we fight these days, the angrier and the hope--and the more hopeless I get.  So I could have had a career that would have been an anti-war career and--as an activist, and devoted the energy that I devote to science to that.  And sometimes I think I would, that I would have been more effective and done more good if I had been an activist.
Speaker 1: Just to continue on that theme, and you have in part answered this question, but how do you feel about the way that you've lived your life?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that I've been too--I think I've made too many concessions to universities.  This again reflects my admiration of Charles Darwin, you know (laughter).  Universities make you compromise in, in various ways.  Now I've been very successful in, in what I've done and in what I've pursued.  And I could not have done the university I could not have done the Chicago [Illinois] project [Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods] outside of the university and so forth.  But I'm also very conscious of the, of the compromises that I've made by being part of a system, part of the university system, even if, even though it's the university system that has afforded me a lot of flexibility, whatever.
Story_ID: 314198
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and/or concerns for the African American or black communities in our country today?
Speaker 2: Well, one, one aspiration I have is, is for African Americans to, to, to feel a claim on this society in which they live.  A claim that can be expressed in one way through reparations, but a sense of citizenship, and a sense of membership, you know that goes back to my [maternal] grandfather [Clarence Lefebvre], who fought in France on the Maginot Line [sic.].  And yeah, I told you the story of how I saw my grandfather position himself in American society and kind of resolve in a certain way that this was a benefit that he had had from fighting, but I think that you know, working in Chicago [Illinois] and knowing poor communities and disenfranchised communities around the country, being involved in civil rights, that we haven't finished this fight at all; that there are too many kids who grow up still feeling marginalized.  I mean the thing that really gets to me in Chicago is to see Mexicans coming into Chicago taking any job, anywhere, under any circumstances, making any amount of money, but consolidating that effort within the family, within the community, to push themselves ahead, leaving behind African American kids who don't feel like they have a stake.  "I'm not going to take that job," you know, "I'm not going to do that work," and so on and so on.  But the consequence of it is that they don't make a claim and they get left out.
Story_ID: 314199
Speaker 1: Last question, how do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) As a scientist, you know, as somebody who, who had a passion in chemistry and converted that passion into being a scientist of society that took a very rigorous approach derived from working in a laboratory, working in, in natural sciences, but took the rigor of that and the caring and sensitivity that my mother [Ethelyn Lefebvre Earls] gave me about people and you know, kind of converged or collapsed or integrated those two perspectives, caring for people and being rigorous into a career.
Story_ID: 314200
Speaker 1: I like this picture, and I use it as my first one because it's about a community.  In this case, the community is a band.  It's a band that I grew up with.  The location is Second Street in, in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And on the right side of the picture here is my Uncle Oscar [ph.], who is the band leader.  These are not kids from a particular school.  It's an after-school program.  The building that are seated in front of is a building that my uncle built himself and that our band studio was inside that building.  I am submerged in my community.  I am on the far left with a clarinet in my hand.  Even though I'm not highly distinguished because I'm on the--at the end of the photograph, in fact, I am the first clarinetist in the band.
Speaker 2: So that's Felton, III [HistoryMaker Felton James Earls].  You know, much of my career was started out studying--my career as a scientist started out studying three-year-olds.  In this picture, I'm three years old.  I'm very neatly dressed because I think my mother [Ethelyn Lefebvre Earls] was putting all of her energies into her attachment with me and my attachment with her.  I was very well taken care of.  I'm looking off in the distance in that photograph, wondering where my father [Felton Earls, II] is.  My father's in the Philippines probably, fighting in World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: That's my mother in New Orleans, in the French Quarter, in the garden of a hotel.  It's one of the last pictures I have of my mother being healthy that--she's about seventy-five in that picture, and that--the last five years of her life, she had a number of different ailments.  So it's a very important picture for me.  First of all, she's beautiful.  The garden's beautiful.  And it's a way I really want to remember her.
Speaker 2: This is my family.  Two or three years after moving from New Orleans to Memphis, Tennessee, my father is there, and at this point, this is a peak of his career.  I mean he's a very important postal official.  There's Philip [Philip Earls] on his lap and Carol [Carol Earls Franklin], who's sitting between my mother and my father, my mother, and I'm a high school student, probably tenth grade at Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee].  Lynne [Lynne Earls Scroggins], my younger sister, hasn't been born yet.
Speaker 1: So that's the Earls' sibling clan at the funeral of my mother.  I'm standing in front of Carol, my sister, who lives in Detroit [Michigan] now.  Philip is standing next to me.  Philip lives in Virginia Beach [Virginia] and Lynne, who's now been born for a long time, lives in Atlanta [Georgia].  So there're four of us.
Speaker 2: The year is 1974.  It's a house that we rented in London [England], and it's one of the happiest days of my life.  There I am, as a father, holding my youngest daughter, Tanya [Tanya Earls], who was just born, I mean she's probably about, I don't know, maybe a month old in that picture.  But still very, very new and very, very beautiful.
Speaker 1: So this is a photograph of the extended family now at my mother's funeral about five years ago in Memphis, Tennessee.  What's important about this picture is that, a lot of the extended family, cousins, are from New Orleans.  And so it was one of the rare moments where the New Orleans contingent of the family has come together with those of us who were marooned in Memphis to have, have a moment as, as everybody, the whole family there.  I'm standing on the left-hand side of the picture in front of my wife, Mary [Mary Carlson], and there's Philip and Carol and Lynne and cousins from New Orleans, none of whom right now are in New Orleans because of Hurricane Katrina.  So Charlene's [ph.] in one place and Nedra's [ph.] in another place, and they're kind of all around the United States.
Speaker 2: Well, this is a great moment in my career.  This is an open house conducted in 1994 in Chicago [Illinois] that is inaugurating our Chicago project [Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods].  And we invited people from the state legislature, Carolyn Moseley Braun [HistoryMaker Carol Moseley Braun] who was then senator from Illinois and lots of other, sort of important people.  We had about 200, 250 people there that sort of christened the beginning of the Chicago project.
Speaker 1: This is another one of the happier moments in my life.  There I am walking my first daughter, Leigh [Leigh Earls Slayne], an adopted daughter I have from my marriage with Mary, down the aisle in a church here in Cambridge [Massachusetts], and it was in some ways a signal of extraordinary success we had as an interracial family in having Leigh sort of reach this moment in her life.
Speaker 2: Well, I said that I should have been an activist and this photograph represents a moment when my activism was at its peak.  I call it grounding with my, with my brothers, that Dumisani Kumalo, standing on the right was the leader of the American divestment campaign--he's South African, during the 1980s and into the '90s [1990s].  Dumisani's now the UN [United Nations] ambassador from South Africa to the United Nations.  The person standing immediately to my right is Joe Throley [ph.], who at that time was one of the leading radical journalists in South Africa.  And next to him is a very famous photographer whose name is Kumalo [Alf Kumalo], who's, who's probably made the most important photographic collections of Nelson Mandela.  But it was a political moment where we're kind of meeting in an airport and exchanging ideas about whether or not the divestment campaign was working or not.
Speaker 1: Well, one of the ways in which I have fun is driving my Porsche.  I--when I first met my wife, she had a Porsche, and she had a couple of 'em, and so over the years, we have gotten to know these cars pretty well.  This is one of those days in which I was racing my car, and, but I just wanted to show it because I think it's important to know how people have fun, you know, (laughter).
Speaker 2: This is a photograph I like because it, it's reflecting my clinical role, my clinical professionalism in some ways, that for seven years I directed the Division of Child Psychiatry [Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry] at Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri].  And I had many patients and had many students and this photograph kind of reflects that period in my life when I was a clinician as well as a scientist.
Speaker 1: Well, I told a bit of a story about my being a conscientious objector in the 1970s, and I show this article because there was a point in which it looked like I wasn't gonna make it, that the [U.S.] Army was gonna draft me and send me to Korea and Vietnam.  And I had a choice to make which was to go to jail.  And I thought very, very seriously about that, and was basically prepared to do that when the Boston [Massachusetts] community chimed in.  And one of the people who was very helpful to me was Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] who learned about my story, knew that I was working at the Charles Street Jail in, in Boston and wrote the Army and said, "We're gonna send this guy there, but we want you to process his claim efficiently.  We think he's a conscientious objector, and we don't want you to dally around and have him going off to Korea or Vietnam if he's not supposed to."  So I went, I reported to active duty in San Antonio [Texas], not knowing what the hell was gonna happen, saw a chaplain, saw a psychiatrist, saw a bunch of other people.  And within five weeks, I was discharged.  But it was because Ed Brooke was calling up the Army every day saying, "Where do things stand today?"
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And this appeared where?
Speaker 1: This was The Boston Globe, yeah.
Speaker 2: That picture was taken in 1991, just after Mandela was released, and we're giving him a photograph of--that's my wife, Mary, there.  And we're giving him a photograph of, of a t-shirt that says, "Free Nelson Mandela," that we held up as a banner--19,000 feet at the top of Mount Kilimanjaro three years earlier.  In 1987, or 1986, when we climbed mountain--Mount Kilimanjaro, we were convinced that Mandela would not make it out of jail, that he'd die, and that we wanted to symbolize his importance by taking him to the top of Africa.  And four years later, I had an opportunity to meet him.  And I've met him since then.  I said Charles Darwin was my hero.  That's still true, but probably before I die, I'll convert to Nelson Mandela as my hero.  He's a remarkable--I would say probably the most remarkable person in the 20th century, given what he went through and what he's contributed all his life to world, to the world.
