Story_ID: 428510
Speaker 1: I'm [Larry Crowe] interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Eva, E-V-A, Lois, L-O-I-S, Evans, E-V-A-N-S.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  It kinda threw me.  And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 14th 1935.  I was born in Memphis, Tennessee, actually, but I lived in Detroit [Michigan] all of my life from about a--one and a half or two.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm the retired--I'm a retired educator.  I was a teacher, a principal, a director, and retired as deputy superintendent of Lansing [Michigan] schools.
Speaker 1: And you were--you, you were also past supreme basileus of the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'm the twenty-forth national president of Alpha Kappa Alpha.
Story_ID: 428511
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --they only require a short answer.  First one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, probably fried cra--clams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably light green.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I'd have to think about it.  I have so many really good ones, but, let me think.  Move on to another question and I'll think about that one.  How's that?
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 428512
Speaker 1: All right, now the, the following are questions that were--are interview questions for former Alpha Kappa Alpha [AKA] Sorority national presidents and they are in different categories.  First category is about your election.  What influenced your decision to seek the position of supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: Well, a couple of things.  I had been office--an officer before in several capacities and secondly, I was encouraged to run for supreme basileus.  My very good friend, [Dr.] Barbara [Kinnard] Phillips, in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, was so encouraging and so was [HistoryMaker] Bernice [Irene] Sumlin from Dayton, Ohio.  All of them came to me and said, you know, you're an ideal candidate, you really should run for the office, and it wasn't anything that I thought seriously about.  But, I, I did run and it was a marvelous, marvelous journey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how would you describe your ascension to supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd been in the sorority since really 1954.  I was an undergraduate chapter basileus.  When I moved to Lansing [Michigan], I was a graduate advisor and I was vice president, then president of the alumni chapter here.  I decided on a whim, really, to run for what we call regional director, and I won.  Who would've thought?  In any case, I won and when Barbara Phillips became the supreme basileus, the twentieth supreme basileus, she asked me if I would serve as her national program chairman.  So, I agreed to do so and consequently, so many of my friends encouraged me to run for supreme basileus.  And by the way, I didn't win the first time and guess where I lost?  In Detroit [Michigan], my home city.  I don't think I took it seriously as a thing to do.  But then I decided I would take it seriously.  And when I ran again, I won.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what propelled--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  What propelled your candidacy for supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: Propelled it?  I'll tell you one defining moment that I think won the election for me.  If you're trying to run among a group of all--women who are all qualified actually to do the job, here in Lansing in my--one of the schools here, we had a television studio and I collected a whole bunch of photographs of myself doing various things, as a member of the Board of Water and Light, as a member of being on the educational staff, civil rights commission, Lansing Symphony [Orchestra].  I collected all of those pictures and one of my sorors who worked for a TV station came by and photographed me doing a lot of those things and photographed those pictures.  And so my speech said I'm qualified to do this because I've done all these things.  And then I have this brainstorm.  I put the music to Anita Baker's 'Giving You the Best That I Got' and it was two minutes on time.  And when I showed it in Richmond [Virginia], the sorors just said, oh, this, this lady is gonna propel us into the future.  And so I think that that one entity--well, at the time, it caused consternation, but now, it's an acceptable practice among people running for office.  It doesn't matter what office you're running for, everybody gets a video.  But at the time, it was, whoa, they thought an unfair practice and so forth.  But, I, I looked down in the audience and wondered if it were something I should do.  Now, there was no prohibition against doing that as your candidate's speech.  There was nothing in our documents that said you couldn't do that, but nobody had ever done it.  So, when I got up to speak and these photographs were showing on the big screens in the hall and the music to 'Giving You the Best That I Got' was also background music and I was saying those things that I felt important to be supreme basileus, and when I finished in my two minutes, it was a total success.
Story_ID: 428513
Speaker 1: Now, the following questions are about your leadership.  What was your vision for Alpha Kappa Alpha [AKA] Sorority, Incorporated?
Speaker 2: Well, I know--I knew that Alpha Kappa Alpha sorors were 100 percent college-trained women.  I knew that they had certain skills because I knew the way women had grown in this country.  I knew that we were teachers and preachers and educators originally and then by the time I became supreme basileus, we had lawyers and physicians and physicists, et cetera.  I assessed those skills and asked myself, what, what can this group of more than 100,000 college-trained women do?  And the answer was anything they want.  And so I knew that in America among African American children, there was a deficit in mathematics and science as skills areas.  I'm from Detroit [Michigan], as you know.  When I left home.  Everybody in Detroit who could work did work, but the automobile factory changed and the need for a different skill arose.  And when I asked the union guys that I knew from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Detroit, what, what was the difference in some people working and some people not working?  Algebra.  Those men who could take those tests to be retrained had some algebra.  So, I decided, well, if that's gonna be the cutting edge for job opportunities in America, that's what we're gonna do because we can do it.  It was my vision that 100,000 college-trained women could do anything.  So, that's what we did, everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what or who influenced your vision for AKA?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a school superintendent deputy.  I was in charge of the third largest school district in Michigan, so I knew what students needed.  I also knew in some of my other things civil rights.  I served on that for 11 years, I told you.  I knew where we were going in civil rights.  I looked at the demography of Alpha Kappa Alpha and I--for the first time in our history, we had women who had been in the sorority fifty years or better, really, a large number of them, so I knew that we didn't have programs that took care of that group of women.  So, those things influenced what I thought Alpha Kappa Alpha could rightfully be about and do well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In what ways was your vision designed to ensure Alpha Kappa Alpha's survival?
Speaker 2: Well, a couple of things.  I also felt that economics was an important piece of it, so I created what's called a business roundtable.  I'm pleased to see that some elements of that has continued.  I also knew that the women of Alpha Kappa Alpha had to use their skills in ways they thought were important, and so I set us to task doing that.  And I felt--when I came to Alpha Kappa Alpha for reasons outside of this interview, we were down membership.  We were down membership because we had asked the women to pay a large assessment for something, to complete our building in Chicago [Illinois].  But, I was determined to get those women back.  So, I thought good programming would do that, and it worked.
Story_ID: 428514
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how was your vision communicated and carried out through the sorority's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] programs during your administration?
Speaker 2: Oh, lots of ways.  Here at Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan], along with who was--the lady that was a provost, she's now the president of Michigan State, Lou Anna Simons [sic. Lou Anna Simon], we got together and we were able to on the campus of Michigan State University offer science and mathematics camps every summer to young African American children from all over this country.  We had a soror in Houston, Texas, who worked for Shell Oil [Company].  She would give us funding for that camp that went on here.  Around the United States, women in colleges and universities also created science camps.  So, the trick is to have your program from coast to coast, everybody doing something of the same thing.  We had a signature program called Partnerships in Math and Education [sic. Partnership in Mathematics & Science (PIMS)], in science and math, and so it worked.  I worked with Elizabeth Dole who was then head of the American Red Cross.  And I knew at the time that AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] was the leading cause of death among African American women of childbearing age, so the Red Cross had some really good materials on AIDS, better than we could create by ourselves, so we partnered with the American Red Cross so that what we had, we could use and they could use us as a conduit to get the information out.  We also at one time were the largest African American group of donors on the blood marrow--in the blood marrow bank because it was important to get that message out.  So, we partnered with organizations that had similar interests to ours and we could be mutually beneficial.  That was my theme, networking.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was--what kinds of things did you specifically do to successfully communicate your vision and effectively institutionalize it as a guiding principle?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a good thing about the way Alpha Kappa Alpha conducts its business.  When one supreme basileus leaves office, the incoming supreme basileus has an opportunity to convey their vision to the entire body politic assembled at their national meeting, so that's one vehicle.  Then, I asked a young soror of Alpha Kappa Alpha living down in Talladega, Alabama, she's the first lady of that school down there.  In any case, she made for me a wonderful program video that every chapter in the US got.  Then, we put in the 'Ivy Leaf'.'  That's our national publication.  Then, we created booklets.  Dr. Gloria [S.] Smith from Michigan State University was my national program chair, so we both understood how to reach large groups of people with short time, partnered with the National Science Foundation [NSF], so on.
Story_ID: 428515
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the next series of questions are about leadership style.  What leadership style did you use to bring your vision to fruition?
Speaker 2: Well, I have an eclectic leadership style.  When I need to be tough, I'm that.  When I need to be conciliatory, I'm that.  But I think that I speak well enough and having taught school, I think that I have the wherewithal to say what I mean and not be conf--have people confused by what I'm trying to convey.  So, you know, I carried myself everywhere myself would go to get my vision out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  As the individual with the ultimate responsibility for making decisions which would shape AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], what was the--what was the fundamental test you applied?
Speaker 2: The fundamental test is whether or not we are doing what our founders envisioned us doing.  Our motto is service to all mankind.  Alpha Kappa Alpha is us, but it's not about us.  I know that probably in the pantheon of women in this country, we're probably pretty privileged if you think about it.  So, you use that privilege to do good things and the ultimate test is whether or not that's what you are doing.  If you are giving service as our motto suggests and if you're using your time and talent as an Alpha Kappa Alpha woman to do what our programs are, that's the ultimate test of whether or not the sorority is going the right way and your vision is going the right way and so on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, which former supreme's [supreme basileus] leadership style, if any, did yours parallel more, the--yeah, the most?
Speaker 2: Let me think that through.  I think I borrowed a little bit from a lot of people.  I watched many of them.  I watched [HistoryMaker] Mattelia [B.] Grays' democratic leadership style and she always looked wonderful.  I like [HistoryMaker] Faye [Beverly] Bryant's, oh, friendly, hello leadership style.  [Dr.] Barbara [Kinnard] Phillips I thought was very, very bright.  I liked hers.  I liked [HistoryMaker] Bernice [Irene] Sumlin who was no nonsense, get it done, but, but kind.  Marjorie Parker was brilliant.  So, I think you can learn a little bit from everybody.  I think I'm pretty smart and I had been a leader in many things, so I used what I knew best, too.
Story_ID: 428516
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the next series of questions is under the title supreme encounters.  What did you learn about leadership while serving as supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: Let me count the ways (laughter).  I learned lots, lots.  I learned sometimes it doesn't matter how passionate you are about a particular thing.  If you don't put a lot of work into making it happen, it's not going to.  I loved working with undergraduates, but I found that I could never fall off the dime.  Every year, I met with alpha chapter at Howard University [Washington D.C.], 'cause I said I want to keep them involved, engaged, so I learned those things from Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority, Inc.].  I learned--I learned the beauty of women who cared about each other, too.  That's the best thing about Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority.  Women who really have your back and want to see you do well as opposed to women who don't want to see you do well.  I worked in an environment with 99 percent white male and it was very different.  They were not discourteous or disengaged or anything like that, but when you stepped up, you had to step up with your best hope.  You had to really step up and be ready to assume and do well, whatever it was you were supposed to do.  That was--that was a good learning tool.  I never resented those men.  It honed me for other things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what lesson or lessons were learned--what, what, what lessons or lessons learned was--were, were most instructive for you?
Speaker 2: Lessons learned.  Well, I learned sometimes to back up gracefully, as least as gracefully as I could.  I learned that it doesn't matter.  Everything is not gonna go your way all of the time, so take it and move on.  Take your lumps and move on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was the greatest challenge or controversy that you faced and how did you respond?
Speaker 2: Well, there were lots of challenges, lots of challenges.  I faced the challenge of having to close the Cleveland Job Corps [Cleveland, Ohio] and discovering that we owed a lot of money at the end of my reign, but I, I understood government contracts from my work, so I set about seeing that we didn't owe lots of money.  I set about doing some detective work to resolve those issues.  That was a great challenge.  I spent all of my Christmas one year working on the Cleveland Job Corps.  Well, membership is always a kind of a challenge.  Doesn't matter, 100,000 women, not all of them are all going to do everything right all of the time, but most do, so challenges like that.  I had people challenges, but they were resolvable as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, on whom did you rely for counsel and guidance when responding to challenges or controversy?
Speaker 2: I spoke a lot to Dr. Gloria [S.] Smith here in Lansing [Michigan] who was a very good friend of mine and, of course, was the national program chair, and I spoke a lot to the regional directors who were on my board at the time.  I thought many of them were so bright and so intelligent and I could rely on their wisdom most of the time, and also my committee chairs.  When it came to Alpha Kappa Alpha, there was always a person to whom you could go for a particular problem, and often, I relied on my experience from similar situations.  They're not too many things under the sun that are brand new and I faced a lot of them by the time I got to the supreme basileus-ness of Alpha Kappa Alpha.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, describe an irritation that spurred you to action.
Speaker 2: An irritation.  Well, owing that money to Cleveland [Ohio] spurred me to action.  That's (laughter)--well, to the federal government spurred me to action in a hurry.  I think mean spiritedness spurs me to action.  If I see somebody behaving ugly toward another person, I may just be up in your face, unfortunately.
Story_ID: 428517
Speaker 1: This next section is called achievements.  The first question is by what standards would you measure the success of your administration?
Speaker 2: Well, the fact that some of the things I wanted to do are still being carried on perhaps in a different form, but nonetheless.  Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority, Inc.] has threads that run so true throughout it.  I am still attempting to complete a continuing care retirement community in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, for our senior citizens.  It looks as if it's going to bear fruit this year and we'll complete the building.  Those are things that I see continued.  I didn't create the strands under which I operated, but I did put program to them.  We always had a healthcare strand.  We always had education as a strand.  We had those things--I added economics when [HistoryMaker] Faye [Beverly] Bryant was the national president.  She called me in when she was going into office and Dr. Freddie Groomes[-McLendon] from Tallahassee, Florida, was going to be her program chair and she asked me, what strand would you put into Alpha Kappa Alpha's program?  And I remember saying to her economics.  That's the last frontier in America that we haven't covered, so I think economics.  I can't say that I did anything with it as a strand, but presidents from then on did, and the current president just has it wonderfully well thought out as her program theme.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what one thing would you like to have done that you were unable to accomplish?
Speaker 2: The senior housing project.  It was the project closest to my heart.  The day that I saw more than one hundred women stand up in a room who were then fifty-year members, I knew we needed it.  And one of our former national presidents said, you know, if it were built today, I'd move into it.  If it were built today, we have a soror whom you know, not very far away, who could be living there if it were built today.  And I'm--it will be built, but I'm disheartened that I didn't get it built.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, it is said that we do not remember days, we remember moments.  As supreme basileus, what was your greatest moment?
Speaker 2: Well, I had so many wonderful moments.  One great one was getting elected.  That was one great one.  Another time, all of the undergraduates came and each one gave me a t-shirt, a big sweatshirt from each of their schools, the undergraduates on the committee, on the Undergraduates Activities committee.  If undergraduates care about you, you can feel pretty good about that.  And I thought that that was a marvelous time.  In my life, though, I met everybody.  I met the president of the United States, the vice president of the United States.  I met the members of [U.S.] Congress.  I worked with [HistoryMaker] Dr. Dorothy Height.  I worked with all of the congressional representatives who were members of our soror--of our sorority and who weren't--all of them came--the black caucus came to my Boules in Baltimore [Maryland].  We helped [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun to become the United States senator and I asked her to speak in Chicago [Illinois].  So, I've had some marvelous moments.  I've met ambassador this and congressman that, and I think all of those things were, were wonderful opportunities.  I don't know about one, but they were all great.  And here at MSU [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], I had seven hundred kids up here one time that were undergraduates of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority and that was wonderful, I thought.
Story_ID: 428518
Speaker 1: All right.  This, this following set of questions is about your legacy.  Compare the Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority, Inc.] you inherited from your predecessor to the one you left for your successor.
Speaker 2: Well, when I left--when I got to alpha ka--came into my presidency of Alpha Kappa Alpha [AKA], it was a good time to be the national president.  My predecessor had built a headquarters, not the whole headquarters, the third floor of the headquarters and had gotten it paid for.  Now, of course, there were repercussions from that but I was able to recoup some of the lost membership and I think move on from there.  Alpha Kappa Alpha is an humungous sized organization, so it doesn't shift easily.  Programs that [HistoryMaker] Dr. Mary Shy Scott in Atlanta [Georgia] put together, some people are still doing those as well as some people are still doing science and math.  Some people are still working on the [American] Red Cross, so every president leaves something.  I think that I left, though, the notion of partnering with other organizations to leverage our influence.  When I was president, we partnered with Pillsbury to underwrite some of our programs and the quid pro quo of that was the women of Alpha Kappa Alpha who were science majors and math majors and et cetera, it helped Pillsbury with its program to diversify its workforce.  So, we had science people and math people who went to work for Pillsbury and they were grateful and we were grateful for their underwriting our program, so, the notion of partnershipping.  I partnershipped with Elizabeth Dole, as I told you, and I worked with HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] and so on to get this building built in North Carolina.  I think I left that idea, leverage.  I left the idea I think, too, that programs should be global, that all of us should turn our attention to whatever it is the sorority is trying to accomplish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, which of your contributions had the most impact?
Speaker 2: Who knows (laughter)?  I don't know, I started a public policy forum in Washington [D.C.] because I felt that a group like ours should have a presence in the nation's capital.  That's continued and I think that was impactful for Washington to know about a group like ours.  I think the understanding that we were bright and we were the best and brightest the nation could produce bar race or anything else, and we could use that for something, that if we decided--I think that I was forever articulating, we're the best and brightest and we can do whatever we choose.  I think it resonated and whether it set or not, I think we, we know that better.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, what accomplishments of your administration do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered for the, the Ivy Acres [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], our center for the aging.  I'd like to be remembered for the public policy.  I'd like to be remembered because even though I didn't have girls, I was convinced that our sorority would be better off if our daughters had an equal shot at membership, so I campaigned for four years along with everybody else and me, but I had a focus on it, that we would leave legacy, that our daughters could be AKAs, as long as they held the same standards, the same academic averages, they had the same as everybody else, that we couldn't keep them out of Alpha Kappa Alpha.  And my story I used to tell was, hey, if you went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] or the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], you got extra points for being a legacy.  We should give extra points.
Story_ID: 428519
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the last section is on the past and the future.  First question is, what key elements of the sorority's heritage or legacy have been powerful enough to keep AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] vibrant through the test of time?
Speaker 2: I think that--the fact that there is a commonality of understanding among us.  You're selected to be an AKA because you have certain attributes and habits of mind and heart.  As long as we continue a good selection process, I don't mean to keep anybody else out.  I just mean the women that we get are similar in what they believe to be true.  They believe that African Americans are good people.  They believe that we can benefit from a good education.  They believe that America is a good place.  They know it's not a perfect place, but they believe that if we worked hard and played by the rules that we could achieve.  All of those--as the nation grew, Alpha Kappa Alpha grew.  And so those are things I think that vined us together, our strength is our membership.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what one thing is essential to ensure that we walk rather than back into the next one hundred years?
Speaker 2: Education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Has the sisterhood dimension taken a back seat to your pledge to be of service to all mankind?
Speaker 2: No, because before you can give that service, you first join this sisterhood and we believe that we choose women who understand that.  As I said earlier, wherever there is in the United States, if you are in deep trouble and there's an Alpha Kappa Alpha woman in that place, you have a friend.  You have somebody you can call upon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do your--I'm sorry.  What do you perceive as the greatest threat to the survival of the sorority?
Speaker 2: Dissension, possible dissension, not, not absolute dissension, but possible dissension, possibly not sticking together, possibly not remembering that our founders created a friendship among college women, and the friendship was to be of service.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What elements of the sorority must be maintained or changed to ensure perfect sisterhood?
Speaker 2: I don't know that there's any single element and I don't know that there's anything like a perfect sisterhood.  I think, though, that for sisterhood to remain in Alpha Kappa Alpha, you have to do it.  You have to be a good sister.  Because what you do speak so loudly, I can't hear what you say, so you have to be a good sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your vision for the perfect sisterhood?
Speaker 2: If there were a perfect sisterhood, I would think that my emotional, psychological needs would be met by being assured that what I was in was worthwhile and I think that that would be a perfect sisterhood, if everybody acted as if what we're in is worthwhile and we're supposed to treat each other kindly and with care.
Story_ID: 428520
Speaker 1: I'm gonna start by, by asking you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Arthur Allmon] side.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: But, we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's first name was Exzelma, E-X-Z-E-L-M-A.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And her maiden name was Lowe, L-O-W-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well, she's deceased.  Her date of birth was January 29th and since she--it must've been 1912 or 1914, one of the two.  Sorry about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Sardis, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, first of all, I want to ask you about her name.  Is there a story behind Exzelma?
Speaker 2: Well, when my grandmother was educated and her sisters and brothers, I think they were educated a little differently.  They were educated in a more classic tradition 'cause one of my uncles is Everett [ph.] Gervaise, G-E-R-V-A-I-S-E.  So, my grandmother and her sister went to a, a school that was a continuation of the eighth grade school that became the forerunner Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].  So, they were educated on a different tradition, a little more classical tradition.  I think that's where the stuff came from.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: My mother went to high school in Memphis [Tennessee] 'cause there wasn't any high school there for African Americans in her little town.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll get to that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, but Sardis is in northern Mississippi or?
Speaker 2: Just outside of Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we were talking upstairs that it was near Holly Springs [Mississippi] where Rust College is, right?  Close?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Now, I'm saying as if I know for sure, but I believe that it's not far because my uncle married a woman who had gone to Holly Springs.
Speaker 1: To Rust, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Rust--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --College.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  Can you trace them all the way back to slavery or Reconstruction or, you know, how--what--how, how much do you know about them?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I do know a little bit.  I went on the internet to the Cambridge [Public] Library in Mass [Massachusetts].  I got a membership to that library and I went back to the census records for an Albert [ph.] Lowe, L-O-W-E.  I never knew this, but I found that the first Albert Lowe that I could find on the census in the late 1800s when they first put African Americans on the census came from Virginia.  He married a woman named Annie [ph.] from South Carolina.  I never knew that.  I don't really know how they got to Mississippi unless they got marched out.  Mississippi was the new west in that time.  There are Lowes in Tuscaloosa [Alabama], that's correct.
Speaker 1: So is this a--
Speaker 2: Tuscaloosa.
Speaker 1: This Albert Lowe, is this a name that's passed down in your family--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that you know?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I was gonna get onto that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: The next Albert Lowe that I found was in Mississippi, the next time I found one.  His son was my mother's father who was also Albert Lowe.  I found on the census records in the household of the Albert Lowe that was my great-grandfather, my mother's name is on the census records, Exzelma Lowe.  At the time when I finished, her second brother was there, Everett was his name, and there was another child in the household, Forestine [ph.], but I think she had been left there because her father moved to Michigan, Detroit [Michigan], and he sent for her to come, but she was left in the household.  So, I know that name follows us, Albert Lowe.  One of my uncles has it as a middle name now.  He died.  He was--he died, I'm told playing baseball.  They didn't get him to the hospital in time for appendicitis.
Speaker 1: Now, this is your, your mother's father?
Speaker 2: My mother's father.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's your grandfather.
Speaker 2: The, the legend goes.  He died--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --playing baseball.  My grandmother, my mother's mother, remarried.  They're--put a pen in that point.  There are lots and lots and lots of Lowes, L-O-W-E, in that part of the world, Sardis, Batesville [Mississippi], Memphis, lots of them, many of--most of whom I don't really know, but I know that there are.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are there any other stories associated with the family?  Now, the, the, the fact that he played baseball, now, your grandfather would have had to been born I guess in the 1890s I guess to have a--
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: --a child in 1912, you know.
Speaker 2: 'Cause the first one I saw was like 1820 out of--on the Virginia hall of records.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was something like that, so he's two generations away from that.
Story_ID: 428521
Speaker 1: Was that Albert Lowe [ph.] a slave?
Speaker 2: Probably.  Doesn't say, said farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, the, the--when you go across the top of the census, it says the person's name, then the person's mother's name, and all of this is in somebody's handwriting, the census taker's handwriting.  Then, it says date of birth, then it talks about the, the color of the person, then it ask whom he married.  That's how I knew about this Annie Lowe [ph.], Annie.  And it ask the occupation and it ask interestingly enough if you could read and write, and the answer was yes, he could read.  And I wondered how he could read, but he could read.  But, it said his occupation was farmer--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --so, he may have been a slave, but--
Speaker 1: Now--well, if he was--
Speaker 2: If he was in Virginia, yeah.
Speaker 1: --he would be listed under his master's name, you know, as property.  The, the other thing is that if he was black, they would list colored or--
Speaker 2: He was colored.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had colored.
Speaker 2: I still have those--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I think I have the--I copied the paper down, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's possible that he was a free man of color in--even in Virginia and because otherwise he would be listed as property I think of a master.
Speaker 2: He wasn't listed as property--
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, so he's--
Speaker 2: --when I first saw him--
Speaker 1: --so he probably was.
Speaker 2: --and his own name on the Internet.  Now, I guess I could go back to a Lowe family of Virginia to see who was in their household, but they would've--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --been white.  But, in his own name on the Internet, it said farmer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so chances are if he's colored and a farmer, he's free.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I hadn't--
Speaker 1: He wouldn't--
Speaker 2: --thought of that, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 2: When I get some--
Speaker 1: Yeah, otherwise--
Speaker 2: --more time--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they're listed as property along with the goats and the--and everything else, you know, usually.
Speaker 2: Oh, I saw that in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 2: I went to a--I went on a tour.
Speaker 1: And many don't have last names either, they just have their name, their first name, you know, and then they're considered to be part of the family that owned them, you know, and--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, Albert Lowe's brother, a legend is, worked in Memphis [Tennessee].  His name was Herman [ph.] at The Peabody Hotel [Memphis, Tennessee] in Memphis, and the Peabody is still there.  But, the legend goes he baked a cake shaped like an egg and he won a--something good for that.  And as a grownup person, I went to the Peabody Hotel.  I felt a kinship with that hotel (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are there any, any stories that come down?  I mean, well that's a good story there about the cake--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in, in the--are there any other stories about what it was like?  Now, now they grew up in Memphis itself and--
Speaker 2: No, they grew up in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, as far as I knew.
Speaker 1: But your mother [Exzelma Lowe Allmon]--
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: --was in, in--
Speaker 2: My mother went to high school, yes, went to--
Speaker 1: --in Memphis.  She went to--high school there, right.
Speaker 2: And all of her brothers and sisters had to go to high school in Memphis 'cause--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --there was no school there.  But, when Albert Lowe died who was my great-grandfather, my grandmother remarried with three small children, and his name was Trammell, T-R-A-M-M-E-L-L.  I always thought Grandpa Jake's [ph.]--I never knew my mother's real father.  I only knew Trammell and he was always my grandfather.  His name was David Trammell [ph.], but I thought his name--we called him Grandpa Jake and I thought his name was Jacob, and on the Internet I couldn't find him.  Then, I was told I was looking for the wrong name, that's why I couldn't find him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: But lots of good stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, any other stories about the Lowes?  Now, what did--
Speaker 2: The Lowes had a school named Lowes School [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Now, what--about, about circa what year was Lowes School?
Speaker 2: Well, it had to be in my mother's time because the boys and girls went to school there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even the Trammell boys and girls went to the Lowes School.
Speaker 1: So, circa between 1912 at least and--
Speaker 2: Yes, and--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --I'd say 1940.
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty [1940].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  All right.
Speaker 2: Let's see, what else--
Speaker 1: So this was a--this was a school that the black children went to in--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And Miss Cora [ph.] who would be my great great aunt--well, would be my grandfather--great-grandfather's brother's wife, Miss Cora, she taught the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her name would've been--last name was?
Speaker 2: Cora Lowe.
Speaker 1: Right, sorry, Cora Lowe.
Speaker 2: And you know what?  As a--as a, a young girl, I visited them once.  They were very--Miss Cora still lived and Uncle John [ph.] still lived, very interesting people.  I wish I had known them better or I, I wish at the time had known to ask them the questions that I now know to ask.
Story_ID: 428522
Speaker 1: So, your mother [Exzelma Lowe Allmon] went to high school in Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: In Memphis.
Speaker 1: Did she go to Manassas [High School, Memphis, Tennessee] or is that--
Speaker 2: Booker T.
Speaker 1: Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Manassas was the great rival school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I remember hearing about the parades between Booker T. and Manassas.  As an adult, they have taken me by Booker T. Washington High School so I could see it.  It's now a middle school but it still is there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what, what year did she graduate?  I'm gonna say she--1930, I guess or?
Speaker 2: Probably something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, about nineteen--
Speaker 2: Nineteen--
Speaker 1: She'd, she'd have been eighteen in 1930, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty [1930], something like that.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did she have any stories of growing up and what it was like to grow up in Memphis or, or go to Booker T. Washington High School?
Speaker 2: Well, the stories of the parades and the drum majorettes and what great fun that was.  She always spoke about it as something important.  I remember her saying that she sang a song in high school at their assembly, 'I Only Have Eyes For You.' (Laughter) It's one of the legends.  I only--she said, oh, I loved that song.  That was my song, 'I Only Have Eyes For You' and I sang it at the talent show or whatever the equivalent of a talent show was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did, did your mother get a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she went to--she went to a school in Jackson, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Is that Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Lane, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had about ten cousins that went there as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--okay, she went to Lane College.  Was she the first in your family to go to college or was she--
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Just--okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So you have--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --a history of college grads.
Speaker 2: Well, at least a generation history.  Uncle Robert--my family in Detroit [Michigan], Uncle Robert Edmonds [ph.] had graduated from Lane and wanted to continue.  He wanted to be a physician, graduated with biology, but he--when they got to Detroit, it wasn't the land of milk and honey, and so he went to work at the post office as did my dad [Arthur Allmon], worked at the post office.  And he worked there for I'll bet you forty-five or fifty years.  I still have his obit [obituary] upstairs.  And it's funny, people could do things in those days.  Uncle Robert educated five children on a postman's--well, working in--he was a Nixie clerk at the post office.
Speaker 1: Well, post office in those days was considered--
Speaker 2: Oh, and that's a--
Speaker 1: --a decent job.
Speaker 2: We thought it was.
Speaker 1: You know, with benefits and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) In my household.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But, unfortunately, it was a place that a lot of black people with degrees could--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the--it was the only--
Speaker 2: Could land.
Speaker 1: --job they could get, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's correct, could land.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And my great aunt went, grandmother went for a while.  Grandmother--you know, I don't think Grandmother Sarah graduated.  As I told you, she and her sister, whose name was Glenna, G-L-E-N-N-A--
Speaker 1: Now, is Sarah on your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Sarah, Sarah Jane [ph.] is my grandmother's name.  My mother's mother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is Sarah Jane.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she graduated--she went to--
Speaker 2: She went to--
Speaker 1: To Lane, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, no, she went to what would be the equivalent of the--before Fisk [School; Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] was a college or a university.
Speaker 1: Oh, to--
Speaker 2: It was something called Walden [University, Nashville, Tennessee] if her--if I read her obituary correctly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Walden, okay.
Speaker 2: I, I don't know much more about it.  What I know about those things is what Aunt Glenna's children wrote in their obituaries of their mother and father, things I hadn't known until I would say 1990 in Detroit.
Speaker 1: You have--if your--if your grandmother went to the precursor of Fisk, I mean that, that puts her in school in 1870, '60s [1860s] or '70s [1870s], I mean, you know--yeah, that's--yeah 'cause Fisk dates--well, I don't know the exact date that Fisk starts [1867], but I know it's--it was going in the 1870s, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, directly after the Civil War, she went to a precursor--well, you know, you could only go to the eighth grade and if you went to the twelfth grades, you were considered able to teach school, actually, which is what happened to them.
Speaker 1: I, I had read also that many of the early black colleges [HBCUs] were high school basically.  You--
Speaker 2: That is essentially the case.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And as they went on and gained more rigorous course work, and as their instructors themselves were graduates of colleges and universities.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother have anything particular to say about, you know, Booker T. Washington or Lane or?
Speaker 2: What I remember her talking about a lot is that there were good and bad times.  You know, you have a friend all over the country if you go to those schools, and so we knew people.  My middle name is really spelled L-O-Y-C-E, but as I went onto school in later years, somehow the L-O-Y-C-E got changed, and I'll tell you that story.  That story is a godmother named Joyce.  My mother's good friend that was from either high school or college was Joyce, and so she named me Lois in honor of Joyce.  And if--J-O-Y-C-E.  And as I said, somewhere along the way, that L-O-Y-C-E got changed to L-O-I-S.  But--so, that was a good time.
Story_ID: 428523
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side of the family now.  Can, can you give me your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Arthur, A-R-T-H-U-R, Allmon, A-L-L-M-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's from Pine Bluff, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: So, Arthur Allmon Evans, right?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, Evans is my married--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, that's your married--
Speaker 2: --name.
Speaker 1: Okay, Arthur Allmon then, okay.
Speaker 2: My, my maiden name is Allmon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A-L-L-M-O-N.
Speaker 1: And he was born--what was his birth date?
Speaker 2: Well, he, he was two years older than mother [Exzelma Lowe Allmon].
Speaker 1: So, 1910?
Speaker 2: Something like 1910.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know much about his family.
Speaker 1: In Pine Bluff, Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Except that his family was somehow kind of racially mixed.  They didn't talk about it a good deal.  I saw a picture--his, his, his mother was a very dark-skinned person and his father was a very, very mixed man.
Speaker 1: Light?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Very light--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --colored man?
Story_ID: 428524
Speaker 1: Now, you were talking about your father.  His--he was your--
Speaker 2: Arthur Allmon--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was his name.
Speaker 1: And, and you said his mother was very dark, his father was light-skinned.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Their photographs appear that way.  He had a sister whose name was Mildred [ph.] and they called her Millie 'cause that was his mother's name as well, Millie, and I remember this.  His mother's maiden name was Millie Dishmon, D-I-S-H-M-O-N, and his father was Alexander Allmon [ph.].  And I don't--unfortunately, I haven't learned very much else about that family, although I will one of these days when I slow down enough.
Speaker 1: Now, were, were they associated with the--with the school at all?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  My father was in Memphis [Tennessee] to go to school.  Then, he had to go--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to war.
Speaker 1: No, I mean, the, the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff [Pine Bluff, Arkansas].
Speaker 2: No, but my former husband's uncle was president there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, do you--what, what did your father's family do in Pine Bluff [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: I, I--they were probably farmers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't--I don't know that to be a fact, but I can recall my dad saying, oh, my dad had a big fine white horse.  For him, that was very important to have that.  And he carried a pistol he said.  I have no idea why exactly he did those things, but my father seemed to think that was important.
Speaker 1: Now, did they own property in--well, did your father's family own property there in Pine Bluff?
Speaker 2: I don't really know.  I assume they did.  I assume they had their own farm.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Yeah, if they weren't sharecropping, I guess they owned their own--
Speaker 2: No, they weren't sharecroppers.
Speaker 1: Okay, they owned their own farm.  Now, that, that--that's significant when black people owned land, you know.  So, I'm just--that's why I ask like that 'cause so many people don't get a chance to own any land.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, I can say grandfather--all the grandfathers and the great uncles that I know in Mississippi all had land 'cause we had a tragedy in our family about that, owning land and who got it and how long it had been in the family.  And one of my cousins that should have inherited all of that land did not.  Her dad married somebody and his wife moved it away from our family, been in our family since a hundred years, I'm told.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, were, were any of your father's people masons?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well, I--
Speaker 2: That's interesting questions.
Speaker 1: --thought I'd ask.  Yeah, I--
Speaker 2: I'm want to look that up (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, because there, there was a strong Masonic thing in Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Really strong.
Speaker 2: I'm going to look that up.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But, now, did--is there a story about--did, did, did your father tell any stories about going to school or growing up?  Did, did he grow up in Pine Bluff?
Speaker 2: Yes, he went to school there.  There was a school for black children there in Pine Bluff, so he did go there to school.  He married my mother [Exzelma Lowe Allmon].  He had a high school when he married mother, so he had to have gone to school in Pine Bluff and they came to Detroit [Michigan], it seems to me 1937 or so.
Speaker 1: Now, wait, wait, before we're getting there--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: --let's--I just wanted to establish that he--did he go to Lane [College, Jackson, Tennessee] too?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, he did not.
Speaker 1: Your father--so, so, where did--where did your--do you know why your father left Pine Bluff?
Speaker 2: Actually, I don't.  I don't--I don't--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --know.
Speaker 1: --did he go to Detroit from Pine Bluff or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or to--
Speaker 2: He went to Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Memphis, yeah, that's what I was--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went to Memphis.
Speaker 1: But he didn't go there to go to school.
Speaker 2: I--if he did, I don't know it.
Story_ID: 428525
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did your parents [Exzelma Lowe Allmon and Arthur Allmon] meet in Memphis [Tennessee]?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --how they met?
Speaker 2: I knew they met in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how they met and, and how they fell in love?
Speaker 2: A party (laughter).  They met at a party for young people.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'm glad you're not reducing this to any (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No, I, I remember that much of it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so they met at a party and--but, he wasn't associated with the school at all, he didn't--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, what was he doing there, do you know in, in, in Memphis?
Speaker 2: What was dad doing in Memphis?  I don't have a clue what dad was doing in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have to ask an uncle or something, what was dad doing in Memphis?  What brought him to Memphis, Tennessee?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the '30s [1930s], yeah.
Speaker 2: Sure, that would be interesting.
Speaker 1: And how--and so--but we do know they got together--they met at a party, they got together--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they got married and they--did they get married first and then move to Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, they arrive in Detroit around 1937.
Speaker 2: About '37 [1937] or so.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1937.
Speaker 2: You're really calling up marvelous things for me to find out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Glad I have some use here (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, so, well, well, what, what did they do?  Do you know why they moved to Detroit or did they have relatives there?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, well, Great Uncle Robert lived in Detroit, Robert Edmonds [ph.] lived in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Is that your mother's uncle or?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was my grandmother's sister's husband, but they were all cousins anyway (laughter), so.  Uncle Robert lived in Detroit, my grandmother's sister, and also my grandmother's brother lived in Detroit.  His name was Edwin [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that's what brought--and that girl I told you, Forestine [ph.], whose name I saw living in my grandmother's household, she lived in Detroit.  Eventually, they all moved to Ferndale, Michigan, 'cause Great Uncle Robert was on the planning commission for that City of Ferndale, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Now, is that right outside of Detroit?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's right off of the famous Eight Mile Road.
Speaker 1: Is it across Eight Mile or before Eight Mile (laughter)?  Just across Eight Mile Road?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Eight Mile runs east and west in Detroit.  Eight Mile runs east and west because Woodward [Avenue] runs north and south.  So, they lived on the Ferndale side of Eight Mile.  The other side of Eight Mile is Detroit, so they lived in Ferndale.
Story_ID: 428526
Speaker 1: What did your father [Arthur Allmon] do for a living in Detroit [Michigan] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Post office.
Speaker 1: Post Office, okay.  And what was his personality like?  What were his talents and--
Speaker 2: Dad?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Oh, he was good fun and a less discipline--disciplinarian than mother [Exzelma Lowe Allmon], but he was good fun.  He liked to have a drink at Christmastime and the other times like that.  He--I just remember him as sort of good fun.  Whatever--he tried to do good things.  I, I can recall him building in our home on Harmon Street where I grew up, he had the basement all paneled and everything.  And I can remember one of the great things I wanted as a child was a pair of shoe skates, so he tiled the whole basement so I could roller skate downstairs in the basement.  He was a good guy.  I was never to let the fire go out in the furnace, neither mother nor I.  That was the days when you put coal in your furnace, you know?  So, that's the only time I ever knew him to be angry with me was not, not taking care of the fire once--when I was home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: He's a good guy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what, what about your mother?  What kind of personality did your mother have?
Speaker 2: I liked her so much.  I was an only child.  And my mother I thought was really the cat's pajamas.  I mean, she was my dearest person in the world.  When my mother died, I thought I would never get over it.  The feeling has lessened, but it--it has lessened in intensity, but I still think that that was the worst thing that ever happened to me when my mother died because the last thing on earth she ever said to my great aunt and to my--her brothers and sisters was take care of my child.  Don't throw my child away.  And I was an adult, you know, I was twenty-two years old.  But, she was the best.  When I was a child, I had lots of lessons and dancing lessons and piano and so on and so on.  I can remember mother staying with her friends at night sewing sequins on costumes and oh, just I think she did all the right things.  I never got a whipping unless I deserved it (laughter) which was not all that often, but--and I thought I was treated fairly as a child.  That's my memory.  So, I don't have any bugaboo memories or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have great memories of being a child.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you think about your parents' personalities and their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Prob--well, I knew mother better it seems to me.  I know that we used to go to the Detroit Public Library and she would say, now what's that word up at the top of the library?  And all of the words were Greek names like Aeschylus and Dionides [ph.] and Archimedes and things like that, and when I could say it right, I always got something good, and I would come home from the library in the cold wintertime in Detroit, and it would truly be cold, snow up to your hips, and she would give me a tea bag from which I could drink forty cups--no, I can drink a lot of cups of tea off of one tea bag, but she made cocoa and stuff, and she read to me.
Story_ID: 428527
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I remember trying to walk.  I don't think I was going to school, but I was trying to walk to my aunt's house, who didn't live all that far, but I had to cross two big streets to get to her house.  Don't ask why I thought it was important to do that, but I did.  And I can remember really getting into trouble for that.  I had to be four years old or so.  And I can remember it just as if it were yesterday, that I was trying to walk to her house.  I started dancing lessons at six and I can remember that, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I started.
Story_ID: 428528
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what--can you describe--now, you--did you--you lived in Detroit [Michigan] itself for a while before you moved to Ferndale [Michigan]?  Was that--
Speaker 2: I always lived in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was the other relatives (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  My mother's [Exzelma Lowe Allmon] uncle and aunt lived in Ferndale.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And they were my grandmother's sisters and brothers.  But I always lived in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, what neighborhood did you live in?
Speaker 2: I lived in what they call the North End of Detroit.  That's what they called it, the North End.  It was north of West Grand Boulevard and three blocks south of Highland Park [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, so near Highland Park.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you describe I guess the neighborhood and, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow, yes.  We had a drug store on the corner, Kelly's [ph.] drug store, and Kelly's had everything including good ice cream.  And there was a Barthwells drug store [Barthwells Drugs, Detroit, Michigan] that we could walk to.  Mr. Barthwell was a pharmacist and he lived across from my other great aunt, but he had great ice cream.  I remember on the corner of Woodward [Avenue] and my street was a music store.  You could go into the music store and if you wanted to buy a record, you could sit in the booth and listen to the record before you bought it.  I remember the library.
Speaker 1: So, that--let's, let's go back to that for a minute 'cause that's a feature that doesn't exist anymore.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But they would usually have like three booths--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --two or three booths and you could get in and, and you had speakers on both sides of your head, you know, and they played a record and they pipe it into that booth.
Speaker 2: And you could hear it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I remember saving up my money as a--as a smaller child than a teenager for two things.  One was Jose Iturbi playing 'Clair de Lune,' and it was a big record like that and I thought that was the most beautiful music I'd ever heard.  And I saved up for 'Rhapsody in Blue.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But then when I was a teenager, I saved up for Nat [King] Cole and Martha and the Vandellas (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, but that was preteen years--
Speaker 2: Yeah, these were preteen years.
Speaker 1: --you wanted those, yeah.
Speaker 2: In--
Speaker 1: So did you hear those, those songs on the radio or, or how did you--
Speaker 2: Some at home, some on the radio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had good music in our house.  My mother's brother, Everett [ph.], came to live with us.  We had three rooms, three bedrooms in our house and Everett came up from the South to live with us.  He came up to go to Wayne [University; Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan], which he never finished, but that's what he came for, and he lived with us.  He was a great jazz fan and he had all of the good records.  He had Earl ["Fatha"] Hines, Duke Ellington, Count Basie.  He had all kinds of good jazz records that he played in his room and I was permitted to listen.  You ask about a story, when I was small, my grandmother would come and visit us and my mother would always teach me a piece to say to impress my grandmother that she was doing a good job, see (laughter) or a song that I was supposed to sing for her.  So, she had really taught me a song called, "I'm sorry playmate, I cannot play with you" ['Playmate, Come Out & Play with Me'].  "My dolly has the flu, boo-hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo."  Well, instead of singing that song when my grandmother came, because of the influence of my uncle, I sang, "Please Mr. Johnson, don't play those blues so sad," ['Please Mr. Johnson'] (laughter).  And, of course, my mother said, "Where did you learn that?  You know, that's not what you're supposed to sing!"  But, my Uncle Everett had all that music and so that's what I liked.
Speaker 1: Please, Mr. Johnson (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Don't play those blues so sad.
Story_ID: 428529
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did--now, you said you had a lot of lessons and, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --growing up, dance lessons, what, what other kind?
Speaker 2: Well, I had dance lessons and piano lessons and that was--essentially that was it, dance and piano.  But the dancing teacher was an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.].
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: LeClaire, L-E-capital C-L-A-I-R-E, LeClaire Knox.  And she lived on the next block from me.  Her husband was a physician.  They lived on Trowbridge [Street] and I lived on Harmon [Street, Detroit, Michigan].  And so, she taught a dancing class in Detroit [Michigan], and I don't know how she got her students.  I hunch that they were children of friends of hers.  But in her dancing class, she taught tap dance and ballet and she taught--she had a dramatics class and a baton twirling class.  And out of her dancing classes came some really good people.  I didn't go there to be a--I thought I wanted to be a ballerina, but my mother [Exzelma Lowe Allmon] said, have you lost your mind (laughter) or words to that effect.  But, one time I was in New York City [New York, New York] and I was looking--I was seeing the play 'Raisin' and I said, wow, whoever designed those costumes was a dancer because they, they moved just right.  I looked at the program and there was the name Bernard Johnson and he had been in my dancing class.  I was looking at television once and I saw this girl on a sitcom and it was Barbara Meek who had been in my dancing class as well.  The rest of us, though, we turned out to be pedestrian.  But I can remember as a child, we danced for the 150th anniversary of the City of Detroit.  We danced out of the U of D [University of Detroit; University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan] stadium and we danced on the birthday cake of Detroit downtown.  It was a big doings in those days.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, that is a big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, our--they invited the dancing classes around the city and ours was one of the ones they invited.  And the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] used to have something called Jabberwock in Detroit and it was always in the auditorium of the institute of arts, Detroit Institute of Arts [Detroit, Michigan], and our dancing class was always in it.  Jabberwock was wonderful even as a--an adult.  It had the best and brightest of Detroit's talent, concert pianist, dancers, singers.  It was great.
Story_ID: 428530
Speaker 1: Was radio a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know if you remember 'The Shadow'?  You probably don't, but I do.
Speaker 1: I, I remember the remnant, you know, of it, but--
Speaker 2: Well, 'The Shadow' and 'The Green Hornet.'  And there used to be something called Lux Radio Theatre.  Well, I had a radio in my room, which was supposed to be off at nine o'clock, and I would put the radio in the bed under the cover with my ear to it to hear the programs on radio.  Oh, I remember Gabriel--Gabriel Heatter's voice used to scare me.  He was a newscaster.  Oh, radio was great.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Gabriel Heatter, J.P. Kaltenborn [sic. H.V. Kaltenborn].
Speaker 2: Oh, that's correct.
Speaker 1: People from those days.
Speaker 2: And I thought asbestos was a good thing in those days because a lot of radio programs used to be sponsored by asbestos makers and they said--they would put asbestos in the war things 'cause it--'cause they didn't--it didn't burn.
Speaker 1: Yeah, asbestos was always--Batman comics, he always had asbestos stuff--
Speaker 2: Asbestos, right.
Speaker 1: --that wouldn't burn.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Shoot, yeah, radio was great.  And on Saturday after I came home from my dancing class, they had 'Let's Pretend' where they dramatized all of the fairytales.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Cream of Wheat is so good to eat, you can have it every day (laughter).  Did you ever see 'The Christmas Story' [sic. 'A Christmas Story']?  That little boy who wanted a Red Ryder B.B. gun for Christmas?
Speaker 1: Oh, the, the Jean Shepherd story, yeah, Christmas--
Speaker 2: Well, that story reminded me just so much of growing up in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Yeah, he grew up in like East Chicago [Indiana] in another--
Speaker 2: Um-hum or something like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, town with similar kind of economy, yeah.  But, now, what, what about movies?  Did you go to movies?
Speaker 2: It was my--it was and remains my favorite thing to do.  I was really a movie buff and I still love the movies.  When I was coming along, Judy Garland was a big star and of course, everything that Lena Horne was ever in, we went to see.  But I went to the movies--as a matter of fact, Judy Garland had played in a movie called 'The Pirate' I think with Gene Kelly and in that movie, Gene Kelly jumped from one--he had a rope--he was a pirate and he jumped on his rope and he moved from one part of the ship to the other on a rope.  I was trying to show my girlfriend across the street how he did that.  So, I jumped from my dresser onto my bed and broke all of the slats (laughter) in my bed.  I had to sleep on them for weeks to teach me a lesson about jumping on my bed.  But--oh, yeah, movies were great.
Speaker 1: So now in, in Detroit, they--did they segregate the theaters when you were coming along?
Speaker 2: I--they must have because I went to the neighborhood theater that I could walk to, so I knew all the kids in the neighborhood that went to that theater, but I can recall the Fox Theatre [Detroit, Michigan] downtown was segregated, but we had--the Fox Theatre and all the theaters were downtown--were probably segregated.  But, we had the Paradise Theatre [Detroit, Michigan], which--where every black artist in the world came.
Speaker 1: Now, that's in famous Paradise Valley [Detroit, Michigan], right?
Speaker 2: No, well, actually it had moved uptown, but--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --you know, in the--by the '50s [1950s], there wasn't any more Paradise Valley actually.  The Paradise Valley's was a '30s [1930s], '40 [1940] phenomenon, you know?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, we had the Flame Show Bar [Detroit, Michigan] in Detroit and oh really great things to go, but the Paradise was our theater.  And I don't think we went downtown much to the theaters until I was a teenager.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you had a neighborhood theater where you, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 428531
Speaker 1: Now--well, tell us about school.  Now, where did you--oh, was church a big deal when you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What, what, what church did your family attend?
Speaker 2: We went to Reverend [Carlyle Fielding] Stewart's church [First Baptist Church; People's Community Church] on Woodward [Avenue] and Pingree [Street, Detroit, Michigan] and I'm trying to think of the name of the church.
Speaker 1: Was it Baptist or A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was an A.M.E. church.
Speaker 1: AME?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It, it was--I'm sure it was a church they bought from somebody but it was an A.M.E. church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to a parochial school for a while and I went to the Catholic church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when I came--when I moved to Lansing [Michigan], I went back to the A.M.E. church, but I went to a Catholic church for a long time from--just from having attended a parochial school for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what, what was your first school?
Speaker 2: I wanna say Saint Benedict--bless it, but it wasn't--Sacred Heart [School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Sacred Heart?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that on the north side too, the north end?
Speaker 2: No, it was down on Eliot [Street] in Detroit [Michigan], down--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --going toward downtown Detroit.
Speaker 1: Mount Eliott [Avenue] or?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, oh, what did you say?
Speaker 2: Not Mount Eliott, just Eliot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nowadays, it--Eliot--it would be a rough neighborhood.  I had to take the bus down there.  Then, I went to--I went--completed--it was a K [kindergarten] to six.  Then, I went to Dwyer [Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], D-W-Y-E-R, that was close to my house, I think six-eight.  Then, I went to Hutchins Junior High [sic. Harry B. Hutchins Intermediate School, Detroit, Michigan].  And I went my first year--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Sorry--
Speaker 1: Are, are these all in Detroit?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  My first year of high school, I went to Cass Technical High School [Detroit, Michigan] and I left Cass because it was so far (laughter).  I had to take a--now, tomorrow, [HistoryMaker] Melvin [J.] Holley had to come a lot further than I did, but I had to take two, almost three buses to get to school, to get to Cass.  So, I asked mother [Exzelma Lowe Allmon] if I could change schools and I graduated from Northern [High School, Detroit, Michigan].  I went to Northern in the tenth grade, yeah, tenth grade--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I graduated from Northern High.  I had a great time in high school.
Story_ID: 428532
Speaker 1: Okay, Northern High School [Detroit, Michigan]--well, in school period, like, did you have a favorite subject in school, in all your schools?  Now, you've gotten--this is like--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --six schools.
Speaker 2: English.
Speaker 1: English, okay.
Speaker 2: English.  It continued me entire--my entire educational career.  I wrote little pieces for the school newspaper.  I always--I was a great reader as a child.  I kept myself amused and entertained by reading in addition to the other things I did, but reading was my passion.  And so English I sort of drifted into.  I loved the classics and I loved the junk (laughter).  I read whatever I got my hands on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you share something with your soror, [HistoryMaker] Bernice [Irene] Sumlin, in terms of that 'cause she was always the one to do the recitations in church and in school and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you seem to have a similar kind of a talent for--
Speaker 2: I do.  I used to--when I taught school, I didn't--I'm, I'm a--an easy speaker.  Words come easily in the main to me and so--and I think about speeches and people ask me to do it.  But, when I taught, I would put together things for my students to say so that they could learn to be prolific in front of an audience.  And I put together once a piece called 'Black and Unknown Bards' because I wanted my students--in, in the anthologies when I taught, the only African American in it might be Langston Hughes.  He was the only one.  Occasionally in the anthology, you would see, from Dayton [Ohio]--
Speaker 1: Dunbar.
Speaker 2: Dun--Paul Laurence Dunbar.  But in the main, you would not.  So, I would collect the poetry of African Americans and we make--we would make it into a skit where the students would recite the poetry.  In my household growing up, we had lots of poems and things by African Americans and we had one book in particular that I loved.  It was called 'The Negro Caravan[: Writings by American Negroes,' (eds.) Brown, Davis, and Lee].  If I could ever get something out of the household in Detroit [Michigan] growing up, it would be that book, 'The Negro Caravan.'  That's how I learned so much.
Speaker 1: Is that, that like [J.] Saunders Redding or, or, or?  Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: It's a big thick--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --book.
Speaker 1: I've seen it.
Speaker 2: And in that book, it had scripts by Oscar Micheaux.  It had poems by Langston Hughes who probably is my favorite poet.  We had Jean Toomer.  We had--it had things about the renaissance, the Harlem Renaissance.  It was a great piece.  The first time I ever heard The Creation was from--I don't know if I heard it at mother's [Exzelma Lowe Allmon] church or not, but I remember saying, that's in our book, mother, that's in our book.  I wish--but now, I've been able to collect those as individual pieces.  I used to ride down to Detroit to a book store called Vaughn's [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Ed Vaughn, yeah.
Speaker 2: Ed Vaughn.
Speaker 1: Vaughn's bookstore.
Speaker 2: And I would get books from his bookstore and bring it back to Lansing [Michigan] to supplement the anthology from which I taught because they just didn't have it.  You'd be surprised.  The kids loved it.  Blacks--I had--ninety-five percent of the students were white, but they loved it.  They loved it.  I always taught 'To Kill a Mockingbird' [Harper Lee] and I would say, what's the mockingbird here?  Why would they say the mocking--and the kid--they got it.  They got it.  They knew.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a couple years ago, the City of Chicago [Illinois] made a, a book that everybody read in the whole city that, that--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: They, they had this program from the public library.  That was the first book they chose was 'To Kill a Mockingbird' by Harper Lee.
Speaker 2: Well, I used to sit on--this is before then, but I used to sit on the book selection committee of the district in, in the English department, and I was just--if we hadn't chosen 'To Kill a Mockingbird,' I think I'd have passed away (laughter), but we did.  It was on our reading list of books to read and I always taught it 'cause I thought it was really great.
Story_ID: 428533
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, we need to get you back--let's go back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Okay.
Speaker 1: --to school--
Speaker 2: Back to school.
Speaker 1: --for a minute.  Yeah, now--okay, so this is where you developed this great--
Speaker 2: Love of reading?
Speaker 1: --interest and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and love of reading and books.  Were there particular teachers that served as mentors or role models for, for you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --coming along?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Matthews [ph.].  Ms. Matthews was one teacher.  She was an elementary school teacher [at Dwyer Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] but she, she was the pianist for the dancing class.  Not only was she the pianist for the dancing class, and that's where I learned to listen to all this marvelous music apart from at home, she also was my elementary school teacher and I really liked her so much.  Also, Mr. Owen [ph.] in high school.  Mr. Owen was the journalism and English teacher in high school.
Speaker 1: Was he at Northern or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Northern High [School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  In middle school, I don't remember anybody that--not teachers.  The teachers that I remember were in the neighborhood, just friends of the family.  You know, the ones that I loved so much, I didn't have them in school, but they were certainly good role models to know, the, the women with whom my mother [Exzelma Lowe Allmon] sewed and things like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A lot of them were AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was your mother a member of AKA?
Speaker 2: No, she was not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know why either. I mean, I don't know if they had a chapter when she was down there, but they certainly did when my cousins were there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something we don't--it's hard to imagine a time when those black fraternities or sororities did not exist on campuses, but there were some campuses where they--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --they, they, they weren't everywhere.
Speaker 2: And that was a Christian school.  Lane [College, Jackson, Tennessee] was a Christian school.  But they had a chapter by the time my cousins got there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Lane is a C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] church, school, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 428534
Speaker 1: --When you were in high school at Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] and at Northern [High School, Detroit, Michigan], you worked on the school paper you said and you did--
Speaker 2: At Northern, I worked on the school paper.  I, I was a cheerleader, which was a great thing to be in high school if you will recall, probably a bummer thing for the teachers, but--it caused me great consternation, but I was a cheerleader which meant that, you know, you got to meet all the people.  And I had a wonderful group of friends, many of whom are my friends even today from high school.  We ran around together.  But, the, the--what formed the group was out of school relationship.  What formed the group was, so many were in my dancing class, so many were in--just friends of the family and things like that, so we had a great group outside of school and we partied hardy.  That's why we had to have a basement that was all knotty pine because you couldn't just always go to your friend's house.  You had to--and I had friends that had houses that were big as all outdoors.  They had their own ballrooms and things.  But we had a great time.  I had a great time coming along.
Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the, the students that were--that graduated with you from Northern?
Speaker 2: Well, you're gonna interview one tomorrow, [HistoryMaker] Verna Holley, graduated with me.  Who graduated with me and we were in each other's weddings was a young man whose photo you will see soon.  He took me to my first debutante party.  I was a debutante and he was my escort.  Doctor--so many of them are physicians and teachers and all of them essentially the ones that I knew turned out well.  It was not the thing to do in my high school to be a bummer.  The thing to do in my high school was to achieve.  Your folks didn't ask you where you wanted to go to school or if you wanted to go to school.  It was never--it was never a choice that I had--could make.  I knew what I was going to do.  As a matter of fact, one of my friends lives in Lansing [Michigan], her name was Jackie Jones in Detroit [Michigan].  She lived just two blocks from me and she was a Miss Michigan or something like that, but she went to the catholic school.  [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson lived on her street.  Aretha [Franklin] lived like three blocks down.
Speaker 1: Now, now you're in the generation where most of the Motown stars--
Speaker 2: Hey.
Speaker 1: --were--yeah, there were all--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in your generation--
Speaker 2: Knew all of them.
Speaker 1: --pretty much.
Speaker 2: Back in the day--
Speaker 1: Within, within five years, one side or the other of you.
Speaker 2: Back in the day, I knew [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy, I knew, well, Smokey and I knew--Clineice Stubbs was married to Levi Stubbs of the Four Tops--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and Clineice was in my dancing class for a while.  I knew Max Richards who was [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards' brother and Max--and I did know Lloyd, but briefly, not as well as I knew Max Richards.  I never really--my girlfriend had Diana Ross in class.  I didn't know her well.  I mean, I had seen her around the city of Detroit.  I didn't know her well.  But I did know, oh, oh, I knew most of the Gordys to tell you the truth.  But, I ran into Berry Gordy at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].  He was--I didn't know him and he didn't know me.  It wasn't the Berry I knew, but we were all young then, you know.  But, he had been the speaker at MSU [Michigan State University].  But he had brother--he had a lot of brothers and sisters if I recall correctly.  His sister, Esther [Gordy Edwards], was an AKA.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her husband [George Clifton Edwards, Jr.] served in the Michigan Legislature, now that I think about it.  Esther Edwards was her name.  Her husband served in the legislature.  Oh, I knew a lot of good people.  There was another group in Detroit called the Celeste Cole Opera Workshop.
Speaker 1: Celeste Cole--
Speaker 2: Opera Workshop.
Speaker 1: --Opera Workshop, okay.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And every year, Celeste Cole Opera Workshop would do some opera and/or operetta and I recall the first time they ever did 'Porgy and Bess,' [George Gershwin] the music just knocked me out.  I loved it so.  Then, one year I remember being the page turner for the pianist who played for the opera, but my mailman was in it and we would hear him coming down the street singing, oh, they're so fresh and fun, delivering the mail, learning his part, you know.
Speaker 1: That must've been something.
Speaker 2: Yes.  As I said, I only got a whipping when I needed it, so my memories were good of Detroit.  My memories are good of Detroit.
Story_ID: 428535
Speaker 1: Were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: Sure I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I won a scholarship, all that kind of good stuff.  I thought school was a snap 'til I got to college (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, when you were a senior, what were your prospects?  What did you want to be?  Did you--
Speaker 2: A ballerina.
Speaker 1: Still as a senior in high school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Actually, I knew--I probably knew I was going to be a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I knew I was going to be a teacher.  I liked teachers and I liked what they did.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you choose a college?  Did you have good counseling?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  The only--you know, you can try this out on [HistoryMaker] Verna [Holley] tomorrow, but we had one--no, we had two African American teachers in high--at Northern [High School, Detroit, Michigan], neither of whom I had, but one of whom was such a wonderful role model, Mr. Loving [ph.], and he counseled all of the African American children about what we should and shouldn't do.  And I remember my mother [Exzelma Lowe Allmon] used to come over to chaperone the dances and things and everybody's folks talked.  I went around in a circle where everybody went to college.  It just, just was what you did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did you choose your school?  Or what were the reasons why you chose your school?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to be a teacher and it was a teacher college, EMU [Eastern Michigan College; Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan].
Story_ID: 428536
Speaker 1: Okay now, you went to--where, where did you go to school for?
Speaker 2: EMU, Eastern Michigan [College; Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Eastern Michigan, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And I graduated from Wayne State [University, Detroit, Michigan].  I went there as a senior.
Speaker 1: Eastern Michigan is in Kalamazoo [Michigan] or, or--
Speaker 2: Ypsilanti [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Ypsilanti, Ypsilanti, Eastern Michigan University.  Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And, and as a senior, I transferred to Wayne State--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where I got a baccalaureate.
Speaker 1: Now, did you like Eastern Michigan University?
Speaker 2: Loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I wanted to teach in Detroit [Michigan] and Detroit pretty well hired people who had gone to Wayne State.  They had a really good teacher training program at Wayne State, so I wanted to teach in the Detroit [Public] Schools and I wanted it on my resume when I applied that I had graduated from Wayne State.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Oh, I had a good question there, but I don't know what happened to it.  Eastern Michigan first, then Wayne State.  Now, did you--did you join AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] at Eastern Michigan?
Speaker 2: EMU, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Undergraduate at XI chapter, X-I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Chapter, Ypsilanti, Michigan.  The chapter still is there.  You can tell it's a very, very, very old chapter because it's a single letter chapter.  It was--it was originally the chapter in Detroit until 1922 when we began graduate chapters.  That chapter then moved to Eastern Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's one of the oldest in the state, in the sorority, to tell you the truth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you, you graduated from high school [Northern High School, Detroit, Michigan] in 1957, right?  Am I right?
Speaker 2: College, college.
Speaker 1: College in '57 [1957]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No, no, I don't think--is that true?
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: No, that wouldn't be true.
Speaker 2: No, that ain't right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I graduated in--
Speaker 1: You said it with such--
Speaker 2: --nineteen--yeah.
Speaker 1: --authority, I--
Speaker 2: That was--
Speaker 1: I started to go with it, but I--
Speaker 2: That was high school, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: I had already calculated it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That ain't right.  It's, it's--that ain't right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, high school in '57 [1957] and then college in, I guess it would be--
Speaker 2: Sixty--
Speaker 1: --sixty-two [1962] or--
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961]].
Speaker 1: --sixty--
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961]?  Okay, '61 [1961].  Okay, now were there any special teachers or mentors in college, either at Eastern Michigan or at Wayne State?
Speaker 2: Not at Eastern.  Everybody at Eastern Michigan--I, I never had an African American instructor there.  But when I went to Wayne and started my student teaching, the first year I was student teaching, my critic teacher was an AKA and she was so helpful.  I think Mrs. Martin [ph.] was her name, if I remember correctly.  And then I didn't have her.  And then my--when I--you had to student teach in Detroit at all the levels 'cause I, I have a teaching certificate from--that I can teach K [kindergarten]-eight and then nine-twelve, so I had to do elementary student teaching and then I had to do a high school student teaching as well.  So, I had a critic teacher in between, but two of my critic--two of the three critic teachers that I ever had, and those were supervising teachers, were AKAs.  And they weren't easy but they were helpful.  They knew I was a young AKA trying to make it.  They probably knew my folks and so they work with you.
Speaker 1: So, they were interested in you succeeding and--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and--okay.
Speaker 2: Interested in me succeeding.
Speaker 1: And doing it the right way.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is--now, this is an experience that African American students don't always have in white colleges, right?
Speaker 2: You bet.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You bet.  Eastern was a nice size school, but there were no African Americans on the staff and I took classes at the U of M [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], there weren't any African Americans on the staff, and there certainly were no African Americ--or very few at Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan], and if there were, I never had any of them, see.  So, it's important for the people who work there, whether they're your teacher or not to look after you, and that's what happened when I was a student teacher.
Story_ID: 428537
Speaker 1: Well, are there any stories from the student teaching days?  Did you enjoy student teaching?
Speaker 2: I did.  I loved it except for, I don't know if you know Detroit [Michigan] well enough to know that on the corner of West Grand Boulevard and Second [Avenue], on one side of the street was the General Motors Building [Cadillac Place, Detroit, Michigan], big of the world, the world headquarters of General Motors, and on the other side of the street was the Fisher Building [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It created a wind tunnel there and it would be so cold waiting on the bus to get to your student teaching assignment.  Occasionally, my dad [Arthur Allmon] would let me drive his car.  My mother [Exzelma Lowe Allmon] never did let me drive her car, but my dad would let me drive his car to Wayne [State University, Detroit, Michigan] so that I could get to my student teaching.  And one time, I guess I was in class too long 'cause I didn't get out there in time.  Not only did I get tickets, they put a lock on the tire of the car and I had to call dad to come down and pay whatever it was to get the--get the lock off the car tire.  I remember those things about student teaching.  But what--I liked it, though.  I liked student teaching very much except in the wintertime and how cold it would be to get to some of the places.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you get an assignment right away after your student teaching years?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: And where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to the Joyce School [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It had been formerly East Detroit High School [Eastpointe, Michigan], but it was called the Joyce School and I went right to work, had a great time at the Joyce School, worked with a guy who became the superintendent of Detroit schools.
Speaker 1: Who is that?
Speaker 2: Chapman, Al Chapman [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but the time he was the superintendent, of course, I had moved (laughter).  We were all peons in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how, how long did you stay at Joyce?
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in Detr--I was a teacher in Detroit about four years or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I married and moved to Lansing [Michigan].
Story_ID: 428538
Speaker 1: Now, how did you meet your husband?  Can you tell, tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, Howard [ph.] was a good friend of a friend, my--a girl I grew up with named Jackie Jones, I said about earlier.  Her husband was a great golfer, played a lot of golf, and Howard played a lot of golf.  He was here.  As a matter of fact, I think he worked on a golf scholarship for a while at MSU [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], but he played golf very well.  And so one time they were playing a golf tournament in Detroit [Michigan], and that's how I met him.  And I married him and moved to the Big L.
Speaker 1: The Big L (laughter), okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: It's Lansing [Michigan], of course, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, you--now, you got married, what, in 1966?  Is that it or--
Speaker 2: Six--sixty-four, 1964.
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], okay.
Speaker 2: December of '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then--
Speaker 2: I didn't move to Lansing, however, until 1965, '66 [1966]--
Story_ID: 428539
Speaker 1: 'Kay, moved to Lansing [Michigan] in '65 [1965] or '66 [1966].  So, you were away when they had the, the riot in Detroit [Michigan].  You had moved out (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  I was living here, just living here 'cause that was 1967.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But, I have--I had lots of friends who would call me.  And, of course, you could watch it every--blow by blow on the television and so on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But while I was in Detroit, I belonged to the young adult division of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and when I was a senior--I don't know if the name [HistoryMaker] Ofield Dukes registers with you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Ofield was the president of the young adult division of the NAACP in Detroit.  And Ofield had the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, SNCC, came to teach us nonviolent methods of civil protest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who, who came?  Do you--do you remember, was it [HistoryMaker] James Forman or some--well, go ahead.
Speaker 2: I don't think it was anybody as famous as James Farmer.
Speaker 1: Forman, yeah.
Speaker 2: No, Farmer was his name, James Farmer, F-A-R-M-E-R.
Speaker 1: Farmer was with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality].
Speaker 2: Was Farmer with CORE?
Speaker 1: Yes.  James Farmer, he's the one depicted in '[The] Great Debaters.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He's with CORE.
Speaker 2: Well then--
Speaker 1: James Forman--
Speaker 2: --I'm, I'm thinking--
Speaker 1: --was with SNCC, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: SNCC.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It wasn't anybody famous who came.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, maybe they are--maybe they became famous.  But I remember there were two young Caucasian women--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and one young Caucasian man and a black man who came.
Speaker 1: So, the black man was in the minority in that group.
Speaker 2: Of the ones who came.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in my home, we had a long and great discussion about that, about SNCC because in Detroit before the great Civil Rights Movement began in the '60s [1960s], [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had come to Detroit, and I remember marching down Woodward Avenue with mother [Exzelma Lowe Allmon] and father [Arthur Allmon].  He spoke at the [Henry & Edsel] Ford [Memorial] Auditorium [Detroit, Michigan] in Detroit and we went to see him speak.  I was one of the young people that picketed [S.S.] Kresge in Detroit.  I was trying to think what else Ofield had us doing.  But, we had been kind of engaged before the big engagements were.  I remember [HistoryMaker] John Conyers [Jr.] was--he had been elected by that time.  I think--he was in undergrad school with me for a while.  He was at Wayne [State University, Detroit, Michigan].  I'm, I'm trying to think, he had graduated or, or he was a senior when I got there, but I thought he had graduated 'cause he was president of his Kappa [Alpha Psi Fraternity] chapter.  But, he used to do a lot of talking to the young people.  We identified with, with John.  He was very young when he first got elected to [U.S.] Congress and he would come back to the young adult division, he and Ofield were good friends, and talk to us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: First thing I ever did in Lansing was picket (laughter) a real estate company here.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you got involved with NAACP youth which is--the NAACP youth in those days was, was--
Speaker 2: Oh, listen, we were--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We thought we were somebody.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all over the country, I hear stories of them leading--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  The young--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --adult division of the NAACP in Detroit, the older people thought we had lost our minds.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: And they--I remember Mr. Je--[Dr.] Arthur Jefferson.  He was very concerned about us, but he, he, he didn't want to stop us, but he was concerned about us.  But, I--Ofield was really a marvelous level best thing for this young adult division 'cause some of the boys were really grrr, you know, really militant and everything.  But, I, I loved that.  It was my time.
Story_ID: 428540
Speaker 1: Oh, you were talking about your activism, yeah, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth.  You were talking about young [HistoryMaker] John Conyers [Jr.] and some of the things that you all were doing before.  This was while you were still in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Still in Detroit.  When I came to Lansing [Michigan], of course, I joined the Lansing branch--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --NAACP.  And the Lansing branch NAACP, I joined it right away 'cause that's, that's what we knew.  My, my mother [Exzelma Lowe Allmon] and father [Arthur Allmon] were members of the NAACP.
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1965, '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And at that time, there was a realty company in Lansing that was trying the same tactics that they had tried in Detroit, e.g. blockbusting and so on.  So, we picketed that realty company and I picketed right along (laughter) with them.  And I became--I followed Hortense Canady who was the national Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority] president.  She became the national Delta president, but her name was Hortense Canady.  There had never been an African American on the school board in Lansing.  I remember volunteering my time to go over and help her get elected because I thought it was so important.  Lansing at the time was undergoing school desegregation of the elementary schools.  I came here and in a few years, I was appointed the director of elementary education at--right in the heart of school desegregation.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is this?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--and so within about, you know, less than ten years of coming here, you're in the mix of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah, about--
Speaker 1: --in school desegregation.
Speaker 2: --six or seven years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was in the mix of it--
Story_ID: 428541
Speaker 1: [You were] appointed the, the--
Speaker 2: Director of elementary ed [education].
Speaker 1: Director, okay.
Speaker 2: We had to oversee the desegregation of elementary schools.  Well, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] brought suit against the Lansing [Michigan] schools for its segregatory arrangement of schools.  I can remember testifying in the district court in Grand Rapids [Michigan] about school desegregation in Lansing schools.  I remember testifying before the Michigan Civil Rights Commission about segregation.  And at the Michigan Department of Education, I served on a statewide committee that looked at segregated education in Michigan and attempted to formulate a plan to desegregate schools in Michigan.  It's interesting that we are re-segregated, but we are, you know.  But, at the time, people were working extraordinarily hard.  The NAACP brought the suit, and at the time, I believe I was the (laughter) education chair of the NAACP.  When Mrs. [Hortense] Canady left that office, she said get, get [HistoryMaker] Eva Evans.  She'll be a good chair, and we were.  We participated in all kinds of ways on the different committees.  Lansing underwent a recall petition about elementary school--about school desegregation.  Mrs. Canady was recalled because she voted for school desegregation in Lansing.  Five members of the board were recalled.  The governor appointed an interim board.  One of the ladies that I put down as a person to interview, her husband was one of the people, and the other day, I went to a scout meeting and the man that used to be the mayor, Tony, Tony Benavides, he was appointed.  But, after that came a segregation, a pro-segregation board.
Speaker 1: Board.  Now, who was the governor of Michigan at that time?  It wasn't--I, I don't think it was George Romney then, right?  He, he had passed, you know.  He was in his '60s [1960s], right?
Speaker 2: I believe it was "Soapy" Williams, G. Mennen Williams, was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the governor?
Speaker 1: They called him Soapy Williams?
Speaker 2: That's because his family owned the Mennen--
Speaker 1: Oh, George--okay.
Speaker 2: Things for men.  His name was G. Mennen, M-E-N-N-E-N, Williams.  I believe he was the governor of Michigan and following him was Milliken, William Milliken, M-I-L-L-I-K-E-N.  They both served during parts of the turmoil in Michigan about school desegregation.
Speaker 1: Now, now were these both republican, the governors?
Speaker 2: No, G. Mennen Williams was a Democrat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Milliken was a Republican.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But a very moderate man.  He may be the only Republican I ever voted for, very moderate man, very intelligent.  Both of them were, though.  They were both good governors, I have to say.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  But, the--now who recalled the school board members.  Did, did the local--
Speaker 2: The City of Lansing.
Speaker 1: The city--the city, okay.
Speaker 2: City of Lansing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Recalled five members, the five members of the school board who voted for school desegregation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what year is this?
Speaker 2: It seems to me it was in 1974, five, something like that.  And the superintendent of schools was Dr. Carl Candoli.  He lead the effort and they hired him specifically for that point.  Carl, C-A-N-D-O-L-I.
Speaker 1: Now, now, he's--he, he has an Italian name and you said--so, the mayor was an Italian too, right?  Is there a lot of--
Speaker 2: No, the mayor was--
Speaker 1: Was it--
Speaker 2: Later on in our history, the mayor was Hispanic, Tony Benavides.
Speaker 1: Oh, Benavides.  Oh, he's Hispanic.  All right.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: The mayor in those days was a man named Gerald Graves.
Speaker 1: Okay, Gerald Graves, okay.
Speaker 2: But, Dr. Candoli was a force in education in Lansing, a tremendous force.  He had been a professor at The Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] and he had a philosophy about the way schools should be organized, which to a degree carries on today.  The whole notion of the decentralization of power, he decentralized the decision making in Lansing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he supported local school councils and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: He did.  He did, wrote books on it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we used to go all over the country.  In Lansing, we've turned out about seven or eight school superintendents around the United States.
Story_ID: 428542
Speaker 1: Just kind of explain to us the--it happened a lot of--all over the country, we know this, but what was the--how did school desegregation ultimately play out?  As you said, it's now back segregated again but in a different way, but just kind of walk us through it.
Speaker 2: Well, in Lansing [Michigan], there was a big to do about neighborhood schools.  There weren't really a great number of African Americans in the greater Lansing area, but they were all--all of whom lived here lived in this--in this city, Lansing.  The county has eight or ten cities in it, but they all lived here in Lansing and within Lansing, they all lived in a certain geographic area, which meant that they all went to certain schools.  They redrew the school boundaries to be able to more integrate the schools, which meant busing.  Now, in Pontiac, Michigan, the people had laid down in front of the buses to keep the school district from desegregating, but Lansing, we managed to escape some of that, but not without some picketing and yelling and demonstrating and so on, but we didn't have the violence that the--some of the school districts had.  First of all, Dr. [Carl] Candoli was an excellent school superintendent and he was a fierce one.  He was not a--not afraid to speak.  But his deputy superintendent was a Dr. Matthew Prophet [Jr.], P-R-O-P-H-E-T, who wound up the superintendent in Portland, Oregon, but Dr. Prophet was a retired [U.S.] Army officer.  I think he was a colonel and he was--he had served in some strategic arm of the [U.S.] Armed Forces 'cause he was a tactician power excellence and he brought all of that military strategy, e.g.--in--just in terms of organization, so we were organized to everything.  We knew every moment a bus was gonna run and so forth.  So, school desegregation went on, but not without its casualties.  The school board was a casualty.  There were even parents who began to move away, but we tried to maintain the standards of education in Lansing so the--regardless of if you were black, white or brown, you were getting a good education.  Over time, I believe that a casualty of school desegregation was the growth of suburbs.  Lansing--the communities around Lansing that were villages are now cities.  Two things helped that.  One of the things was school deseg [desegregation], that helped it, but possibly not as much as the growth of charter schools.  We had a Governor [John] Engler who, who was mad at school education I think because of so many teacher strikes and things, so he was determined to break the backs of educators who defied him, mostly the MEA [Michigan Education Association].  It was a powerful voice for education in Michigan, so he created these charter schools--oh, he, he helped to create the legislation that enabled charter schools to be.  That was okay, too, but the money then followed the children, which meant that the money that was in public education was siphoned off and it went another way.  Before we had the current way of supporting schools in Michigan, it used to be property taxes.  It still is, but it now all goes to the state.  It used to be that each community's property taxes went to support its schools.  Rich, rich, rich communities had rich, rich, rich schools, and the reverse is also true.  Well, the governor did--one thing he did cause was schools to be funded differently and he tried to more equalize the funding but at a cost as well.  So, charter schools and school desegregation in a way were the downfall of public education in urban communities.  I saw it happen in Detroit [Michigan] and all of the other--any center in the United States that can be called urban, you've seen a decline in the way schools are operated and are funded and in their reputation.  It does not mean that you couldn't get an excellent education in an urban center. That's not true.  But, money will buy a social worker, which sometimes kids need in school.  Money will buy a psychologist.  Money will buy extra help.
Story_ID: 428543
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know in--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --nineteen seventy-six [1976], you earned your Ph.D., is this true?  I mean, in--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you, you got your Ph.D. from Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan]--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --in [East] Lansing [Michigan].  Now--so, you were going to school I guess for a while prior to--I, I mean during this crises and stuff, you were going to school, too.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what was your--was, was your dissertation related to the crises?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was your--
Speaker 2: I was in--Michigan State University got a huge grant to--for teacher education, so they had research interns associated with this grant and I was a research intern in something called the Institute for Research on Teaching.  I was interested in the quality of education for urban children.  My interest was on teacher expectations.  And so my dissertation was on teacher expectations, how the teacher's expectation for the child differed from the child's expectation of himself.  Because if you have--I believe, if you have low expectations of a person, you do very differently than if you have high expectations of them.  So, I was interested in that phenomenon.  So, my dissertation was a research paper from six public school districts in Michigan, how the teachers expectations match the students' expectations and whether they differed by race and social economic status.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Now, the repercussions of your study and there may have been other people that studied the same thing, but I--I've--this information, I've, I've heard before and it's, it's dramatic and it's informed a lot of teachers and parents and, and it's been, you know, widely discussed, you know, since people started studying this.  But, what, what--does, does it--I mean, do the expectations of teachers affect the--how they, they teach the children and, and, and how children learn?
Speaker 2: Well, back in the day in the '70s [1970s] when I was studying it, I could only find one or two researchers.  I found a lot on teacher expectations but not by race, et cetera.  The studies that I read that informed the review of literature in my paper showed that given two--yeah, if you didn't see their faces, given two young people, same age, dah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah, the teacher's expectations might be the same for both.  But if the teacher knew one was black and one was white, the expectation for the white child were generally higher.  That didn't mean everywhere, though.  I, I cautioned people in my dissertation.  Some people have expectations and don't act on them.  Some have them and they do.  Some children perceive the teacher's expectations differentially, but in the main, the largest bulk of the research showed that the expectations for minority children, particularly African Americans, were generally less than they were for majority children.  But, when I ask all of the children what it was they wanted to do, what I found was this.  A lot of the boys and girls wanted to be things they never were gonna be like a professional football player, like a movie star, but, but some of them wanted to be a teacher, a doctor, a lawyer, et cetera.  So, what I tried to match was, this is what the--I asked the child, what do you want to do?  And then I gave the teacher another research piece that ask, in your--and the, the, the list of things I had the children wanted to do, in your judgment, was this child likely to be a doctor, lawyer, whatever that list was, and the teacher put yes, no, maybe, maybe not, and so forth, and so on.  I generally found that the teachers' expectations by race more closely matched by race what the child's expectations of himself or herself were.  By race for African American children, many of them wanted to be things that the teacher said they wouldn't be.  Now, I cannot say I was there long enough to watch the teacher act on that.  That is, I didn't see the teacher treating the child differently because of that.  I do know that by research paper, it showed relatively definitively that if an African American child of a--of a low socioeconomic status said I want to be a doctor, the teacher was likely to say, you can't be.
Speaker 1: There--there's a--
Speaker 2: But if a low white child of socioeconomic status said I want to be a doctor, the teacher would put, it's possible he could be.
Story_ID: 428544
Speaker 1: You know, there's a classic story from right here in Lansing [Michigan] about a little boy named Malcolm Little--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --who told his white teacher (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Malcolm X.
Speaker 1: --that he wanted to be a lawyer.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And his lawyer said, "Malcolm--"
Speaker 2: Teacher, um-hm.
Speaker 1: "--be, be realistic.  You're a nigger."  I mean, really, that's, that's, that's how he put it.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: You will never be a, a lawyer.
Speaker 2: I knew his brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You should go into carpentry or something and, you know.  And that--I mean, that's exactly how he told him, you are a nigger, and you will--you know, now--
Speaker 2: You won't be a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Now, they may not have been doing that in the '70s [1970s], but you still--you're saying that the--you suspect that the--that the expectation of the teacher largely affects what the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the outcome of the process.
Speaker 2: I saw it boring out in my research, which eventually they printed in--the excerpts at MSU [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] in different publications that if take--taking children and accounting for the socioeconomic status, there is a belief in education that your socioeconomic status can affect your learning.  It doesn't mean that poor children are less able.  It means that they come to school with less of what the school measures as good.  For example, if you're poor and hungry, you're less likely to be on time and well-studied and tah-dah-dah-dah-dah, all the things that the school measures.  You know, the school is a--kind of a punitive organization or it can be.  But, if you--if your folks, if you come from a more middle class household where your mother says, okay, guys, get up.  I got oatmeal on the table and last night when I helped you with your math homework, you didn't do dah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah.  If you come from that kind of a household, you're likely to do better in school 'cause the school values, you're here on time, you've got your homework done, you act nice in class, and things like that.  If your mom couldn't help you with your homework, if you didn't have any breakfast, if your clothes were not quite so nifty, your socioeconomic status could--it didn't always, I didn't say that.  I'm saying it has--it is a factor in school.  The more you come to school like what the school measures, the better you're likely to do in school.  So, that's how socioeconomic status matters.  The more you are like the person in charge, the better they understand you.  If you come from Ishpeming, Michigan, and there are no black people or Hispanic people in Ishpeming and you never saw one until you got to Lansing, you don't understand that child very well and the likelihood is, you will attribute motives to his behavior that he didn't even have because you don't know about that child.  But, a white child, you can say, oh, that's not what he meant.  His mother probably told him dah-dah.  One of the studies I read was by a researcher named Geneva Gay and even as late as--what was the guy from New York who was a researcher, went on to be a senator?
Speaker 1: Oh, Moynihan.
Speaker 2: Moynihan.
Speaker 1: Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
Speaker 2: Daniel Patrick Moynihan.  As late as his studies came out, they would attribute motives to black people in child-raising that were not their motives.  For example, a black mother may say, boy, if you don't sit down, I'm going to knock you down.  Or, boy, I'm going to kill you if you do that again.  Well, they're not going to knock you down and they're not going to kill you.  But, a researcher listening to that attributes that as a negative way that black people have of raising their children.  So, you attribute motives to them that they didn't have only because you don't understand them very well.  A black researcher on the other hand hearing, boy, I'm going to kill you, they know that you're not going to kill your child and so they don't put that down as a negative motive.  But, the research in those days on us had been done by other race--racial groups.  When we started to do our own research, then you were getting better data and better information that instructed your decisions about children.  Now at Michigan State, I believe because of that Institute for Research on Teaching and the concern about urban children, teachers are taught differently.  I would go back sometimes to the school district since I've been retired and I would do in-baskets with both administrators and teachers and I would get very different responses today than I got back in those days.  They're more alert.  And, and a lot of things have helped that.  Colleges of ed [education] and television, too, attributes to, to helping that, understanding of each other a little better.  But, but in those days--and I don't think it's disappeared, I think it's better.
Story_ID: 428545
Speaker 1: Now this study, I--you know, I--you say you don't know if it's been quoted by people like Alex Kotlowitz and Jonathan Kozol and others that write (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  I don't know.  The--
Speaker 1: --books that criticize and, you know, American education and, you know, give it a critique, you know, I mean, more, more than a criticism, a critique.
Speaker 2: Critique.
Speaker 1: An educational critique.
Speaker 2: I was doing it a long time ago.  Later, I read a book by Jonathan Kozol [sic. Alex Kotlowitz].  He went into Cabrini-Green's [sic. Henry Horner Homes, Chicago, Illinois]?  Cabrini-Green's in Chicago [Illinois] and the name of his book is, 'There Are No Children Here[: The Story of Two Boys Growing Up in the Other America,' Alex Kotlowitz].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Oh, my.  That was a powerful, powerful book.  'There Are No Children Here.'  Little boy lived in that projects.  He didn't even know he was a child.  He was only ten years old.  'There Are No Children Here.'  And we also had Dr. Kunjufu here in Lansing [Michigan] school.  Do you know him?
Speaker 1: Jawanza Kunjufu, yes, yes, ma'am.  I used to work with him in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We had [HistoryMaker] Marva Collins.  Oh, we had everybody here at one point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do--so, now you were--you became the deputy superintendent of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --schools here.
Speaker 2: For instruction.
Speaker 1: And, and what, what year was that?
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).  Well, I was--
Speaker 1: Was that after your Ph.D. or before?
Speaker 2: After.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was two deputy super--
Speaker 1: So it's after '76 [1976].
Speaker 2: Yeah, after seventy--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Two deputy superintendents, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, so about what--do, do you know?  Was it '77 [1977], '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: No, it was the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I became deputy superintendent something like 1988.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  That, that--
Speaker 2: Eighty--yeah.
Speaker 1: That helps 'cause we try to keep a--
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: --chronology.  And--but before we leave the '70s [1970s], you know, not to--
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 428546
Speaker 1: We were in a real, real serious mode, but there's a personality here in Lansing [Michigan] that people know all over the world that you knew as a student and that's Magic Johnson.  So, tell us a little bit about him.  I think we--we'd be remiss if we didn't talk a little bit about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  About Magic.
Speaker 1: Earvin Johnson.
Speaker 2: Well, he was an elementary, middle, and senior high school student in our district.  He went to elementary school not very far from me, up the street, a little school called Main Street School [Lansing, Michigan].  He always was--what I remember of that boy was he always was a good basketball player, a good ball handler.  When he went to Everett High School [Lansing, Michigan], he, of course, parlayed that high school into the state championship.  As a matter of fact, we had one high school principal mad at us because (laughter) we changed the boundaries for--evidently we were trying to balance the schools.  We changed the boundaries and instead of going to his high school, he went to Everett High School, and he was just livid that that had happened.  But we said that that kid, he was so personable.  He always smiled.  He, he was not a malicious young man.  He was always smiling.  He could've passed the millage on his own.  And back in those days, we used to have to have elections to--called millage for the money to support the schools.  And we used to lie, we'd say, well we ought to put Earvin out there 'cause Earvin could pass this millage with no problem at all.  He was a popular, popular boy in high school, and by all accounts a nice boy.  It didn't get to--he, he didn't have a big head.  His counselor, Mrs. Bird, tells a story about, he--she came into her office one day and he was waiting for her, had his feet up on her desk.  She said, boy, if you don't get your feet off--get your foot off my desk, I'm gonna break it off.  But, he from all accounts was a nice boy, you know.  The girls liked--the girls who liked athletes really liked Earvin.  And the last time I saw him to be close to him, he was at a funeral where I was, young person his age group and he was--he was there.  And when--back in the day when I knew him, he'd always give you a hug and a big smile.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's consistent with everything we've ever heard about him, I think.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Pretty much.
Speaker 2: I was on my way to Indianapolis, Indiana, and I had a cab driver, Caucasian man.  When he found out I was--he was driving me from the airport to the hotel and when he found out I was from Lansing, the first thing he asked was, do you know Earvin Johnson?  I said, oh, you know, I knew him as a boy, as a kid.  He said, oh, I just broke down and cried when he had to quit the NFL [National Football League]--I mean--
Speaker 1: NBA [National Basketball Association].
Speaker 2: NBA, when he discovered he had AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].  He said he was the nicest boy.  This was a cab driver in Indianapolis, Indiana, so he must've been--when we sent him off, he must still have been a nice boy.  He sponsored some reading programs in the district.  His mom [Christine Johnson] was wanting to do something good as a result of his fame and fortune, so he sponsored some reading programs that his mom took charge of.  One of his sisters is a counselor in our district as I speak and one of them is an assistant principal in our district as I speak.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you say he has a brother named Larry [Johnson] that is nearly the same size.
Speaker 2: Yes, he does.  He has a brother named Larry.  Larry worked with a rehabilitation program of some sort the last time I saw him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, I had a question and--I may have to--I can't think of it now.  But, okay.  Oh, did you know his, his wife, Cookie [Johnson]?  I think she's from here, too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I can't say that I did.  All I know about her is that she was a student in the Lansing schools when I worked in the Lansing schools.  But to know her from the--we had 32,000 at the time, I don't think I knew her.  I knew that she went to Union [Missionary] Baptist Church [Lansing, Michigan] up there, but when she went to church, I think bish--reverend--well, it's not the same minister as it was now, so I don't--I can't say that I really knew her.
Story_ID: 428547
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you become a deputy superintendent of instruction in 1988 and are there any, any stories about that that you--that are significant to--
Speaker 2: Sure.  Before then, though, I was the deputy superintendent for other things in Lansing [Michigan] schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had been the deputy superintendent for support services, which meant I ran all the buses and the lunch program and the, oh, security program and all--the maintenance programs and all that stuff.  That was interesting 'cause I didn't know what a tuck pointer was when (laughter)--I said, what is a--and I thought it was a puck tointer [ph.] and they said (laughter) no.  But, yes.
Speaker 1: About what year was that when you did the--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --special service--support services.
Speaker 2: About '86 [1986] I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was only that for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But in instruction, one day, I got this telephone call and this man was yelling at me, I know you, he said, and you're not gonna suspend my son.  I thought, I certainly am not because I'm not in a school building.  Well, he said, my son is being suspended from this high school on something that should not be.  So, I said, well, that's fine, I said, but, but what is the issue?  I'm afraid I guess I just don't know it.  Well, this was prior to the Internet being a household word.  The Internet was in the library in school.  His son and two of his friends had been trading on the stock exchange on the Internet from the library.  The only way they knew it was a broker bill had come to the school for (laughter) a serious amount of money and so they found it out because the teacher said I'm not paying this broker bill.  I don't know who's doing this.  Well, the boys had been trading on the stock exchange and they had been trading things that they were relatively equal, Coca-Cola, Nike.  So, when they found out about it, they called the boys' dads and the, the man wanted his boy to go to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and he said he is not going to have a suspension on his record and I want him to go to Yale.  So I said, well, bring him to my office in the morning.  I have no idea exactly what you're talking about.  Well, I did know the father.  He was a high official in city government, got to my office and I said--I knew the boys knew what they were doing.  They said that they thought it was a game.  And I said, boys, why did you do that?  They said, well, you know, we thought it was a game.  We didn't know it was real.  And I said, what do you mean you didn't think it was real?  They had given them their social security numbers and they had told them that they made a couple of hundred thousand dollars a year which the school had already told the broker and the broker said, that's no big deal.  A lot of kids have a couple hundred thousand dollars a year, so you gotta pay this fee.  But I said to the boys, well, you, you gave them this information about yourself.  How did you think it wasn't real?  They said, well, you don't have anything else real in school (laughter).  What could you do?  I thought, well, okay, I guess you don't get suspended.  I wouldn't have anyway, but I thought that the teacher needed to put some locks on the computers so that that couldn't happen again.  But, of course, we wanted the Internet in the libraries but not, not doing that, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So.  Did, did they get suspended or?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: No.  I thought that that was rather clever and not a suspendable offense.
Story_ID: 428548
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now we're leading up now to you becoming the, the first vice president of AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], I guess.  I don't want to get ahead of myself, but this is 1990 when you become the first vice president of AKA.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, now, how did that happen?  I know we discussed it somewhat before.
Speaker 2: Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can recall going to, as they say in Richmond, Reechmond [ph.].  I recall that the supreme basileus was Janet Jones Ballard and she was from Richmond, Virginia, and it was going to be an exciting boule even though I don't think the City of Richmond was quite big enough to handle all of us.  They had some lovely what I thought of as antebellum hotels, not all of them.  But, in any case, it was going to be a lovely boules and [HistoryMaker L.] Douglas Wilder was the governor of Virginia, so he came to the boules.  Well, I decided I was going to run and I was going to take all of [HistoryMaker] Ofield Dukes' notes to me and take them to heart and learn how to run an effective campaign.  I did all the things Ofield told me, but in addition, I got this class from one of the high schools here in Lansing [Michigan] to make that videotape for me and Anita Baker's 'Giving you the Best That I Got' and it went over--the whole auditorium erupted (laughter).
Story_ID: 428549
Speaker 1: So 1994 is when you become the twenty-fourth supreme basileus of AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.].
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And just tell us a little bit about that.  I know you mentioned it earlier and--but you can fold it into this part of the interview.
Speaker 2: It was in the City of Indianapolis, Indiana.  The twenty-third supreme basileus by the way was Dr. Mary Shy Scott from Atlanta [Georgia] whom I just loved dearly.  And in Richmond, Virginia, when we were both install, we went out and raised our hands together in a victory salute.  When I was installed in Indianapolis, it was a wonderful celebration.  Everybody came.  My aunt and uncle came and I have--I have one aunt who happens to be a Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority], well, and I have a cousin who happens to be a Delta.  Well, they both came to the--to the banquet, though.  And my uncle and his wife came and, oh, it was just a marvelous cele--my pastor came.  My pastor's wife here in Lansing [Michigan] is an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], and they came.  I was so happy that they came.  So, our [HistoryMaker] Bernice [Irene] Sumlin had raised money to give a nice reception for me at the end of the meeting where you're installed.  And, of course, when you're installed, you get this beautiful pen which I don't have with me, but it's a beautiful pen that only supreme basileus of Alpha Kappa Alpha have.  And, of course, for that event, you get the prettiest dress you can find.  And, but prior to that, you have to have thought through your program.  You have to have thought through what it is you wish to accomplish with this high-powered women.  You have to have thought through what kind of material you will give to the body assembled so that they will remember what it was you had to say on that momentous morning when you give your speech.  And I had mine made up into a booklet.  Then, you have to--there's a, a lot associated with being supreme basileus of Alpha Kappa Alpha.  I was lucky that in my life I understood the use of money and a budget.  I knew how to budget for a large organization, having been second in charge of a--of a budget that was bigger than the City of Lansing [Michigan].  I understood the management of people and I understood how to put a curriculum together.
Story_ID: 428550
Speaker 1: Before I became the supreme basileus [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], I had gone to the National Science Foundation [NSF] and I made a speech talking about what a community based organization could do to support the mission of advanced mathematics and science among African Americans in the United States, and they gave me a platform to say that.  And I told them that I didn't come without portfolio, that I had been a deputy superintendent, I was at the time, and I had gotten a good degree from a good school in a good subject, so I wasn't a quote unquote sorority girl coming there talking to them, that I knew what I was talking about.  I told them about Alpha Kappa Alpha and I told them what my vision for what we could do in America to improve the lot of African American children.  As a matter of fact, they printed that talk in the national engineering journal or something, something, something of America, which I thought was kind of a--it must've been a success for her to print the whole thing.  But, when I came to the supreme basileus position, I had been to the National Science Foundation to talk to them, I had been over to the national headquarters of the American Red Cross in Washington, D.C., and I had gotten two or three audiences with Elizabeth Dole who was then the head of the Red Cross before she became a United States senator.  And we had a--we had a video taken of ourselves shaking hands to show that Alpha Kappa Alpha and the American Red Cross would be in a partnership, and we issued a position paper on that when I was supreme basileus.  We had a soror that worked for the Pillsbury Company in Minnesota.  Their, their national headquarters in Minnes--is in [Minneapolis] Minnesota.  So, before I was supreme basileus, she had, had me come to Minnesota to meet the CEO of the Pillsbury Company.  He and I met and we chit-chatted and he--we had some things in common.  He told me he had been the United Way [Worldwide] campaign chair in his community and I had been that here in Lansing, chamber of commerce, and dah-dah.  So, we had a few things in common and we talked for a long while.  Now, Gloria Smith, Dr. Gloria Smith, my program chair from MSU [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], it just happened that one of her students, 'cause she, she only handled doctoral candidates, so one of her students was a CEO up there in Minnesota as well.  So, we got hooked in to some good things.  This is what you do when you're gonna become the national president of Alpha Kappa Alpha.  You can't just go in there.  I was hooking up with the people who did Heart & Soul magazine for health, for the healthcare initiative.  I asked our sorors who worked at Johnson's Publication [sic. Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois], if they could arrange a meeting with [HistoryMaker] Mr. [John H.] Johnson and Linda Rice Johnson [sic. HistoryMaker Linda Johnson Rice] and Johnson Publications, which they did do.  So, we had a long luncheon/dinner with Mr. Johnson and Linda Rice before he died and the guy who was the controller.  And interestingly enough, I wanted to meet [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett because I had read 'Before the Mayflower[: A History of Black America,' Lerone Bennett, Jr.] and his--and I asked Mr. Johnson if it would be impolite of me to ask if, if I could meet Mr. Bennett 'cause I was familiar with his work and he said, oh, no, no, no.  So, Mr. Bennett came down and he brought copies, signed copies of his next released publication, which I thought was wonderful.  I don't know where those pictures are, but we had oh, so many pictures taken on that day.  But I did that.  I had a purpose for that.  The purpose was so that good publicity for Alpha Kappa Alpha over time was a good thing, and they were good about that.  When I was president, I was in there a lot.  Now, Linda Rice and her mom [Eunice W. Johnson] are Deltas but they, they are not small people.  They're big people.  They get the big picture, as it were.  I wanted to partner with [HistoryMaker Eddie] Williams in Washington [D.C.] that ran the Black Think Tank.
Story_ID: 428551
Speaker 1: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Eddie Williams, yeah.
Speaker 2: Eddie Williams.  I--when I was president, I told you I felt that we needed a presence in Washington, D.C.  We're smart enough.  And of--we had five members of the [U.S.] House of Representatives who were AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], so I figured, hey, let's use that to our advantage and we can help them, they can help us.  So, we would have what was called a public policy forum each year in Washington when I was president, and one--we would focus on different things.  And we would have the senators and the--well, the only--well, we had black people that--in the main, but I'm--I--if I'm not mistaking, I believe Mr. [Orrin] Hatch came over once because one of our themes was--you see, the president picks the [U.S.] Supreme Court and I was interested in Supreme Court justices that year and I was interested, equally interested, in people who got into federal judgeships down at these levels, 'cause I was in federal court two times on school deseg [desegregation].  One judge was wonderful, one was not, so I understood that process.  I had wanted to work with Eddie Williams because I felt that we in the United States, we could have benefited from Alpha Kappa Alpha's presence in a Black Think Tank like that.  He and--I, I ran out of time.  I couldn't do all the things I wanted to do.  I got to meet him one time and didn't get, get a chance before my time was up to, to finish all my stuff.  We had very good friends in the White House [Washington, D.C.] thanks to [HistoryMaker] Ofield [Dukes], [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman.  We had Bob Johnson [HistoryMaker Ben Johnson], wonderful man in the White House.  Oh, my.  His office was right next door to [First Lady] Hillary [Rodham] Clinton's office and right around the corner from himself.  But, he would arrange the speakers.  He would help us get them for many of the public policy forums that we had.  And because so many of the female members of the legislature were African Americans, I had an opportunity to address the Congressional Black Caucus at their--they met once a month, and I came to Washington once to meet with them.  And guess who was waiting in the hall when I was waiting to get in?  George Stephanopoulos.  And I remember thinking, boy, go and shine your shoes (laughter).  But, I did ask the [Congressional] Black Caucus to come to Baltimore [Maryland].  And do you know they came?  We, we got a bus for them--
Story_ID: 428552
Speaker 1: So, they [Congressional Black Caucus] attended the, the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] convention?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And C-SPAN captured it.
Speaker 1: What, what year was this?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-six [1996].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Baltimore, Maryland.  I also went up--because my theme was mathematics and science, I was trying to find out who could help us.  [HistoryMaker] Hazel O'Leary was then the secretary of energy and I had met her--oh, I had been at the White House [Washington, D.C.] a, a couple of times, once with the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] and once just 'cause.  So, I asked Hazel O'Leary if she could help us with this initiative.  And lucky, she had an educational initiative in the department of energy.  You know, energy handles atomic and all research and tah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah.  But, she had an educational arm and she was interested in this initiative that Alpha Kappa Alpha had for mathematics and science.  So, the [U.S.] Department of Energy helped us bring so many wonderful things to the women at Alpha Kappa Alpha.  They helped us bring lots of information on the use of the Internet and the computer as technology.  They brought up to us in our national meetings Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] who had a wonderful training program for teachers of mathematics and science at the time, she funded their coming to both Detroit [Michigan] and Baltimore, and we trained so many teachers who thought they knew how to teach science and, well, they learned top-notch techniques from them.  So, to be the president, you have to make all kinds of initiative and have thoughts about so many different things.  Serving on the board of the United Negro College Fund, which is a position that presidents of Alpha Kappa Alpha have because over--so, our [HistoryMaker] Bernice [Irene] Sumlin is responsible for that.  She pledged Alpha Kappa Alpha would give a million dollars to the United Negro College Fund.  That was an unheard of sum at the time.  Since then, of course, we've gotten these very, very, very high powered people.  Like I told you, when I served, [HistoryMaker General] Colin [L.] Powell had all served so--and the president of CBS and, and there was a big firm that gave the UNCF all those commercials.  "A mind is a terrible thing to lose."  But, to be--you have to--I--we didn't have all that money, but we knew people who did and whose influence we could leverage.  I told the [Congressional] Black Caucus members whom I knew who were AKAs themselves, and what they did was point out to me et cetera's wife is an AKA.  So, not only did we have five of them, but we had so many AKA wives, so they came.  I thought it was important because you got 180--at the time when I was there, you got 180,000 college-trained women.  Not all of them were active, but I'll bet you this.  If you say AKA, they come.  They understood.  The black caucus knew who we were and they understood it, so it was no big thing.  You know, many of them were frat [fraternity] members themselves and sorority women, so they understood me.  I didn't have to talk long to them for them to come.  I didn't have to talk long--I had to talk a long time to Elizabeth Dole.  It wasn't that she wasn't interested.  She just didn't--she couldn't believe the story, our story.  She, she, she believed me, but she was so impressed the story was as big as it was.
Speaker 1: It's that cultural distance.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We, we, we--
Speaker 2: She, she was a good person, though, very good, fine--very fine woman.
Story_ID: 428553
Speaker 1: All right.  Yeah, something we were saying off camera is you think it was your, your base that you already had.  You, you had a local base that you brought to the office.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you didn't, you know, necessarily need the office to give you the clout.
Speaker 2: No, I did not.
Speaker 1: You already had--
Speaker 2: And I understood--I understood how I thought because I had seen a state work from one base.  I thought I understood a little bit of how the country worked.  At least I knew what I thought.  This was my base, too.  I thought 180,000 college-trained black women that you can get your hand on.  They're not so dispersed that they're--you can get your hand on them and you can get them thinking in the same way.  We had the--my, what we call connection person was an attorney whose name is Beverly [E.] Ledbetter.  Beverly is now the general council at Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island].  She was then.  But, at the time I was--we were really into voter registration because it was very important.  We had been before.  Every time there's an election, we get--but we had been--because of the public policy forums, that's one, the, the representatives there had impressed upon us the importance of the vote and the importance of what we could do to get the vote out.  Well, we had one--Beverly created a theme of Take Five.  If you remember Dave Brubeck, he had a song called 'Take Five' on his "Jazz Goes to College" [sic. "Time Out"] album.  Well, Take Five.  All over the United States, we had a Take Five.  It meant you take five people to the polls and then that five takes five more and that five takes five more until we cover a whole community taking five.  And then you leverage all of that influence.  She did a wonderful job on the connection committee.  From her efforts came--each state has a, a state connection chair.  Each chapter and each state has a state connection chair, and each city has a state connection chair, has a connection chair.  On--next week, we're gonna have AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] day at the capital, which, which the other groups do, too.  But, AKA day at the capital, we go to the capital and we do in each capital now what we went to Washington [D.C.] to do during my administration.  The next president carried it the next step.  They still do the Washington public policy forums, but now we do them by states as well.  But, it was the understanding that we could leverage that influence.  We worked one time with Operation Big Vote.  During the public policy forums, we had--Donna Brazile came.  Another young lady who was then head of the Democrat--oh, what was her name?  I had her picture but I for--oh, anyway, we had demo--we had to be even-steven because we were a 501(c)(7) not for profit, so we had Republicans and Democrats who came to talk to us.  Part of the effort was if you're not registered to vote, get registered, and particularly on college campuses.  We knew that AKAs were probably registered to vote, but we wanted to know if all the churches were and all the barbershops, and all like that.  We believe strongly in getting to churches and barbershops 'cause that's where we are.  That's--that was where we got out in math, too, all the churches and the barber shops, mathematics and science.
Speaker 1: Okay, well that--you sound like you had a, a busy tenure as president.
Speaker 2: Oh, my, all the time.  But you know what?  It was worthwhile.  It was worthwhile to do.
Story_ID: 428554
Speaker 1: Now, you, you were president [of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] from?
Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994] to '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994] to '98 [1998].  And a lot of the, the initiatives that you started are still in place and people have taken, built on some of those and been inspired to start--
Speaker 2: Some, yes.
Speaker 1: --some of their own?
Speaker 2: And some--all of us, as I said, though, we had strands that ran throughout Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority, Inc.].  We had education as a strand.  What you did with it was--but we had education, health, economics, and so on as strands.  But, yes, some of the individual programs that I started have had some life to them.
Speaker 1: Now, now, certain programs you had to cut out, I think or, or had to put the brakes on some of them and one was the Cleveland Jobs Corps [sic. Cleveland Job Corps, Cleveland, Ohio] and, now--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what, what--is there a story behind that that--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Soror in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] --soror [HistoryMaker] Julia Purnell in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, was responsible for our getting the Cleveland Job Corps and a soror out of Huntsville, Alabama, Mary Chambers, together those two women managed to get the proposal written, they managed to secure the support of other organizations, and we were the first and the only African American women's group in the United States to be given a job corps contract.  It was in Cleveland [Ohio].  And we had it for twenty-five or so years.  Well, there came a point in the political history of America and in the economic history of this country where there was a retrenchment of funds and maybe even some questioning as to whether the Job Corps in the United States had really done what they set out to do.  So, they had questioned Alpha Kappa Alpha prior to my--they had been questioning Alpha Kappa Alpha one or two presidents back as to whether or not the Job Corps were continuing their mission.  Well, we had a job corps from the--whenever Julia was supreme basileus, the '60s [1960s] or so.  We ran it for twenty-five or thirty years almost.  And I thought that the then Washington [D.C.] administration--interesting thing.  The person in the [U.S.] Department of Labor that was--whose--had oversight for the Job Corps was investigating it who later asked me for my support when he wanted to run for governor.  But nonetheless, we went up to talk to him along with a new man that was coming in as the CEO of the job--to help us in Cleveland.  He had a management company that managed Job Corps and he had come in under soror Mary.  He's doing a pretty good job I thought.  It was the (Unclear) Corporation of Jackson, Mississippi.  But, I think it was as political as anything else.  But when I came to office, I was notified that they would not refund the Cleveland Job Corps.  I spent an entire holiday season between Cleveland and Washington attempting to save our job corps.  In retrospect, closing it was an idea whose time had come.  We had had it longer probably than any other single entity, a job corps in our name.  But, at the time, I thought it was some kind of a catastrophe.  Well, eventually, the Department of Labor did not renew Alpha Kappa Alphas contract.  It was never renewed under my administration.  And so I had to accept that.  What I was appealing in Washington all that time, took an attorney with me and so on was, I was appealing their decision to close it.  The summer after I was the president, I got in the mail all of this information about the Job Corps and soror Mary had, had sent me twenty-five boxes of Job Corps stuff almost that Alpha Kappa Alpha owed this humongous amount, $887,000 to the job corps and I thought, huh, how is that possible?  Well, apparently the audit had uncovered eight hundred and some-odd thousand dollars' worth of disallowables.  And so I understood disallowables from dealing with Title I and all the titles in public education.  So, I found the controller and all of those persons, and the controller was able to come to Chicago [Illinois] in a--and clear up the disallowables--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so that we didn't owe that.  But I was pleased to have found him and pleased that I understood and knew where to look to even do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Education.  You learn everything if you're the chief of a school district (laughter).
Story_ID: 428555
Speaker 1: Now the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] have contributed to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], I think while, while you were--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --president.
Speaker 2: 'The Old Ship of Zions' [sic. 'The Old Ship of Zion'].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, 2004, you received the Sojourner Truth Award from the city council of Lansing [Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for many years of dedication to education and community service and--here.  You also were tapped as the grand marshal for the African American Parade and Family [Reunion] Picnic in Lansing--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that year.  2006, you were chair of the board of the Lansing Community College Foundation.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're involved heavily in the Lansing community and in--and in Michigan doing lots of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --good things, so--
Speaker 2: I live here and earn my living here, and I'm educated, so I have to give something back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Probably.  I don't know at the moment what it is 'cause I wasn't clairvoyant enough at the time to know not to do it that way.  No.  I lived life I believe as I was intended to live it.  And I don't know what I would've done differently.  Maybe I would've avoid some missteps and--avoided some missteps, but I'm not smaller for having had the missteps.  At least I know now that that's a misstep and I won't step that way again.  But, no.  I did the best I could as long as I could and that was all I knew at the time.
Story_ID: 428556
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, we always ask this question.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: What were some of--what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope that in large numbers, not just a few people doing well, I hope we can do well in large numbers.  It's high time we were president of this country.  It's high time we occupied the halls of power.  We've been good American people and we have contributed to the making of this country.  It's high time.  But, what I hope is that in large numbers, we can get our children educated, that in large numbers, we can live well in our communities, in large numbers, we can raise good productive boys and girls.  And I think--I don't know how much more you can hope for.  I don't necessarily want us to be rich.  That's not a bad thing, but that's not what I'm after.  I'm after us enjoying the fruits of this country in large numbers and earning it.
Story_ID: 428557
Speaker 1: How has--this is a AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] question--well, it's my AKA question.  And--you know, how has AKA, I guess, changed--or, or fraternities and, and sororities, the black fraternities and, and the sorority community, how have they changed over the years?  I know they certainly changed from the--what people perceive as college rivalries and such to, you know, what happens when you become a mature adult working in the world trying to make it better.  As you--you, you were discussing before, you worked with, with Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and, and, and anyone else, in fact, at a higher level with some of them 'cause they're more highly organized than other people on some level to, to make positive change in the community.  And those old rivalries from, you know, college don't seem to be as important as people get more mature, right.  So, just speak to that, I think, if you would.
Speaker 2: Well, George Bernard Shaw talked about when you're young and in college, if you're not a rebel, you're kind of stupid.  And if you are still a rebel after you get out of college and get into life, you're kind of stupid.  "But, when I was a child, I spoke as a child, and when I was no longer a child, I put aside childish things."  It's childish to be a rival of those bright intelligent women who are Delta Sigma Theta.  It's childish to be in a rivalry with the Theta Phi Beta [Sorority], so I put aside childish things.  African Amer--if I were just talking about women, African American women in the whole, we all work together.  We got the same backgrounds, same with our brothers.  It's childish to be liking Kappas [Kappa Alpha Si Fraternity] better than Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] or Omega [Psi Phi Fraternity] or whatever.  All of those men have striven and achieved.  When I was a child, I spake as a child.  I'm not a child.
Story_ID: 428558
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, that I did the best I could as long as I could, that I was intelligent enough to know what I could do and did it, that I was compassionate enough to try and help along the way, and that I was my mother's daughter, and she, I hope would've been proud of what I became 'cause I was young when she died.
Story_ID: 428559
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit--now, do you have any children?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I oversaw a lot of them (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, and you're, you're no longer married, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But, okay, but you--you've got--you have such a rich community life here it seems--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  The boys next door, each year, I--well, they--I see them all the year but I say, I got my eye on you, you know, two young men.  I watched them through elementary and middle and now they're in high school.  It's hard to believe.  But, at Christmas is when I try to show my affection for them and I always give them things, you know, boy things, but I always give them books and music, too, and say don't forget your love of literature.  Don't forget that reading is an occupation and just watching TV and listen to good music and things.  And so I'm interested in their life.  I've been interested in the lives of children all of my adult life.  And I have good friends.  I entertain a lot--
Speaker 1: And, now we're--
Speaker 2: --in my house.
Speaker 1: Yeah, let me just say, we're sitting in a pretty large basement and it, it really looks like it's laid out for entertainment.
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: Complete with a stack of 45s [RPM records] and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --records and (laughter)--
Speaker 2: And when I have guests--excuse me, they have their own area.  It's like their own little suite where they can stay and not annoy me.  But I--and I have guests frequently.  I've had young people from Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority] know that I live here and they have to come here and take exams at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].  You ever gotten a call on Friday morning that I'm coming Friday afternoon and I need to take the MCAT, may I stay with you (laughter)?  So, I've had a rich and wonderful life, essentially.
Story_ID: 428560
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything we have not discussed that we probably should discuss tonight before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well, if there is, I certainly can't think of it.  What am I doing now?  I'm--now, I'm working on the hospital board and I sing with [The Earl] Nelson Singers [Company] and I--I'm with the council for the humanities and I'm still reading scholarships for the community college and tah-dah.  But, I still go around for Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority, Inc.] as much as I want to and I'm still completing--you didn't ask me about the senior residences [Ivy Acres, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, go ahead right now.
Speaker 2: --in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Do you know what that is?
Speaker 1: Well, no, tell us.
Speaker 2: Okay.  When I was national president, I looked at Alpha Kappa Alpha [AKA] and for the first time I told you we could have all of these women who had been an AKA for fifty years.  I took a survey prior to coming--becoming supreme basileus, and I asked for everybody in the sorority who had been made into the sorority before 1960, whoa, there were a lot of them, and so many were widows or, or widowers, men, you know.  So, we had lots of programming for young people, but not a lot for our senior members who are the ones who keep us going with their dues and interest.  And so I thought, well, I would like to build a gentle place where people could come with--for people who have memories like theirs, a nice place, and it started in Virginia.  Soror Sifax [ph.] in Virginia was going to do this in Arlington [County, Virginia].  She passed away.  So, soror Dr. Barbara Kinard Phillips picked it up in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.  She knew from having been the associate superintendent of schools there that there was a, a place where the school district had once decided it was gonna build a school and didn't do it.  So, the land was available.  We bought the land.  The sorors of Alpha Kappa Alpha gave contributions and we bought the land, forty-eight acres.  Then, Winston-Salem, the City of Winston-Salem has worked with us.  Dr. Phillips has passed.  She passed in 2005 and it has been mine to try to complete.  The banks in Winston-Salem did a little bit of help out and so forth and so on.  Up until now as I speak, we have the footings and the foundations to our assisted living facility in the ground and hope to get it completed, the building up over this--over the course of this coming year and we're considering developing a partnership.  We've been talking to another 501(c)(3) entity there in the City of Winston-Salem who are in the nursing home business and on our campus.  I hope that I'm still leveraging my partnerships, hoping that the partnership with them will work and they will put a nursing home there.  And then, we have the architectural drawings and plans for four different independent living houses and so as the sorors' wish and put enough money down, we will begin building their independent home.  The idea is a continuing care retirement community.  You can come there as an independent senior liver.  If you need it, you can go to the assisted living facility or you can get the assisted living services in your own home.  If you move past where assisted living is what you need and you need more intense care, you can go to the nursing facility without leaving our campus.  That's, that's what we're working on and have been, I will say, for a long time now.  Looks as if it's going to come to fruition.
Speaker 1: That, that sounds wonderful.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we're not just quote unquote sorority girls in the pejorative sense.
Story_ID: 428561
Speaker 1: My last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: She did the best she could for as long as she could in good humor, good grace, and with some degree of intelligence, and I was an okay supreme basileus [for Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], a good supreme basileus.
Story_ID: 428562
Speaker 1: This is my mother and father, Arthur [Allmon] and Exzelma [Lowe] Allmon, and this was taken at our home in Detroit, Michigan, and it had to be about 1960.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Good, next.
Speaker 1: Well, this is [HistoryMaker] Eva Evans and Howard [ph.] Evans.  This is Eva and Howard at a fraternity dance here in Lansing, Michigan.  This is my former husband.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Good, next.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) In the center with the hat on is Eva Evans.  In the front is Gloria [H.] Dickinson, who is a former Supreme Grammateus [Recording Secretary].  This is Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  We were just swimming on a hot, hot Sunday afternoon.  The other lady is from Bates College in [Lewiston] Maine.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is Eva Evans with her dear, dear friend, Dr. Barbara K. Phillips, the twentieth supreme basileus of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority, Inc.], and that was in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, where that photo was taken.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Got it.
Speaker 1: This is Sarah Jane Trammell and Exzelma Allmon.  This is my mother and my grandmother.  That picture was taken in Detroit I'd say about 1958.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Great, next.
Speaker 1: Oh, my.  In the upper right-hand corner of that photograph is an Eva Allmon.  These are the women who were in my chapter and undergraduate school [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan], some of whom were my line sisters and others of whom were my big sisters, no longer called big sisters, but that's what they were.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Good.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me that a young man who was trying to get into the photography business took, as he was trying to--he was gonna put it around different places to show people how well he could do photography.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  About what year is that?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's about 1980.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  All right.
Speaker 2: This is 2005.  This is a group of women from Sparrow hospital boards [Sparrow Women's Board of Managers].  We were up in Mackinac [Island], Michigan, at the Grand Traverse [sic. Grand] Hotel [Mackinac Island, Michigan] in Mackinac, Michigan.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Oh, I forgot the little one here, the little one.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: That is Joanna and her husband.  This is my great-great grandparents.  I'm--Stewart.  Joanna Stewart [ph.].  This picture would've been taken in Mississippi in probably 18-something.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Um-hum, good, thanks.  Next.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Now, I don't know which ones on here.  Was this the--which ones on that photo?
Speaker 1: Can you get this page or any--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Yeah, we, we can get--yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Get the whole page, yeah.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Well, well, we'll probably focus on one photo at a time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And go ahead.
Speaker 1: These are pictures from my term as supreme basileus.  This is about 1996 and I was in Washington, D.C.  These are pictures taken for the Ivy Leaf, the sweetest days.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture when I was in one of my positions in the [Lansing] school district.  We used to have city-wide field days and I was a good helper in the city-wide field days.  This is about 1989.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture, I was at the White House [Washington, D.C.] with then President [William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton.  That's about 1992, '4 [1994].
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  One second.  Okay, got it.
Speaker 1: This is a very young Eva Allmon, one of the dancers in the City of Detroit's 150th anniversary.  This was our costume for our 'Rhapsody in Blue.'
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is the high school [Northern High School, Detroit, Michigan] graduation picture of Eva Allmon, Eva Lois Allmon.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, good, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me with the barristers.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Whoop, fell down.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Uh-oh.
Speaker 2: --party, but one of the times when I was presented in Detroit, the second one, yes.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Is that you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: I have another picture of that too when I was at the--the big one, the big white one there--kind of event.
Speaker 1: This is Eva at her coming out party in Detroit and that was Dr. Piper [ph.]--who is now Dr. Piper.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me taken by a very famous Detroit photographer who did photographs for Life" magazine.  I was about twenty-four years old then and that would've been 1960-something.
Speaker 2: This is an interesting picture.  This is not 2004 as that says.  That's Mrs. [Hortense] Canady, myself, and [HistoryMaker] Julia Purnell.  On the left, that's Mrs. Canady, the former national president of Delta Sigma Theta [Sorority, Inc.].  To the right of me is Julia Purnell, the sixteenth--
