Story_ID: 117070
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us including if you have a middle name, and I'd like to also have your date of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is Sharon Emily Epperson, S-H-A-R-O-N E-P-P-E-R-S-O-N is my last name, and Emily, E-M-I-L-Y.  I was born April 12, 1968, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 17, 2014.
Speaker 1: Okay, and our location?
Speaker 2: We are in New York City [New York] at Skadden, Arps [Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP] Law Offices.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a journalist.  I am a television journalist.
Story_ID: 117071
Speaker 1: And I--we ask five People magazine-ish questions--short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: My favorite food probably is lasagna.  That's one of the first dishes I learned how to make, and it's one of the things I love to eat when I can spare the calories.
Speaker 1: A favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite colors are red and purple.  I love 'em both.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is the spring.  My birthday is in the spring, and I just love when the snow is gone and everything turns green again.
Speaker 1: And favorite place vacation?
Speaker 2: My--my favorite place to vacation is probably any type of island or warm weather spot with palm trees, sand and blue water.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying, if you have one?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Probably one of my favorite sayings and something I try to keep in my mind as I pursue my life is to give as much as I can of my time, talent and treasure to others.
Story_ID: 117072
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you first about your mother. If you could give her name and, you know, what you know about her family background and growing up.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson.  And she was also born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, November 21, 1936.  She is the youngest of five children.  Her parents, J. Edward Trower and Sara Emma Berry Trower, lived in Pittsburgh and ran a dry cleaning business [Trower's Cleaners, Shirt, Laundry and Monogramming Service Inc.] for many, many years.  At one point, they had four locations all over the city of Pittsburgh.  And they were some of the first African-American entrepreneurs--successful entrepreneurs in the city.  My mother worked with her brothers [William Trower and John Trower] and sister [Sara Ann Trower Martin] in the family business for many years.  And they sold it several years ago.
Story_ID: 117073
Speaker 1: So my mother [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] grew up in the city of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] working when--when she was growing up as a small child and then, as an adult, part time in the family business [Trower's Cleaners, Shirt, Laundry and Monogramming Service Inc.]. But she also was an educator herself.  So she went to the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and got her bachelor's degree, her master's degree there, and she taught for the Pittsburgh Public School Systems for eighteen years.  She taught until I went to college and then she took some time--I shouldn't say that.  I'm gonna do that again.  So my mother taught for the Pittsburgh Public School System until I was born.  She took off eighteen years to raise me and then went back to work when I went to college.
Speaker 2: So let me ask you, how--did she share any specific stories about growing up, either in the family business or Pittsburgh as--you know.
Speaker 1: My mom has a lot of relatives from Virginia.  Her father [J. Edward Trower] originally came from Virginia.  And we can trace our ancestors all the way back to 1860, to my great-great grandmother, who was born in 1860 in Virginia, Cecelia Downing.  So she spent a lot of time going back to see those relatives in the summertime.  And growing up, my sister [Lia Epperson Jealous] and I would love to hear the stories.  She would come into our room.  And her bedtime stories weren't, you know, "Goodnight Moon," [by Margaret Wise Brown] and they were bedtime stories about her life growing up and sleeping on her grandmother's feather bed, what a chamber pot was, you know, using that, and, and when she would go down to Virginia, taking the train from Pittsburgh to Virginia to go visit her grandmother.  So those types of stories about her childhood and connecting as a child to her ancestors was--were very important stories for us growing up.
Speaker 2: So--so what, what did she--can you tell me about your family going back to, to Virginia anymore about that, that family and what the--you know, what the storyline--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, they lived on the eastern shore of Virginia.  And from what I remember, from some of my mother's stories, there were a number of siblings of my grandfather's that lived there in Virginia that he would go to see.  It was hard for them to stop work with business and for him to be able to travel with my mom all the time. So he did when she was younger, and then she would go with her brother John [Trower] on the train and they would go together some years.  Her--the stories that I remember about her grandmother, and, and it's not about what her grandmother did for work or, but just stories about things that happened around the house, about getting her hair done by her grandmother, about having the hot comb on the stove, and, and all of those types of stories of, of going there and really enjoying being in that part of the country and being there with her family.  And over the years she continued to stay connected to the relatives that she has on the eastern shore of Virginia.  And in fact when I was I, I think a teenager, maybe around thirteen or so, I went with my aunt and I went to visit some of the relatives there as well.  So it was a good going back home journey.
Speaker 2: Now how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 1: Very, very strong; very devoted to her family, a mind like a steel trap.  She doesn't forget anything, and extremely, extremely supportive of her children and her family members.
Story_ID: 117074
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about your father.  Can you give his name and you know, his--you know, what you know about his background.
Speaker 2: My father's name was David Ernest Epperson.  He was born March 14, 1935.  He passed away June 20, 2011.  And he was a university dean for nearly thirty years at the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in the School of Social Work.  He also grew up in the Pittsburgh area, but was born in and raised in Donora, Pennsylvania.  He was born in, in Pittsburgh in [Pittsburgh] Mercy Hospital, but he was raised in Donora, Pennsylvania.  Donora is a steel town--was a steel town.  My grandfather, Robert Nelson Epperson, worked in the steel mills in Pittsburgh area.  And it was a very hard life for my father.  My grandfather did not finish the third grade--barely finished the third grade.  My grandmother worked in many homes and also was not a well-educated woman.  Her name was Bessie Tibbs Epperson, but they were extremely, extremely strong in their faith.  And they had another son, Robert Nelson Epperson, Jr., who was my father's older brother--three years older than my brother [sic, father]-- and raised them to be the best of friends, the closest that they could be, and really supported them and nurtured them and other boys, black boys, in that very small town.  And so they were in the Boy Scouts [of America], and they were in many church groups.  And of my father's close-knit group of six or so guys, all of them went on to college.  None of them were from parents who were college educated, but they all were taught to strive for excellence, and so they're engineers, and they're teachers, and they're all kind of professionals and in a small town that really didn't have very many of those people at the time--black people.
Speaker 1: So how far is Dor- Dor- how far is--
Speaker 2: Donora is about--
Speaker 1: --it.
Speaker 2: --an hour or so from Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: From Pittsburgh, okay.
Speaker 2: From Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: So what--how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: My father was a very dynamic, strong, fill up the room type of personality.  He was very generous.  If you came to the house, he would want you to come in, have some of my mother's [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] iced tea, which is excellent, and you know, enjoy being part of our home--invite you into our home.  He was very active in the community in Pittsburgh and very active in his church.  So I'd say he was someone who taught me, as my mother did, very early on that it's all about faith, family and friendship.  And that is what the guiding force should be in your life, and that was the guiding force in his life.
Story_ID: 117075
Speaker 1: Now you say that the--you know, your father's [David Ernest Epperson] side of the family was very strong in their faith.  What faith were they?
Speaker 2: They were Baptist.
Speaker 1: Baptist, so--
Speaker 2: They were Baptist.
Speaker 1: --good old Baptist tradition--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And my mother [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] was as well.  Her family was very involved in the Episcopal Church in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  She, in fact, was baptized at Holy Cross Episcopal Church in Pittsburgh and remains a member to this day.  My daughter, Emma [Farley], who's eight years old, was baptized there when she was less than a year old with her cousin, my niece, Morgan [Jealous], who's around the same age.  So we still have a very strong tradition and, and you know, support network there in Pittsburgh in that church--in the Holy Cross Episcopal Church.
Speaker 1: So did your--did your father attend the church, to the Episcopal Church?
Speaker 2: My father would attend occasionally with my mother.  He, during the time I was growing up, was a very strong Baptist, a strong Baptist who enjoyed Mahalia Jackson every Sunday morning--would listen to the music, read the paper, and watch the Sunday football games, cause I'm from Pittsburgh so it's a [Pittsburgh] Steeler nation-- the, it's the capital of Steeler nation.  So he was not a churchgo- goer every Sunday.  My mother made sure we went to Sunday school every Sunday.  She was a Sunday school teacher, and we went to Confirmation classes, and we did all that in her church.  And we would occasionally go to the Baptist church and visit my father, but he never changed.  When he retired, he decided that he wanted to belong to a church that was very active in the community, but perhaps closer to the co- where we lived.  And, and also I think he just really loved the programs of this particular church.  So surprising to us all, my father at the age of--probably around seventy--became a Presbyterian and joined a very, very well-integrated Presbyterian church with a white reverend running the church who became, and continues to be, one of the closest friends to our family and someone who helped my father in his final years tremendously.  But he--it was--it was quite interesting to see this long-time Baptist, every BTU [Baptist Training Union] Wednesday nights, Saturday nights, Sunday nights growing up, to then become a Presbyterian.  But I think he--in his final days and his final years, he spent his time with a congregation that embraced him, and nurtured him, and allowed him to give back as much as he could of himself to so many programs in the community.  So I think it was--it was--it was the right thing for him.
Story_ID: 117076
Speaker 1: How did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: My parents [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson and David Ernest Epperson] met probably at the Trower's Cleaners, [Shirt, Laundry and Monogramming Service Inc.]  where my--my mother's parents' [J. Edward Trower and Sara Emma Berry Trower] business.  And my father--I think the story--as the story goes, as I remember it, my father would come in and bring his clothes, and he met my mother there.  He--I think they knew of each other and had seen each other on the campus of the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], 'cause they were both at the University of Pittsburgh at the same time.  But it was my grandmother who thought he was a really nice guy for my mom and talked him up to her.  And then he went away.  He went into the service [U.S. Air Force].  He took some time off from college.  And when he came back, then I think they started dating more seriously, but they didn't date very long; and I guess in those times, when you knew, you knew.  And so they knew each other for eleven years before they got married, but they probably dated a very, very short time before they got married.
Speaker 1: So what a minute.  They knew each other, but they actually--wa- when did they get married?
Speaker 2: They got married--my parents got married in 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my mother--let me think.  If--35, 36, 18--yeah, so my mother graduated from high school in 1952.  She was sixteen.  She skipped two years, and probably met my father when she was quite young, you know, getting ready to go to college.  But then he was the--there, but then had take--took time off to go into the service and came back.  And then they--
Speaker 1: So they did--
Speaker 2: --started dating, yeah they--
Speaker 1: Right, then they, they both found themselves at--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: At Pitt [University of Pittsburgh], yes.
Story_ID: 117077
Speaker 1: The dry cleaners [Trower's Cleaners, Shirt, Laundry and Monogramming Service Inc.]--is this the largest black dry cleaners in, in, in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you, you what--your not--your family has--I mean, dry--to own a dry cleaners was a huge deal--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the black community.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, it was--there were gas station owners.  You know, there were different ways, but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to own a dry cleaners was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a big--
Speaker 2: Because, you know, when you think about it, in order to do that--we're very proud people.  We wanna have our Sunday best, but it is a luxury item to be able to take your clothes to the cleaners, and make sure that, you know, you have--so it was--it was a place of--in the community where people went with pride, to take their things, their prized possessions some of them, their uniforms for work.  Whatever it was, it was their prized possessions.  And my family, running that business, took pride in them and what they had accomplished and why they were bringing their clothes to our specific business.  My aunt [Sara Ann Trower Martin] would run that front desk.  She'd just--she was kind of the mayor of the community and knew everything that was going on there and people coming in, and the customer's always right.  That's where I learned the--you know, the, the importance of great customer service.  It was definitely, and continues to be, kind of an iconic business in the city of Pittsburgh for the African-American community.  People know that.  Anyone who grew up in the city of Pittsburgh or spent any time there knows of Trower's Cleaners.
Speaker 1: And what you should also say or you know--I shouldn't tell you to say but, your family has a lot of prominence in the city, you know, because of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, because of the business and, and I--this really hit home to me in the last month or so.  My mother's [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] oldest brother, William Trower, passed away at the age of ninety-one.  And when I thought about his life, going to St. Paul's College for a few years, learning a technical trade, becoming a tailor, coming back, becoming president of the business when his parents [J. Edward Trower and Sara Emma Berry Trower] passed away, and learning how many people had worked for that business, it's also a big employer, right--a small business, but with four locations over the years, with the drivers, and the people who were tailors and seamstresses and worked the front counter, and people who worked in actually the dry cleaning facility, and, and people who would just need to have a job for a period of time and get some help to do something else.  There were a lot of people that were touched by that business.  It also served as an anchor in various communities where it was located.  The Hill District and Homewood were the main areas, and the main areas where a lot of black people live in Pittsburgh, so it was kind of the--one of the anchor stores of those communities as well.  And as it flourished, other businesses around it, restaurants, drugstores, they also flourished.  So it was certainly something that was an iconic and really important place in the Pittsburgh community.  Several years ago when the G-20 [Group of Twenty] Summit was in Pittsburgh, I went back with CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel] and I did a story about growing up in se- in Pittsburgh and the Pittsburgh that I knew and the renaissance that has become of the Pittsburgh of today, with the transition from being a steel town to now the focus on healthcare and education with the university community.  But what has stayed there throughout this period has been that business.  It's now under different management, but that same dry cleaner establishment that my grandparents founded and they opened the business--one of the four locations was in Homewood-Brushton community--it remains there today.  And so that is a--that shows the staying power of, you know, a business like that of an--of, of, of the interest in the community--have a business like that is very powerful.
Speaker 1: So who owns it today now?
Speaker 2: Strong.
Speaker 1: Stra--
Speaker 2: The Strong family.
Speaker 1: I see, okay--another black family?
Speaker 2: Another black family.
Speaker 1: So it transitioned.
Speaker 2: Yes, so it transitioned to another black family, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's good to hear.  You don't see that much.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 117078
Speaker 1: So I-- I want to ask you what your earliest memory is growing up.
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, I think one of my earliest memories growing up, and this is either from the bedtime stories my mother [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] would tell me about what happened when I was growing up, or I think in my own mind is where I first lived in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], which was in Belmar Gardens.  And we lived in a kind of a two-family home.  I can see the street.  I can see playing with some of the other kids on the street.  I can see--I think--I don't know if it was the front of my house or when we called Aunt Della, which is the per--one of the people who helped to kind of take care of some of the kids in the neighborhood whenever my mom--she wasn't working at the time, but we would go down there sometimes and play.  And I remember--I remember being outside and playing as a child in my--in my neighborhood.  That's probably one of my earliest memories.
Story_ID: 117079
Speaker 1: And what about your siblings--your sibling--okay.
Speaker 2: So I have a sister, a younger sister, named Lia Epperson [Jealous]--Lia Beth Epperson, and she was born December 12, 1971.  She did not live in the Belmar Gardens house with us because I--we left there right before she was born when I was about three years old.  And she is probably one of my--she's my heart, my closet friend; we're very, very close.  We grew up--as my father's [David Ernest Epperson] brother used to always tell us--my Uncle Bobby, [Robert Nelson Epperson, Jr.], he said always stay close.  You all are--always be best friends; always stay close; always have each other.  And since losing my father, that has been so important to us, to be the team that looks after my mother [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson], though she needs no looking after because she is the most fit seventy-seven-year-old woman I know--but to, to be each other's emotional support as well.  And so we're very close.  We're both--I think we kind of helped each other, though I'm the older sister, through many things, getting through--we both went to all the public schools in Pittsburgh.  We graduated from Taylor Allderdice High School.  We both graduated from Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  She went on and got her law degree from Stanford [University, Stanford, California] and worked for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund, worked for Morrison & Foerster [LLP] Law Firm, and now is an attorney, as well as a law professor at American University [Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 117080
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your--so you remember the name of--oh, I forgot the name of the street.  Gro- so you lived in that house at the beginning you said for your--
Speaker 2: I lived in--
Speaker 1: --first three years.
Speaker 2: --Belmar Gardens on Tilden Street--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the first three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then where did--where did the family move?
Speaker 2: And then we moved to where my mother lives today, to Point Breeze area of Pittsburgh, to 115 North Merlin Street.  And that was a wonderful neighborhood, continues to be a wonderful neighborhood, a well-integrated neighborhood, great schools in the area, and it was a wonderful place to grow up.
Speaker 1: Can you describe your street?
Speaker 2: We had the center house on the street.  We had probably--in the neighborhood I live in now many of the houses look the same.  I think there--I felt like our house was different, maybe just cause it was our house.  At the time I didn't know what different houses were called or how they looked, but now I know that it was center hall Colonial and that meant that it had an entryway where you walked right into the front door and kind of into our house and-- and into the center of the Epperson household.  And that, that says it, it--now the thinking about the type of hou- the, the type of home that we had growing up and the type of family that we were, it was absolutely perfect.  Because once you walk through those doors, you're part of our family, and the house is kind of structured that way and I think in a very welcoming way.
Speaker 1: We were--we've always been friendly with our neighbors; and in fact, one of my mother's-- mother [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] closest friends lives--our driveways kind of--we could go from one to the other.  They live across the street from us and have been such great friends and neighbors over the years.  They have a daughter that's a similar age to mine, and we kind of grew up playing a little bit together.  And once we went away to school, my sister [Lia Epperson Jealous] and I, the parents continued to be great friends; And when my father [David Ernest Epperson] passed away, such a great friends that they said you know what?  We decided to get a bench and have our plot right across from yours.  We'll be neighbors for eternity.  And that kind of--it's hard, living in New York City [New York] first, and now in the suburbs of New York, developing that kind of sense of community is very difficult.  Develop- developing that sight--type of sense of community as an African-American family with a non-African-American family is also very unusual, even today, even in [HM Barack] Obama day. And so I thought it was really--I think one of the most beautiful gifts that we could have been given in that time period right after my father passed away was for that family and that couple to say that they wanted to be close to my parents, because the friendship they had was so strong they wanted to have it for eternity.
Speaker 2: So you are--so you're--the, the street is an integrated street then?
Speaker 1: It is.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And so any ethnic--I mean, what are the--
Speaker 1: So what's interesting to me about Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], now having lived in-- in New York City for my adult life, is that I grew up in a very black and white environment.  I didn't really know of anything else.  You were either black or white, and the, the spectrum of light went Christian and Jewish, because my high school [Taylor Allderdice High School] was in a predominantly Jewish neighborhood.  So I went to half a dozen Bar Mitzvahs and Bat Mitzvahs and I knew about, you know, that tradition, that religion, that culture.  But I didn't know about Latino culture, which is a very broad culture, but I didn't know very many Latinos.  I didn't know very many South Asians.  And even in being in a university setting [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] where there were probably many there--my father, you know, working with him professionally, a wide range of different types of people in my day-to-day interactions at my school and in my neighborhood, I didn't really see very much other than back and white.  So it was really interesting when I got to college and really learned about many more cultures.  And I think that's probably part of the reason why I was so interested when I was in school to live abroad and to have experienced different parts of the world.
Story_ID: 117081
Speaker 1: So what is family life like inside, you know, the Epperson household?  Are there chores that you have, you know?  Both your-- your mother's [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] a stay-at-home mother at this point, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.  I was watching a commercial last night, and I rarely watch commercials, but with my husband [Christopher John Farley].  And it was a commercial about Scrubbing Bubbles, about this Dow Scrubbing Bubbles, and it just brought flashbacks.  I said every--I know it; I can smell it right now, because I remember cleaning the bathroom every Saturday.  And I remember having take--to take the garbage out or take the garbage--collect the garbage from different rooms, take it downstairs.  My dad [David Ernest Epperson] would actually take it outside to the curb.  I remember having to--we had apple trees in our backyard.  I remember having to pick up the rotten apples, making sure they didn't damage the grass, and you know, having to take them out.  We certainly had a number of chores to do growing up, and I don't--I don't know if today I give my children enough chores.  I think I need to give them some more chores, as I was sitting there thinking about when I'd be cleaning these bathrooms every Saturday.  But we, we certainly had chores.  We weren't a family that--my parents believed that excellence was expected, so it wasn't like we did these chores and got five dollars or we got an "A" and we got ten dollars, whatever that--you know, I don't remember actually getting allowance.  I don't remember ever wanting for anything that I--if I really, really wanted it and I really needed it, I think I, I got it eventually.  But there was na- there was not I'll give you this, you know, if you do that.  It was expected.
Speaker 1: And what is--so you're saying on Sundays you're going--you know, you go to, to church [Holy Cross Episcopal Church] with--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --your mother and what, what reminds you of church?  You know, what was the church service?  How involved were you?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, cause Episcopalian is the highbrow part of the African-American community.
Speaker 2: Yes, so let me--you say what do I most remember?  Is the smell of incense I must say, which I can also smell so good, but you know.  If you are not an Episcopalian, and if you've never had that experience, it is a shocking thing to--to, to witness or to experience, I should say, with your senses.  So that's what I remem- I remember that.  I remember, you know, before reading the Gospel, and having the pastor come down, and have the incense, and then hear the scripture.  I remember that.  I remember as a youngster in Sunday School (pause) learning about the importance of knowing who you are.  I can't remember the exact phrase that we were taught, but there was something to the effect probably around the time of Jesse Jackson--of "I am somebody.  I may not know everything, but I do know something.  And what I can do, I ought to do, and by the grace of God I will do."  And we would say that every Sunday.  We'd start every Sunday lesson with that; we'd end every Sunday lesson with that.  We'd have stale cookies and red punch that was too sweet, and things that we don't do now with our organic, Whole Foods [Market] lifestyle.  But it was a--it was a strong, strong sense of community, not just because we were strong in our faith, but because we were strong in creating a family, a friendly, a welcoming, a God-loving and loving of each other sense for the children and for the--for the church.  So the friends that I was Confirmed with, one of my very best friends was in my Confirmation class, she's the godmother of my children; I talk to her almost every other day.  So I still have the connections, you know.  We don't live in the same city anymore.  We're both outside of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  But that foundation was powerful.
Story_ID: 117082
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about how aware--cause you know when we're young our, our family life is really sort of the center of the life, so can you share with us first, before we get to that what sight--and you've done some of this--what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of your childhood?  You were talking about, you know, scrubbing out the bathroom--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I remember that and it's gonna seem like they--that they were just working me all the time with that.  But I really do.  I remember--I remember those chores, cleaning the bathroom being one of them that I didn't really love, but so I remember the chores.  I remember--this is another almost sounds like a stereotype, but he was so good at it.  I remember my dad [David Ernest Epperson] didn't cook often.  My mother [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] did most of the cooking, but he made the best fried chicken, and she'd just let him at it.  And he could make it, and it was phenomenal.  It was terrific, and I don't need it to eat now, because he's gone and nobody can make it as good as he can, so.  I remember my mother's iced tea.  She made sweetened iced tea that was just terrific, and pound cake.  She could cook and bake, and Thanksgiving was done, you know, chopping everything, crying with the--
Story_ID: 117083
Speaker 1: So we were talking about--you know, you were talking about your father's [David Ernest Epperson] fried chicken--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and your mother's ca-
Speaker 2: So fried chicken and, and iced tea from my mom [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson]. She was great at that.  But my mom did all the cooking, so whether it was the quick tuna noodle casserole, you know, on a weekday, or the Thanksgiving meal that she made every single dish and chopped the onions and the celery, and made the, you know, stuffing from scratch, and dressed the turkey, and did it all.  I--so I remember those smells, and I remember setting the table, which was my sister [Lia Epperson Jealous] and I, that was our job with the nice china and the silverware and the napkins and the--and I remember--and I remember Christmas, which was my father's absolute favorite holiday and just--not so much for the year that I got the bike or the year that I got the Teddy bear, or--but because we just loved being together at that time, and it really felt like--you know, it was the best family ever for those--for, for that--I mean, for my lifetime, but at that moment, that was just the highlight of the year, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what sounds?  I didn't hear sounds.
Speaker 2: "Rise and shine."  That's my father, he had--from the military background and being in the [U.S.] Air Force and maybe, maybe I had some gene early on, like my kids do since they were younger, where they can get up.  But so maybe I'm just remembering high school, where kids sleep.  But that was just so disturbing, just to be woken up with that voice and coming in, and the blinds being--you know, the--rolling up the blinds and throwing back the covers--get up; time to get up; time--and I just--just five more minutes; just five more minutes; but no more five more minutes.  So I remember my father's booming voice every morning, "Rise and shine," 'cause no one ever had to wake him up.  He was--you know, his own alarm clock was awesome.  He got up and got us all up every morning, so I remember that.
Story_ID: 117084
Speaker 1: And so what is the young Sharon Epperson like?  And I'm talking around the--let's see--seven to nine--six to nine--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I have a--I think I have a good sense of it.  And I did not--and I try not to make a Mini-Me, but my daughter, Emma [Farley], who's named after my grandmother, Sara Emma [Berry Trower], I think--from my--what my family tells me, she is.  So if that's any indication, very focused on school, loves school--I remember that too.  I mean, my daughter does and I did.  I loved school.  I enjoyed walking to school, cause I walked to school at that--at that age with some neigh--with older neighbors.  I remember as a--probably more kindergarten, so maybe like five or so--or may have--but definitely elementary school age--when we could walk home for lunch.  And so since my mother was home, she took pride in making all kind of interesting--she was a teacher too, so she's home, but she's still always an educator, always an elementary education professional.  So there might be a sign at the door: today is red day.  So red day would be red punch, a jelly sandwich, apple slices; everything had the red theme.  And--or there would be an orange theme, and that would be the grilled cheese sandwich day, with orange juice and orange slices and maybe orange sherbet, if it was a special occasion; and just that kind of--just very thoughtful attention to our day and our development.  And you know, now as a mother, I think about how much effort that took, to do that, to think that through and to plan things like that.  But as a kid, I just remember it was fun.  It was really fun to come home; at that age it was really fun to come home.
Story_ID: 117085
Speaker 1: So you--how many blocks away were you living from, from, from your elementary school, and what was the name?
Speaker 2: So I went to Sterrett Elementary School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and--
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: S-T-E-R-R-E-T-T.  And it was probably--maybe about twelve blocks--ten, twelve blocks away from my--from my home--longish blocks, but not, not too bad.  There was always a crossing guard, and, and, and where I had the busy, busy part of the street that I had to cross was right next to a fire station.  So I think my mother [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] probably thought there are enough emergency professionals around that it's okay for my daughter to be able to walk to school with an older neighbor and be, be safe.  And in that--those times, everyone did, so it was different.
Speaker 1: You know, what's, what's--you have--so, you have a mother who's very dedicated--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to the education of her, her daughter--first of all, she--well, she wasn't trained at that--was she trained?
Speaker 2: She was.  So my mother had already taught for ten years.
Speaker 1: She had taught--
Speaker 2: Before, before, I was born--she taught for ten years in elementary schools [Lincoln Elementary School] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: So she is taking her little one and basically she's going to give you all of her training and all of-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --her knowledge.  So--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --she's sort of surrounding you--I mean, cause the, the whole thing of the red day and orange--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --day, I mean, think--that's just like--
Speaker 2: It's really, really special.  And even as a grandmother, she--at one point, my son [Dylan Farley] was having some trouble in school and--nothing bad, but just being a boy and you know, learning about how to follow rules.  And so she made a poster for him, drew figures that looked like him--rule number one, rule number two, rule number three--keep your hands to yourself, you know, follow directions; and he still has it.  This is from when he was a little boy--he's eleven now and he still has it in his room.  And so she has a way of, even now, even when nerves are a little bit shorter at seventy-seven, of speaking to children and making them feel nurtured, comforted, important.  I think that's very important, to make children believe that, you know, I'm the adult and you need to listen to me.  I'm in charge, but you're still important; you're still important to me.  And she has absolutely done--did that with my sister and I with our kids, and with the children that she has taught and mentored over the years.
Speaker 1: So by the time really you go even to elementary school, you're--are you at a higher level of reading and comprehension? Are you--do you feel--
Speaker 2: I would assume I, I was because my mother read to us a lot and told us stories all the time.  And, what I have learned is just sharing that information with your children and just being with them, speaking to them, and certainly reading to them; it just helps them tremendously.  So I'm, I'm certain that I must have been--I was always a very good student--all of my report cards, you know, I was a straight-A student, very good with my citizenship grades and all that, so that was important.
Speaker 1: And so you--this is--let's see.  So we're in the mid-seventies [1970s] really when you're in elementary--you know, elementary and sort of--yeah, elementary and junior high school.  So I wanna ask what is the racial composition of this--of your elementary school?  Is it--
Speaker 2: My elementary school was pretty--again, black and white, but pretty evenly mixed.
Speaker 1: Oh, so it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it was an integrated school growing up.  And my best friend in the second grade and probably my later years in elementary school, her name was Kerry Gallagher, nice Irish name.  And we would go trick or treating together, dress up together for Halloween.  I remember--so this is the seventies [1970s]--in the--in 1776 plays, that the colonial period that second graders study, and my kids do today--it was 1976.  So we did a big colonial production.  And even then, maybe I didn't--I think--of course my parents explained to me what during the colonial period my people were doing versus other people.  But I still wanted to wear my Holly Hobbie dress; I still watched "Little House on the Prairie"; I still wanted the brown braids like Laura Ingalls Wilder; and I wanted to wear the kind of red, white, and blue dress like she would.  So I had--that's what I remember from that period of--you know, in terms of that was part of my education, but it was also a really fun time for me.  I wore that costume for about two or three Halloweens.  I loved it.
Story_ID: 117086
Speaker 1: So you, you--so all of this--so your sister comes along.  Is there any sibling rivalry at first--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, I certain--I mean, I always--we teased each other because she says you always would say: I finished my chores; I don't about Lia [Epperson Jealous], what she did, but I've done my work, you know.  And the--we would definitely, definitely have arguments and maybe some, hitting each other sometimes.  I don't know if we really got into that, but you know--but definitely, definitely, you know, she gets on my nerves; don't read my diary; don't--you know.  There were periods where we did not get along well.
Speaker 1: So you kept a diary?
Speaker 2: I, I kept--I kept a diary, and I can't think of what ages it was.  It wasn't something that--you know, when I read books now, I see things about people who were dedicated to their diary and wrote a dear diary every day.  I don't remember that, but there were periods I got diaries as gifts, and I would write in them occasionally.  But I think that often what I would write were my frustrations.  Mommy [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] and daddy [David Ernest Epperson] were so mean to me today (laughter), you know.  I wish I could run away and live with Uncle Bobby [Robert Nelson Epperson, Jr.], or (laughter)--but not, not, you know, this is what we did today or this is what school was like today, I don't think.  I haven't read them in a long time.  I think my mom--my mother also keeps everything, so I think she probably still has them.
Speaker 1: So you-so you have--you have chores, you're good in school.  What are your other interests, or what are--when are you becoming aware of the world around you?  And--
Speaker 2: I don't know when I became awa-
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--what part did--
Speaker 2: Aware of the--
Speaker 1: What about dinnertimes?  What about family vacations?  What, what--
Speaker 2: So we took a lot of driving vacations.  We flew places too, but we took a lot of driving vacations, and we would go to New Jersey, to Cape May.  We spent some summers going there.  We took a vacation probably when I was around twelve or so.  We flew to Los Angeles [California]-- I have my mother's oldest sister lived in Los Angeles and her children were there.  She passed away before I was born, but, but her children live there.  And-or was it before I was born--not before I was born, but I was very young.  But then when we went to Los Angeles, was probably the first big, big vacation I remember.  I remember going to Disneyland; I remember going--my father wanted us to have a tour of the city and make sure we had this understood about the city and--of Los Angeles.  We were on this bus tour; we all fell asleep.  He made us get up early in the morning.  We had an agenda for all the different days, and we were just all--I don't know if it was the day that we had just come back jetlagged or whatever.  I said--and I remember my mom being somewhat frustrated saying, you know, you don't need out plan out every day like to the tee.  But, but I loved that, my, my uncle, visiting him.  He had a motorcycle.  I didn't get to ride ride on it, but just to sit on it, I remember that.  And it was just like a different place, cause they had palm trees, and--but it was a city.  It just was wonderful, wonderful vacation, and it was with family, so that was great too, to get to see them as well.
Story_ID: 117087
Speaker 1: Now are you--are you on the campus [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] at all with your father [David Ernest Epperson] at this point--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So we would go to visit campus on Saturdays sometimes with my dad when he had work to do.  And I remember for me the most fun thing to do there--because at the time, again, my mother [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] had not been teaching, so I didn't have the classroom experience there--was to go--he had a--next to his office he had a classroom.  So sometimes we'd go in there and we'd be able to write on the chalkboard and do that kind of thing.  But I also remember he had a Xerox machine, and we would take scans of our hand, you know.  And that--first I was--I don't know why that just gave--was just so much fun for us to do, and just see what it looked like when you put pencils, maybe make designs and do--and Xerox it.  But it was--it was really great.  We loved it.  And I'm--and I remember my dad's office was at the Cathedral of Learning, which is one of the iconic buildings that whenever you see the campus and the University of Pittsburgh, you see that building as the tallest building in the university's campus structure and probably one of the tallest education buildings around.  And his office was on the twenty-third floor, and I remember taking that elevator up to his office.  And it was just--it was fun, but I think now about how proud I was--not realizing as a kid that you're proud of your dad, but it was--I think it was a really proud moment to--for him to bring us there.  But thinking back to where he came from, how he grew up, the education that his parents [Robert Nelson Epperson and Bessie Tibbs Epperson] had, and then to achieve his, you know, degrees and became-get a Ph.D. and two master's degrees, and then wind up in his job on the 23rd floor of the University of Pittsburgh building, you know, the Cathedral of Learning.  That was pretty, pretty amazing--pretty amazing trajectory.
Story_ID: 117088
Speaker 1: And did he talk about, you know, teaching and the students?  Or did he talk--was there any frustration with the University [of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]?  And did you--
Speaker 2: My father [David Ernest Epperson]--
Speaker 1: --hear those things?
Speaker 2: This is amazing.  And I wonder how--as a professional today, I won- I, I have not been able to do it, and I wonder how he did it.  He never brought anything negative from his work home ever, ever.  It was as if he freed himself when he walked through that door, and his focus was on his family.  His focus was on his girls and my mom [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] and having dinner together, which we did almost every night.  We had fam- we had dinner together.  And on the weekends, you know, spending time with us e- even if his version of spending time was him reading the paper and we playin- we played around him, you know.  But he never--I don't ever remember any discussions that he had with my mom--heated discussions about work issues--excited discussions about work really.  I mean, I don't--I, I just don't remember that much--him bringing that much work home.  I, I--they would host parties sometimes or receptions every fall, for faculty.  And often those were in our home.  And that was the time when my sister [Lia Epperson Jealous] and I had to put on our best dresses and our best manners, and greet all the faculty, ask them would you like a drink, can we take your coat, you know, those types of things; and I remember that part of work.  But in terms of what I know, now, he went through, as the only black dean at times, as the senior black administrator, as, a man who was dedicated to the community in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and as a social worker and a dean of the School of Social Work, felt committed to making sure that the University made a difference in the wider community of the city of Pittsburgh--the struggles that he had I did not learn about until his retirement.  And then I was just amazed; I was just amazed that he was able to not only survive for 29 years, but to thrive and to be revered by his colleagues, black, white, Latino, Asian, South Asian--didn't matter.  They all would say I think to a person that he did a fan-phenomenal job.
Speaker 1: So what were some of the struggles you learned that he had?
Speaker 2: Well, I think there were certainly people who didn't want him there, who didn't want him to have that position.  There were superiors that he had that made it very difficult for him to, to try to do what he saw would be an effective job, what he believed would be the most effective way to do his job.  I think that there probably were--any time you're managing a staff, you know, and in his case, professors and other administrators and staff members, there's probably always staff drama, but none of that--I don't remember any of that.  I remember the staff would bring cookies home for Christmas.  They'd give him gifts.  I remember all those good things, but I don't remember any, any type of--any turmoil, at all.  But I know now because, you know, I'm, I'm a working person; that, that--that always comes up, always comes up.  And I didn't know at the time, you know, his assistant or--and, and probably closest partner in working his--but it was his administrative assistant, a blond white woman, that he spent so much time with, so many days, you know, and, and was so helpful to my sister and I as we were coming along as well, in terms of--you know, we would let her read our papers, and she'd proofread our papers.  And she'd just--she was awesome.  But it was important; they'd keep the door open when they were meeting.  It was important then to, you know, let people know that my mother knows that this is his assistant, and they're out to lunch because that's what they do.  But it's just amazing that now that I think back to it, you know, that, that, that was really unusual at the time.  It was unusual at the time.  And it probably by some was not seen as favorable perhaps, but he, he did--he did his work the way that he thought it should done.  And when he passed away I learned from people all over the city, outside of the city, all over the world actually, because my father also did a lot of work with the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] all over the world, that he was really extremely well respected for what he did, and the way he did it.
Story_ID: 117089
Speaker 1: What are you told about being the oldest child?  Is there any of that sort of--
Speaker 2: No, I--you know, that's interesting.  I, I never got that, you're the oldest child.  You need to take care of your sister [Lia Epperson Jealous] or--you know, no.  We were raised like you, you girls better learn to take care of yourselves, you know.  You have--my dad [David Ernest Epperson] had a couple of things: we always had to have our mad money, cause you never knew when you were gonna need, you know, something, so always--and that came out--actually came to be very, very--yes, in my professional life now as a financial journalist, but as a young woman growing up and dating and all that, I always had my own.  So I was like you know, what?  If I'm stranded--I can get home; I could do what I needed to do.  So that was--that was actually a really, really, really good tip from daddy.  They--I think they wanted us to be strong women and supportive of one another.  But I never felt like you're the oldest so you have to take care of everybody until, my father started to get ill, and then when he passed away.  Then I realized that--you know, that I do need to do that.
Story_ID: 117090
Speaker 1: Now when you--so you--you're a good student.  You go--where do you go to junior high, and what year does junior high begin?  Does it begin in 7th grade or--
Speaker 2: So we--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] was going through various--I think maybe that was the advent of the magnet programs and different things.  So I went to Sterrett Elementary School initially.  I went to the--I actually went to the Carn- Carnegie Mellon [University] had a nursery school, so that's where I went for nursery school and probably in the early years of them doing that, where they would have the two-sided window and they'd have students observing and--so I was kind of in a lab school.  So I, I was there for nursery school, and then I went to Sterrett Elementary School.  I believe--I don't know if it was kindergarten or 1st grade--probably first grade--maybe first, second, and third.  But then I went to Linden Elementary School, because they were doing some changes with Sterrett [Classical Academy], and they were making it into a magnet program.  Then I went back to Sterrett because then it became a middle school and for classical studies or something I think was the name.  So I went there for a couple of years, and I think I--there was also part of the magnet program where you could go spend half the day for a gifted program at another school.  I was--I was in a ba- bunch of different schools.  But ultimately, after--I think my main--my main time was at Sterrett.  There was another middle school called Reizenstein [Middle School].  I think we spent some time there.  I mean, it was--there were a lot of different schools in that middle school period.  And now, as my son [Dylan Farley] is in middle school, I realize I must have been a very strong student, because that kind of transitioning already going from elementary to middle is--can be difficult, switching classes and all that.  So, it was--it was--my parents wanted me to--wanted to make sure I was always in the accelerated programs and in some of the magnet programs, and I think that's why that happened.  And then I went to Taylor Allderdice High School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --graduated from there in 1986.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So (unclear)--okay, at Taylor--when you get to Taylor you're in ninth grade?
Speaker 2: I'm in ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Or ten--so it starts--
Speaker 2: Ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So it's sixth, seventh, and eighth is middle school.
Speaker 1: So all those--you went to--
Speaker 2: I, I had spent time in at least three different schools in middle school.  And I think my home school, as I recall, was Sterrett Classical Academy they called it.  But the--and that was a magnet program, and that was a smaller school.  The main middle school for my district I think at that time was Reizenstein Middle School.  And then, then there was this Regent Square school where kids would go for special advanced--I don't know if it was--if it was for the arts more or for academics.  I can't--I cannot recall, but those three schools I definitely spent time in, in middle school.  And then at Allderdice High School, when I started there in ninth grade, I stayed there, for four years.
Story_ID: 117091
Speaker 1: So are you--so what --what kind of person or what are you gravitating in terms of studies in ha- in high school?
Speaker 2: So I knew by the time I was in the tenth grade that I wanted to be a journalist.  And that's because in tenth grade I took a course called Journalism 101: the Working Elective.  So my teacher, who I'm still friends with today, Marsha Tharp, told me that--told us that this class would be a working elective, that we could probably take a lot of other electives that would not require us to work as hard, but we were gonna have a good time, and we were gonna become great writers and thinkers in this class.  And I loved it.  We did a advertising campaign; we did our own radio show on a cassette tape; we were able to write stories and try to submit them for the school paper.  And we were younger; you know, we were jun- not juniors yet, so most--we weren't able to be on the staff of the paper yet. And so that was--that was fun; that was a challenge for me.  And then she also took me and a couple other students under her wing and said you know, I've--I've found some information about a program called the Urban Journalism Workshop, and it's run by the Pittsburgh Black Media Federation.  And maybe this is something that you would be interested in.  Talk to your parents about it.  And this turned out to be a program that took students from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] public schools mostly, but I think any students could apply, jun- sophomore, juniors, and seniors.  And we met for twelve Saturdays in the spring at the Community College [of Allegheny County] in Homewood [Pennsylvania].  And this program was taught full-day Saturdays by working journalists, black journalists, in the city of Pittsburgh.  And we went out and shot our stories.  We had press conferences.  And it's really where I got the foundation for becoming a journalist, and really where I decided this is what I want to do because the people teaching me were the same people whose bylines I read in the paper cause my father [David Ernest Epperson] actually made sure we got the paper every day and saw them on T.V. or heard them on the radio.  So I made an immediate connection with them, and they were very--they weren't easy.  They made--they never made it seem like their business was easy, but they made it seem like they wanted us to be a part of it.  And I think that's so important in my--you know in my field today.  And I--and I--and I try to pride myself on being that kind of professional as well that when you achieve something in your professional life, you don't wanna be there by yourself.  That's not right; you want other people to be there with you.  And that's what this whole group did.  It wasn't a big group, at the time it probably seemed like there were like twenty-five people working on this.  But like any organization, there were probably maybe half a dozen.  But they were dedicated, and the director of that program, thirty years later is still running that program.  And I just spoke at their thirtieth anniversary.
Speaker 1: The Urban--the Urban--
Speaker 2: Yes, the Pittsburgh Black Media Federation.
Speaker 1: Okay, so who is that person?
Speaker 2: Christopher Moore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Christopher Moore, yep.
Story_ID: 117092
Speaker 1: So, what are your parents [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson and David Ernest Epperson] thinking of this?  You know, cause young people, they always wanna do--you know, they have like a--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a thousand ideas.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I didn't have a thousand ideas, though.  I did a lot of different programs.  I stuck with this journalism--
Speaker 1: The journal--
Speaker 2: --workshop.  I did the journalism workshop for three years.  I did it for my--during my sophomore, junior, and senior year.  And that's twelve weeks each of those years, so it was a--I was really dedicated to that.  And one of the directors of the program, Edwina Kaikai, was an editor at the "Pittsburgh Press," and so she introduced me to the managing editor [Madelyn Ross].  And as a sophomore in high school, the summer after my sophomore year I actually spent a summer have--just not a full--not a real internship cause I was younger than what most of the summer interns were, but I spent the summer in the library of the "Pittsburgh Press" just kind of learning.  The, the managing editor was like, I just want you to learn what people do, who does what, be--what does it mean to be a police reporter or you know, cover City Hall, or be a features editor, and, and come back to me.  And, and I had to present a report on all the different positions in the paper and what they did.  And at the time, it was an actual paper that actually had a clip desk, where you actually had to clip the articles and file them.  And so I work with the, with the ladies who did that job.  I loved it.  I really enjoyed learning about that and having that kind of experience.  And then I ended up working summers at the "Pittsburgh Press" for three or four summers as well for my internship.  So I was pretty dedicated to the journalism route.  But my parents loved the pro- you know, exposing me to different things.  And they knew, I think, you know, in terms of where my dad and mom came from, what they were able to do, that it's all about exposure.  And so I did a--in high school I did programs in engineering and actuarial science.  And I did INROADS, and you know, and leadership development, so I did a number of different types of programs just to kind of see exactly what I wanted to do.  And it was--it was great to try new things, but I always came back to writing and reporting.
Speaker 1: Now were these programs, were they during the summer primarily or where they also during the year?
Speaker 2: So Prep for Prep was an engineering program and, I did that during the school year.  I did the actuarial science program at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and I did that in the summertime.
Story_ID: 117621
Speaker 1: So the summer after my junior year in high school [Taylor Allderdice High School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I did several programs.  I was still doing--I was doing the 'Pittsburgh Press,' but I was also able to spend some time at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And I don't remember exactly how I learned about the actuarial science program. It may have been through INROADS or something, that some other program I had been involved in or perhaps doing the school year.  But what really hooked me was being able to stay on campus at Howard University.  And I, I knew enough about--I knew Howard University I think, because at this point, I already I think during my junior year--I think it was during my--it was either my sophomore or junior year during the school year our church went on an historically black college tour, so I had already--I knew about Howard.  And I--also my parents [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson and David Ernest Epperson] had talked about it, and I had a very good friend of the family whose mother had gone there, who lived in our--on our neighborhood, so I knew about that school.  And my, my uncle [Robert Nelson Epperson, Jr.] lived in Baltimore [Maryland] and worked in Washington, D.C., so I knew that could be close to him, and I was just excited to, to try that.  And so I, I, I remember thinking that the coursework was kind of boring.  I remember going to visit ad- actuaries at the--on the job and thinking this is the quietest office I've ever been to in my life, cause I had spent time already in the newsroom.  So I'd been in, in my version of an office setting, but that's far different than a corporate office setting.  So I, I kind of I think ruled it out early on as a possible career path for me, but it was a wonderful opportunity.  And we were probably one of the first classes to be in Howard Business School--the 'new' Howard Business School, which is now over twenty-five years old, but at the time it was new.
Story_ID: 117622
Speaker 1: Yeah- (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: So you--when it comes time to, to go to college, what are you thinking then because, you know, you did the black college tour, so are you doing a black college tour and then you're touring other places.  You know, cause--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I had done this black college tour, with the church.  And I remember thinking--at the time I think I said out loud to my father [David Ernest Epperson]--I said separate and unequal is still alive and well.  Because I had spent--I had grown up at the University of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], so I knew what that campus was like and those facilities were like.  And I went to Bethune-Cookman [University, Daytona Beach, Florida], and I went to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and Clark [College, now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and a number of-we, I think we went to ten or twelve colleges.  And they ranged from--you know, in terms of their upkeep, in terms of you know, the kind of--the presentations that we were given.  But I knew that it was different, and I enjoyed my time there and, and going on this college tour, but I don't think I saw myself there.  And perhaps it's because, again, I grew up in an integrated neighborhood; I grew into an integrated school all my whole life in, in the public school system in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and so I kind of wanted to continue that.  And it wasn't like--I think there probably many more--it's much more integrated at many of these historically black colleges today than it was then, even still, you know, with the majority being African American.  So it was--it just--I, I--it was not a top choice of mine.  I remember that, and I remember knowing and thinking there is a time and place for it, but it wasn't right for me at the time.  So my father was very interested and my parents, when my father took me on the tour of having me see some of the Ivy League schools.  I didn't really see myself there either, because I just thought they were just--it was just too far out of the reach.  I thought that it was really--that these schools might be too hard or too stuffy I think maybe I thought, or too nerdy.  I don't know, but I was blown away because I could see myself there.  And so when I went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I felt comfortable.  I had a friend from Pittsburgh, a black woman who was there the year before me, so that helped that I knew someone who had gotten in.  But I went on a tour of the campus, and I remember the person that took me on the tour was black, one of the people.  And he said we can't go out Friday and Saturday night cause we just have too much work.  But we will go out Friday or Saturday night every weekend.  And I thought well, they actually have a good time, like this is kind of cool.  They, they seem to enjoy being in school, and then they had these different programs that I never thought that, that, that were possible.  So it's not a historically black college, certainly not, but they had a Freshman Black Table, where people would just get together after dinner on Sunday and talk about stuff, like stuff stuff, you know, like you know, social issues or political developments, or--as a bunch of eighteen-year-old black students.  I'd never had that kind of experience, and I thought this is amazing.  And then they had a Black Students Association, and so all of those people, too, I got to meet, you know, when I would go up--I, I went on a--on a tour with my dad to see the campus.  And then I was invited to go for Black Students Weekend, and I was just blown away.  I was blown away. So it was hands down.  I really wanted--I definitely wanted to go there.
Speaker 2: So that was your first choice--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It was my first choice.  I applied early action, and I got in.  I also applied to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] because I lived in Pittsburgh, and it was in, in my state, and I also liked that campus.  I liked Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island].  I remember liking that campus when I went to visit.  But I remember my dad, I think he didn't like the fact that my--the, the--I had a--I had a black tour guide there too, a black--a black male, and he had a earring.  And I don't know, my dad was not into that.  And then when they said you could kind of make your--make your major or something, he's like I've never heard of something like that.  That's, that's--no, I don't--I don't like that idea.  So, that was really kind of--he was not that happy with that.  But we went to visit Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut].  I thought that campus was beautiful.  And Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], I thought it was very artist--the community I met was very artistic at, at Yale.  I loved that.  I thought Princeton was just a gorgeous campus.  So we did all of the I- we, you know, visited all of the Ivy League schools, but it is--there is something to being somewhere and knowing when you found your place, where you feel like this, this could be home.  I could--I could fit in here.  And I just--I really felt that.
Story_ID: 117623
Speaker 1: Now, you know, this is 1986, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And I wanna ask you just something in terms of--are you aware of the [Ronald] Reagan pit- presidency and you know, is there discussions about that, because interest rates are really high at this point in time and this--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I don't--I don't really remember talking about that then--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I must say.  I mean, I, I--and I'm trying to do that now with my kids.  It's not that my parents [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson and David Ernest Epperson] weren't aware of it or what.  It just wasn't a focus in, in my house of talking about the political landscape or the economic landscape of the country.  I don't remember doing that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --growing up.
Speaker 1: So, so you were--I just was sort of wondering about that--you know, I'm trying to figure out what forms you.  But you're, you're very academ- you know, you're, you're both good in math and, and, and you, you've--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --got the right brain, left brain, I mean; and I would say literature, writing--
Speaker 2: And language arts and--
Speaker 1: --and language arts.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Can you describe--now where, where--what--where are you living, cause Harvard's divided into--.
Speaker 2: So I lived--when I was at Harvard I lived in Canaday [Hall], which was my freshman dorm.  And then for my sophomore, junior, and senior years I lived in North House, which is now called Pforzheimer House.  And I--Canaday, my freshman dorm--it's no nice way--kinda it looks like a project.  I mean, it looks like--it doesn't look like a Harvard building.  There's--it's not like a Tudor.  It's doesn't look--it--it's one of the newest--it is probably the newest freshman dorm.  It's by the Science Center, so it's a--it's supposed to be a modern building.  So I--it was--and it's kind of off the beaten path of some of the other freshman dorms.  But having gone back there last year for my husband's [Christopher John Farley] twenty-fifth reunion, I realize it's all right there [cough]--excuse me.  The campus is very compact, but when you're a student there it seems like if your friends aren't right there, then it's just so far away, then it's so far away.  Even though I thought I--even though I felt visiting Harvard that I would--it was definitely the place for me, and it was--felt like home, my--I remember my first experience with roommates at Harvard.  I thought these are people that I've like never met before.  I don't understand these people.  So I had one roommate who was from--who lived--grew up on a farm with one telephone, and a white woman, who I don't know how many black people she'd ever seen.  Then I had another roommate who was from New Jersey, who I also always wondered if she-or at least her parents, if they had any interaction with black people because of the way they talked to my parents and--you know, the--when we were--when we were all arriving.  And then I had another Asian-American roommate.  And again, I said in my upbringing I hadn't had very friends who were Asian-American or Latino.  So it was all--it was, we were definitely a different kind of rooming group, like we'd never been friends with the people that were in our circle at that time.  You know, we didn't have that kind--those types of--I, I didn't have that--those, those types of people in my friendship circle in high school so it was a transition.  And it was a transition--I guess that is when I did feel like I'm the oldest.  Right, so I'm the oldest, and this is supposed to be okay.  I'm leaving my family.  This is what the oldest child does; she go off to college.  And I was very homesick, and, and it was hard; it was hard to be away.  And, and in that, that room where that is kind of your family where you're--you know, you're studying and you're sleeping and all of that.  That was hard, but then my wider circle of friends there were very supportive and you know, became like family.  And, because I think that--some of my, my roommates were so different than friends that I had in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] that I just automatically gravitated toward the black students there, even though many of them may have been--had very different experiences, whether they were African or West Indian or--you know, culturally, they may also have had different experience but that for me it just seemed like I wanna be around the black students.  So my parents, who, you know, funded my education, said did we send you to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] or Harvard?  Every picture you send back is of black people and step shows and Greek life and--I mean, I don't understand.  Like, what are you doing there?  So I, I, I understand that they were probably taken aback by that, but that's kind of--that's how I got through.  And I think that that's support system is what I really needed.
Story_ID: 117624
Speaker 1: Are the--the black students, I wanna understand this about this time period.  Because you get into--you have a very nice network of black students, and you actually have leadership roles you play--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --during that time.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you're--it's a good time.  You know, college--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is a good acculturation, it's a growing period.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So talk about what life was like.  And you actually became very involved in the [Freshman] Black Tab--Black Table, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I became very involved in the Freshman Black Table.  I was President of Freshman Black Table at one point.  I got very involved with the Black Students Association.  I think of myself as a good singer in the shower, so the choir director of the Kuumba Singers [of Harvard College] said if you can scream, you can sing.  And I just--that was music to my ears.  And it was church music and in addition to everything else.  So that was comforting so I joined the Kuumba Singers.  So I did all of that.  And then ultimately, in my sophomore year in 1988, I pledged Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority.  And that was with Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And so my sorority, my sisters, they really did become my family too.  I spent a lot of time with them doing events and, and doing community service, and just being together.  And I was--I pledged in the era when people spent weeks and weeks on line and all, so that was a very big part of my sophomore year.  And then junior and senior year and just working with the sorority was another big part of, of what I did--and, and with the sorority and then with the other Greek organizations.  And that took me off campus to Wellesley and MIT as well, so I was able to build up a network of connections with black students in Cambridge and you know, in the Harvard and Boston [Massachusetts] society--more, more widely.
Speaker 1: Now tell me how many of the students, black students, are from private school and how many from public school at this point at Harvard?  You know, because if you go back now, there are a lot from private schools.
Speaker 2: I think at the time there were more from public schools, certainly than there are today.  And there were--there were more who would be first generation college.  There were certainly, you know, not nearly as many now who would have had any connection to the Ivy League at--you know, in the previous generation.  So it was--I remember thinking a couple of things about the students there, and I--and I think I knew it then, and I definitely knew it soon after.  For many of my friends, or many of the black students there, they couldn't go back, home, you know, in terms of they'd gotten out.  There was no going back home.  And one of the things that--and maybe this is why I never had to feel like, you know, you're the oldest, you gotta take care of us and take care of everybody.  My father [David Ernest Epperson] used to always say you can always come home.  You always have a home here.  And so I always knew that, yes, even today I'm driving my father's 15-year-old green Honda, so it wasn't like we were extravagant people.  But I could always go home and be taken care of, or feel--or, or find a way of take care of myself there with help and mentoring.  And many students didn't have that.  They didn't have someone who--you know, dad, should I take this class or should I--what about this internship?  There was no frame of reference for that--for them, so they could not go back.  They could not fail.  There was no choice.  And I felt that just because my parents had instilled this excellence--sense of excellence and, and, and commitment to my sister [Lia Epperson Jealous] and I.  But I think that is a big difference on the campuses--these campuses today versus then.  Because today also there are a lot of kids who know they can come back home, and so they can try different majors, and they can go back to graduate school, and they could do all these things, and they're always gonna be taken care of.  And there's this sense of entitlement.  And perhaps like some of my classmates back then may have said I had that sense.  I don't think I did, but I remember feeling surrounded by people like, we are gonna fight this; we are gonna--we're gonna make it cause we don't have a choice.  And so even if you don't have that, being surrounded by that kind of energy, makes you want to excel, and I think that was really powerful.  Being in that sorority and with women from Wellesley, that was also very important, because these black women were student leaders in student government at Wellesley, no holds barred.  You know, it was just--that's just what they did.  They were, you know, might have been Basileus of AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha], president of student government at the same time.  I didn't see necessarily those same type of leadership roles with black women at--on the Harvard campus.  But I was able to see myself being able to do them because of the women that I saw in the sorority doing it, you know, on their campuses.  So that was--that, I think that was really important.  I think that was a, a, a really--there were--there were probably some negative as- aspects.  My parents would say we're spending so much time on that sorority and not meeting some of the wider Harvard community then, having to wait till the tenth reunion to meet people I should have known when I was there, but, but it was good.  It was good for me to be able to stay there for four years to--not all--not everyone that I entered Harvard with, with stayed there for four years, finished and was able to do that because, you know, it's, it's--it was--it was definitely a hard place to be sometimes.
Story_ID: 117625
Speaker 1: The other thing, you--is your sister [Lia Epperson Jealous] then--does she come your--
Speaker 2: So my sister came when I was a senior.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're three years apart, and so she was on campus my senior year.  But because I lived the Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] equivalent of off-campus, 'cause I lived in the quad in North House, and she was on the--in the freshman dorms, we didn't necessarily see each other that much.  But I think it was helpful in that, you know, she didn't stay in the dorm I stayed in freshman year.  She stay--stayed in the dorm where I went to all the time and had the most fun.  I said this is where you wanna be.  This is where all the cool people are, so she enjoyed that.  And then she ultimately came--I'd left by this time, but she came to North House, and that was where she--that was her dorm.  And we both majored in sociology, so we had similar professors, and so I think that was helpful for her to kind of know--have someone who could say where the minefields were, where the good professors were.  And she ultimately join--you know, became AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] also--
Story_ID: 117626
Speaker 1: Are you--this is when you're interning, right?  You're interning in summers, like at the 'Boston Globe' and WCV-
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  So during--so during the school year I, I interned at WCVB in Boston [Massachusetts] for the television station.  I also interview--interned at Blackside Productions [Blackside, Incorporated], which did the documentary 'Eyes on the Prize.'  So I got to be the research assistant on the documentary and on the book.  I met Juan Williams; I met, you know, Henry Hampton and, and just so many awesome people.  And I was probably one of the people that you probably had--might have on your team where you need someone to look at all this stuff eventually or maybe to, to log it or what have you.  And that is a tremendous education.  That was probably better, better than all--many of the classes that I took at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was to be able to, to work on 'Eyes on the Prize.'  That was a really, really important project to be a part of so I enjoyed that immensely.  And, and it also, because it was in the south end of Boston--I think that would be the neighborhood that was called the time of where Blackside was located.  It was a very different neighborhood then, Cambridge [Massachusetts], and so I had to actually travel by bus or you know, use the Metro.
Speaker 1: Was it Back Bay where you--was it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Back Bay.
Speaker 1: --it's Back Bay.
Speaker 2: It was Back Bay; that's right.  It was Back Bay.  But I had to go through various neighborhoods to get there and to see Boston.  So, you know, when you're on a college campus sometimes that's all you see.  That's all you see, so that was good.  I remember my first interview there at Blackside, and I didn't--I just went by the book of what you were supposed to wear for your interview.  And I had on, you know, my suit--my business suit, and I probably had hose and heels and all.  And they're like, you know, we're a documentary team.  They're in their jeans, and you know, the person who I was gonna be working for was getting the--you know, helping to supply the bathroom with the pra- paper towels and the toil- because everybody had to do everything, you know, with that kind of operation.  But it was--it was really--it was a great experience to work there.  And then I worked at WCVB at the time of the Charles Stuart murder case [1989], which was you know, another racially charged, as there have been so many, case in Boston and someone falsely accusing a black man of killing a white person.  And, and just to be in the newsroom at that time with other black reporters saying you know, it doesn't seem right, you know.  Always stick to your guns when you're covering something when it doesn't seem right.  And it--and just seeing how that whole story played out, that was also really, really fascinating.  And then in the summertime during my college years, after working at the 'Pittsburgh Press' for one summer after my freshman year--sophomore--after the sophomore year, I went and I did an internship at the 'Boston Globe.'  And then I did an internship--oh, I shouldn't say that--I did an internship at the 'Wall Street Journal' in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] after my sophomore year, and then the 'Boston Globe' the next summer, and then the 'Washington Post' the following summer.  But I--it was--my internship with the 'Wall Street Journal' in Pittsburgh was just funny.  I--the summer before--I guess it was the summer after my freshman year--I was doing some story that found me in an office building.  I don't know why.  And I ended up running to--into a black woman in the bathroom--young like, you know, my contemporary, in the bathroom at--in this office building.  And we just started talking cause it's like, why are you here?  Why are you here?  We're not really of the age to be hired yet, so we were interns.  And she said I'm an intern at the 'Wall Street Journal,' and I said the 'Wall Street Journal?'  In Pittsburgh?  There's a 'Wall Street Journal' office here in Pittsburgh?  She's like yeah, it's right down the street.  You should come.  You should meet my bureau chief and my--so I just--I met them.  And, and so I kind of fell into that internship in that way, just meeting someone who's--and Dana Kennedy is now a top editor at the 'New York Times.'  So it, it--those kind of connections--
Speaker 1: Wait a minute.  You met Dana Ken--
Speaker 2: Kennedy.
Speaker 1: Where--was she the other edi--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, cause we've interviewed--okay--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so she was the other intern that you're--
Speaker 2: Yes, she was--
Speaker 1: --speaking of.
Speaker 2: --the other intern.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: She was an intern at the 'Wall Street Journal' in Pittsburgh, and we met in the hallway.  I was on my way to the bathroom, where we were--somewhere very, very randomly.  And she stayed connected; you know, we stayed connected.  And she was either an intern or a very young hire, but she was--she was new cause we're not that far apart in age.  And that's why it's always important to help--you know, you want--you don't wanna be there by yourself.  That's another--she's a perfect case in point of that.  She didn't know me.  You know, she, she didn't know me.  She didn't have to bring me into meet her, her boss, and she did, and it opened all kind of doors for me.
Story_ID: 117627
Speaker 1: So which one was your favorite internship of those three, of your experience as the editor?
Speaker 2: Well, everything was pivotal for a different reason.  I met my kind of long-term--longish, longish-term college boyfriend working at the 'Boston Globe,' so that was good cause it was socially fun and you know, I also enjoyed that experience.  I--and I, I was at the 'Washington Post' when [Nelson] Mandela came to the U.S. and came to the 'Post,' and so that was--amazing experience.  But in terms of formulating me as a journalist and really working with me and honing my stories, that would probably be--that would probably have been at the--at the 'Wall Street Journal' because it was a small office.  The bureau chief and the assistant bureau chief worked with the reporters a lot on the stories.  And I remember when I would bring--when I would include my clips from the 'Wall Street Journal,' I would always get asked: well, how much of this did you really write, cause I know how the 'Wall Street Journal' work--works; they edit everything.  And, and I--and I, I wrote it.  You know, I wrote these things.  I did work with my editors and--that's how you learn, right; that's how you--that's how you grow; that's how you craft your stories.  And they didn't write them for me, but they certainly helped me figure out how to tell the story in the best way.  And I remember the bureau chief, Tim Schellhardt always saying that every story can be a business story.  You just have to follow the money.  So the stories that I would do for the 'Journal' were always feature stories--almost always feature stories.  And also we're in Pittsburgh, so we already had--they already had dedicated staff to cover Goodyear Tire [& Rubber Company] or you know, some of the big companies in Pittsburgh--U.S. Steel [Corporation] or what have you.  So the things that were left for an intern would be more of the feature stories then, anyway.  And I loved--I loved covering those, and I loved figuring out how to follow the money and find the financial angle to a story that might have been more of a human interest story.
Speaker 1: So you--who are you looking up to at this point also?  I mean, who in, in the--in--you know, are you attending NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] as a student at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes, so I joined NABJ during my summer at the 'Boston Globe.'  And they had a, a couple of very active members at the 'Globe' that really encouraged the management to allow the black interns to go to NABJ and to fi- yeah, I think they paid for us to go to NABJ too, and that was--it was in New York [City, New York].  That was the time when they had the big convention in New York, and they took us to the museum, and they had to-- I was like, this is how journalism--I thought journalists were--you know, like a--you couldn't tell me they weren't corporate attorneys, they were-- and I think back then the way they were rolling at these conferences, they were doing that-- and now, you know, in hindsight, probably should not have been that, that elegant an event.  But it was--it was definitely something that-- it was captivating to me, and meeting and seeing that many black journalists, and learning about the founders of NABJ, that was--that was tremendous.
Story_ID: 117628
Speaker 1: So when you--so is there--I wanna ask one question about Blackside [Incorporated], because I really--I wish I had you know, interviewed Henry Hampton, but I've heard--were you--what did that experience--because that was more document- that he was a documentary producer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what is that experience in your sort of your lexicon?  What--what--
Speaker 2: I wanted to--I think at that time, I wanted to be a documentary filmmaker.  I--I mean, I--I mean, who wouldn't want to after working on a project like that?  I think that was a pivotal time for me to learn how to listen to stories, and find the nuggets of that story to tell.  You know, we've, we've did so many hours--they did so many hours with so many people.  But ultimately, when Juan Williams had to write the book we had to kind of distill it down to something that was gonna be still a tome, but you know, a book that people could, could take with them.  And, and so that was--that was a challenge for that team, and I was part of just the research assistant on that project.
Speaker 1: So you were working with Juan Williams.
Speaker 2: I was work--well, Juan ultimately wrote the book.  I don't even know--I did meet him, but I think ultimately he got whatever research we--and did what, you know, as a writer would do, wherever he wanted to do it.  He wasn't writing right there in the Blackside Productions, but, but I think just realizing that it takes--one thing I learned there definitely is that it takes the many hours to get the essence of what you want to tell that story and to make a, a narrative that would last for--I mean, it's gonna--it's the--you know, it's still this--
Speaker 1: We--
Speaker 2: --the seminal work on that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is the seminal work, and it's interesting cause he sometimes is not identified with 'Eyes on the Prize' and that's fru- frustrating to him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 117629
Speaker 1: It's hard, and, and, and I was--wouldn't say it's easy and I--my best friend--a couple of my close friends from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] went to University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], and I remember thinking they are having so much more fun.  And they're--you know--stellar professionals today, so it's a great, great institution.  And they have--they also have a lot of school spirit and alumni spirit, and we're trying to develop that.  But because of these different ways people feel about it, and things that they went through, and the support that the feel they got or didn't get while they were there, I think it's been more difficult for Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to really bring the black alumni together, you know.  I mean, I, I, I would assume--I don't think very many people can deny how many doors it would open when you have that on your resume.  But what the resume does not tell is what you went through to get the bachelor's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --socially.
Speaker 2: And, and I want to ask you, if--before we leave college, I do want to ask you about that.  Because I went to the [Harvard] Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I remember the first--you know, we've had five--three reunions--black reunions.  And people said that they--people are like, I never thought I would set foot on this campus again.  So can you talk a- because this is--I'm older than you, so I want--you know, and people--the people that we've interviewed- -so what are you talking about then?
Speaker 1: Well, I think wa- I think I was fortunate to have a few things.  I was fortunate to immediately--before coming to Harvard--be introduced to the Freshman Black-- Black Table, because I had a friend, [HM] Susan Davenport, from Pittsburgh who'd been there the year before me.  So I'd gone to something like that on a black alumni weekend or maybe just a weekend to visit her where I saw that, which was just amazing to me.  And I, I just thought that was a wonderful thing.  So that--
Speaker 2: So you're talking--
Speaker 1: --I knew that there was--
Speaker 2: --Susan Davenport of Sheridan Broadcasting--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --So--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --did you grow up with her?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We grew up together in Pittsburgh, yes.
Speaker 2: So, so was she--did she--
Speaker 1: We were in Jack and Jill [of America] together in Pittsburgh, so that's how we knew each other.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you--okay, so you're at Jack and Jill kid.  Was your mother part of the Links, [Incorporated] or then your father--
Speaker 1: My mother [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] was not part of the Links.  My father [David Ernest Epperson] was in the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi].  My father was in the Boule.
Speaker 2: So, you know, I mean, because you're--
Speaker 1: My mom's a Girl Friend [The Girl Friends, Incorporated].
Speaker 2: Okay--oh, so she's a Girl--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: So this is--so you're really--I mean, but you're not--you're really upper middle class.  And, and, and you come from this fam- you know, this very entrepreneurial family that has a history in Pittsburgh and--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I never--
Speaker 2: And you should talk--
Speaker 1: --think about that.  I never think about that, and that's something that I guess now as a financial journalist, I'm trying to talk about more, and we need to talk about it, but we didn't talk about publicly what we had, right.  We didn't necessarily talk that much about money or financial things.  In the household my mother controlled--you know, kind of--my father was the primary breadwinner; my mother did all the bill paying and all that.  But my father would say occasionally--and I'm like, you know, I didn't know at the time if it was just being macho or just being, you know--he wasn't a boastful person.  He didn't say it outside of our home, but he said you know, you're part of the one percent of us.  You know, they're not--you're part of the one percent of us.  And I didn't realize that at the time.  I just knew that I really did not want for things, you know.  It's not that I had the fanciest things, but if I--we took vacations; I had presents at Christmas; we had always plenty of food, all that--you know, all those types of things.  And I had a great neighborhood, great friends, but I didn't think of it like that, because I always--because I was in Jack and Jill, and my father was at the University [of Pittsburgh], I always knew there were people that had more.  So I'm like, so this is kind of normal.  And then when I would visit other people, you know, if I went to my mother's business or where those places were located, I knew that was different, but I didn't necess- and I knew that, that we were fortunate to have some things, but I didn't really--I didn't really focus on that.  Because ultimately, we were all connecting together, the people that I was closest to, on the same levels, which was mainly church. Sometimes it was--you know, the Jack and Jill activities that we had.  But as kids you're just with kids.  You don't know that one person came in a Mercedes [Benz].  I didn't--I mean, I was just not into those things.  I didn't really pay attention to those things as a young person.  But now I realize that, yes, daddy was right, and we were among that one percent for the black community in Pittsburgh, probably in the nation, maybe in the world.  And that having two parents that had, had graduate degrees and two cars, and all that was--that was upper middle class.
Story_ID: 117630
Speaker 1: So who else was it?  So [HM] Susan [Davenport] was a year ahead of you, you say?
Speaker 2: Susan was a year ahead of me.
Speaker 1: So who else was in your class that we might know at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: In my class at Harvard--
Speaker 1: Or, or there at the same time even if not in your class.
Speaker 2: So, well, my husband was two years ahead of me, but I didn't even know him there really.  I mean, we met at 'Time' magazine.  His name is Christopher John Farley.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we went--we would like to interview him.
Speaker 2: My--kind of--in terms of my professional career, my, my mentors, who were just actually my friends just a couple of years earlier, [HM] Soledad O'Brien and [HM] Suzanne Malveaux.  And Suzanne truly--I've tried to follow in her footsteps with the many internships that I did, going to Egypt the year after she did, the same program that she did, going to NBC [National Broadcasting Company] or CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel], and she was at NBC.  So she's really been in, in my career, someone that I have really looked up to and, and, and followed kind of what her career path has been.  In terms of other people that have been--were in my class--let's see, Erica Thomas, who is an attorney with McGraw-Hill [Education].  Let's see who else would have been there around the same time.  Now you know I'm like drawing a blank on all of the people.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, what is stra--what is odd is that Soledad, you and, and Suzet- Suzanne Malveau.  I mean, that--three people who are a key in the media.
Speaker 2: And we were all there--
Speaker 1: Who are young--
Speaker 2: --at the same time.
Speaker 1: --you know, all there coming out of one institution.
Speaker 2: We were--yeah, we were all there at the same time.  It was just pretty impressive for black women in the media, you know, all coming from the same place that doesn't teach journalism.  That's what really phenomenal about it.  Because it--you know, what I--when I--and I teach at Columbia [University, New York, New York] now in the School for International [and Public] Affairs that I always say you don't necessarily need--I took classes at Journalism School of Columbia and it was great, but you don't have to have a journalism degree.  You have to be able to tell a story, and so therefore you have to have something to te- be able to talk about.  You have to have some frame of reference for that.  So, I, I think that we were all sociology majors too.  I mean, I know Su- I'm pretty sure Suzanne was the sociology major, and I'm not sure about Soledad.  But, you know, we were in the--in that kind of lib- liberal arts realm for certain because that's Harvard College, and that's the way that we were--that we were educated as undergraduates.  So it's, it's, it's quite interesting that it's not--you know, three women from Medill [School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois] or Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] or [University of] Missouri [Columbia, Missouri], but we're from a liberal arts background.
Speaker 1: And so did Suzanne, she--I mean, her family was a media family.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They were a radio family.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was there--was there any discussion with her about what you were doing or ever any idea--
Speaker 2: I mean there was, but Suzanne was a math whiz.  She was an applied mathematics major.  I'd never even heard of that major until Suzanne did it (laughter), and she excelled at it.  Then it turned out that my later to become brother-in-law was also a mathematics major, Jonathan Farley, so he--Christopher's young- youngest brother.  But she was a math whiz, so we didn't really talk about journalism.  I think we supported each other in what we were doing, but we didn't really talk about me and--doing that.  And I never--because Sheridan [Brodcasting] definitely had a news component to it, but I don't--I wasn't as interested in radio at the time, and I do radio now.  But I wasn't--I wasn't really focused on that.  I really wanted the TV or you know, magazine or something like that.
Story_ID: 117631
Speaker 1: So you graduate.  What are you thinking you're going to do?  And you just mentioned that--because where does international affairs come in?  And you spent the time in Cairo [Egypt], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I graduated--I graduated in 1990 from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I'd done all of these internships, and I had the sociology in government degree.  And I realized that I didn't think I knew enough about the world.  Like, I wanted to--I wanted to be--I kind of wanted to be a foreign correspondent, but I didn't--I felt like I had a grounding in American government and, and you know, knew about America, but I didn't know much about other parts of the world.  So I really wanted to go abroad--to travel abroad.  And this internship, or they call it an externship, I guess, that [HM] Suzanne Malveaux had done sounded so interesting to me, to be able to be on the campus of the American University in Cairo, work at the television journalism center [Kamal Adham Center for Television and Digital Journalism] as--they said as a working journalist.  And you'd be doing stories and stuff with the--with other graduate students there, and then be there for the entire year.  That just seemed like a tremendous opportunity, and, and so that's what I decided to do after my internship at the Washington Post. And that's what I did in the fall of 1991.  Now I didn't realize that the Persian Gulf War would become as, you know, heated and, and would appear as close to where I was as it did here in the U.S. to my parents in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] when I was so very far away from everything.  But I took the last TWA [Trans World Airlines] flight out of Cairo in January of 1991, before--
Speaker 1: So you didn't--
Speaker 2: --the Persian Gulf War--
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: --really, really started--
Speaker 1: --was--
Speaker 2: so, I only spent three months in the program.
Speaker 1: So you weren't in the program the whole time?
Speaker 2: I was not there the whole time.  But it was one of the defining moments of my life, to spend those three months, to be in an Islamic country, and to be the guest often of people who were with the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] as well, because my dad [David Ernest Epperson] was very active in that.  So to meet Coptic Christians and study Islam and you know.  And when I say study Islam, I mean living with people who were practicing every day, who were twenty-somethings like me, who would listen to music, loved hip-hop and you know, loved the music that I was loving, and in the morning would be up in time for prayer.  It was really--it was just an, an extraordinary experience.  And being able to work as a journalist and tell stories, and go cover different cultural events and sporting events throughout the Cairo area and, and, and Egypt was also interesting.  And I did that with graduate students who were there and staff members at the--at the Television Journalism Center.  And again, we would be out on a shoot.  We could be at Saint--Saint Ca-Catherine's Monastery doing a, a story, and when it came time for prayer, we had to take a break.  They would have to pray.  I just had so much respect for the spirituality around the people that I was with that were young people like me.  And it was-and it wasn't cultish; it wasn't--it didn't seem--I don't know what the word would be if--I don't know if evangelical's the word, but it didn't seem like it was fire and brimstone.  And I know that's associated more with Christianity, but it just seemed like people who were rooted in faith.  And that's how I grew up.  So I was able to connect, and it didn't hurt that they kind of looked like me too.  So it was like we were really connecting, and so it was just three months, but I feel like, you know, even twenty-five years later that that was just such an important time in my life, really helping me to understand other people, and very important after 9/11 for me to have had that experience so that I can formulate my own views of what that situation really meant to me, you know.  And that was really, really, really an important time in my life.
Speaker 1: So did you--so you saw the commonality of religion and people--
Speaker 2: I absolutely did--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --the commonality of people in religion, absolutely--
Speaker 1: Now did, did everyone leave the program or did--
Speaker 2: No, no, my parents said they're not paying you, and you're getting a stipend to be there, and you do not--my dad specifically said you are not an employee of NBC [National Broadcasting Company] News, cause I guess--even then I thought I wanted to work for NBC News.  He said but you're not--and you're, you're my--under my care even though you are there, and you're coming home.
Story_ID: 117632
Speaker 1: So you came home and then is that when you started the program then at--now so what do you do--
Speaker 2: So I--so I came home in January.  And I--this is my entitled period, so I came home in January very distraught that my parents [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson and David Ernest Epperson] had made me come home, cause it was a great experience.  And I went to stay with some of my relatives in California for a month or so.  I came back home, and I specifically remember that I was still you know, doing one of that--those things some nineteen, twenty-year-old-twenty-somethings do, which is in my pajamas at like 3:00pm when my mom came home from teaching.  Oh, that lasted one, one day.  She was like not in my house.  You're going to a temp agen- you know, I'm like a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate.  She said I don't care.  You're getting a job tomorrow, and so that was the fire that I needed to--yes, I got the temp job.  I worked actually for a mortgage company, so that was my--probably my first entree into a--you know, a business type job.  And I got on it and started applying to graduate school at that moment.  And I applied and got in for the fall, because I was like, you know what?  I gotta--I gotta do something (unclear).
Speaker 1: And so was it the Cairo experience that made you wanna get a degree--I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --for school in internat-
Speaker 2: International affairs, yeah.  I really wanted to be able to--as I said in my essay there I think for Columbia [University, New York, New York], that I wanted to be a foreign correspondent.  And I probably said something like a lot of the kids that I have now as students say: I wanna change the world; I wanna--you know, I wanna better the world or report about--I knew that I would--I, I really did wanna be a foreign correspondent in Africa.  And I wanted to tell more human stories about the humanity of Africa, and not of the plight only of Africa.  So that was something I was very interested in doing.  And between my first and second year in graduate school, I spent time in Kenya, and I worked for the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] magazine, and traveled all over to the different programs they had in Kenya.  And it was also a very rewarding experience and learning about you know, the different cultures within that country, and realizing that, you know, there's an Islamic part of Kenya on, on the coast, and Mombasa and then there's Nairobi and very much the British influence there, and going to--on, you know, safari, going to different places in Kenya.  But I did realize as I was traveling around that it's not so easy to travel around in Africa.  So the idea that I'm gonna be able to do the job the way I would do it in New York [City, New York] or Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] or somewhere else is gonna be very different.  And I also felt like I wanted to be more financially secure.  A lot of the people that I had gone to graduate school with were fine with being able to freelance or maybe parents were paying for them to kind of help support them while they were starting out.  But when I started working, I was supporting myself.  You know, I was--my parents could help me, and they may have--might have helped me here and there, but I really wanted to be supporting myself so.  Though it's difficult to start in New York as a journalist on a starting salary, I did with my ramen noodles and my two roommates and all that.  So that's--I, I wanted to be a foreign correspondent, but I ultimately--I think I--I think I figured out that New York is, is pretty international in and of itself.  And I was--the 'Time' magazine opportunity was just tremendous so I--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 117633
Speaker 1: --stayed here--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Talk about the 'Time' magazine opportunity.
Speaker 1: So I am coming out of graduate school and interested in television, and interested in magazine, and interested in newspapers, and having done internships in all of those areas, and I met someone at, at 'Time' who was starting the 'Time' New Media department.  His name was Joe Quinlan. He had just left the 'NewsHour' on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], and he'd been an executive there for many years.  And he said, you know what?  I'm wanna create a job for you, be like an Omni journalist.  You could keep a Hi8 camera on your desk and then when they send you out on a story, you could shoot the story.  And then you could write it up for the magazine and you can--you know, so you'll have something that we can have for on-air 'cause they had just developed a relationship with trying to do stories for the 'NewsHour' and for NY1. And so this is my idea.  What do you think?  And I was like that's great.  Who's gonna pay me?  Who am I really working for?  So ultimately, I was working for 'Time' magazine, for the New York bureau, but with the understanding that I would be kind of on loan as this person who is kind of doing this new venture that they were looking into for the 'Time' New Media department.  And so I was doing then, at the very start of my career, what I am required to do as a journalist today, which is to be able to tell a story on multiple platforms.  And it was--it was a great idea; it was obviously way before its time.  But after doing it for maybe a year and a half or so, trying to split my time, 'Time' magazine was like, who do you work for?  Who's paying--you know, who's paying you?  We are, so you need to be here and commit to being here full time.  So I spent probably a year and a half or so kind of bouncing between working for the New Media department, working on television projects, and for the magazine, and then ultimately that my final year and a half or so that I was at 'Time'--I was there for three years, I really worked for the magazine.  And that was great because I was forced to, with my bureau chief requiring me to write for every different department in the magazine.  And so writing science stories, and health stories, and social issues, and politics, and business stories, and that was a great calling card to have, to then be able to go to a National Association of Black Journalist conference and go to the NBC [National Broadcasting Company] booth and they happen to be looking for people for CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel].  And at the top of my clips was this story, a business story.  And so that was something that I think really intrigued them and, and why I got to have a further conversation with, with NBC.
Story_ID: 117634
Speaker 1: So I wanna get to NBC [National Broadcasting Channel].  I wanna ask you about the article that you did on Minis- [HM The Honorable] Minister Louis Farrakhan while you were at Time.  And I also wanna ask you who is--who's it--before you get to that, who is senior at 'Time,' who's black at that point in time?
Speaker 2: So at that point, was Janice Simpson was my bureau chief, and Jack White was a senior writer.  I don't know if at the time there were any black editors.  My husband was there at the time, Christopher John Farley, and not--I don't think it was the Louis Farrakhan cover, I don't think.  But there was a Farrakhan story that we did together. It was the only story we'd ever done together where he was the writer and I was the reporter.  And it got more letters than any story that either of us had worked on in the time.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute.  Your--you and your husband worked on that story together?
Speaker 2: Christopher John Farley.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And it was--that was the story about Farrakhan speaking at Kean College [Union, New Jersey] or some--it was--it was a speaking engagement.  It was not the cover story I don't think that we did for the magazine, but we did work together on, on a--on a story about Farrakhan.  But that story was really interesting.
Speaker 1: So you did two stories then?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Cause I saw the cover, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was part of the cover story, yeah, for sure.  But there was another smaller story that, that wa- that had to do with some remarks that were made at a speaking engagement or something.  And I, I--for some reason I remember it being Kean College, I think.  The Farrakhan cover story, my role in that was to cover the Nation of Islam in New York [City].  And I remember going to [Muhammad's] Mosque Number Seven, and even though I'd been to Egypt and you know, lived with Islamic people for, you know, this three-month period of time, the Nation of Islam was something that was different, I knew.  And I didn't know exactly what to expect, but I went in with an assignment to interview Conrad Muhammad and to find out more about Mosque Number Seven.  And the one part that I remember vividly was the introduction I had to him.  And the person who introduced me introduced me as Sharon Epperstein.  And I thought this is not the name I want him to have on his--on his mind when he--when he meets me for the very first time.  And I quickly said Sharon Epperson.  And--but he was--he was actually extremely dynamic, a great interview.  It was real and it was very interesting to--I also was--you know, it's my sociology background--very interested in the interaction, or lack thereof, of the women and the men, and--and kind of why women were so interested in being members of the Nation of Islam as well.  So those are things I remember I can--that's been years since I've looked at that story.  But I do remember entering Mosque Number Seven being introduced as Sharon Epperstein and thinking this is not gonna go well.  I gotta turn this around right now, but it was fine.
Story_ID: 117635
Speaker 1: So what--you're talking about a time in journalism when journalism is about to take a paramount shift.  But it's at the very beginning where there's experimentation and that's what you were doing--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at, at 'Time'--at 'Time' magazine.  So, and even during that time, wasn't there some management changes?  I don't know if you were aware of that.  You know, I--I'm not sure--I think that there were--
Speaker 2: I think there were some management changes.  I mean, I was also there at 'Time' magazine during the period of the darkened O.J. [Simpson] cover.  And so after the darkened O.J. cover, that managing editor [James Gaines] was no longer there as the managing editor.  So there were definitely some issues.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about that?  Talk about that.
Speaker 2: So there was a lot of controversy about the cover image that they chose after the O.J. Simpson verdict [1995], and questioning as to why it was--the, the cover was doctored in some way and why that it was--the image of him was darkened, perhaps to look more sinister, many people were saying.  It was just an, an, an instance where we see time and again of not enough people in a room to say hey, wait a minute, some people are gonna have a problem with this.  But in that room--even though Jan[ice] Simpson may have been in that room, Jack White may have been in that room--there weren't enough of us in that room.  There's still not enough of us in these rooms, too often, to stop some of these instances from occurring that are just insensitive, if not outwardly malicious, certainly insensitive.  And that was something that just created a firestorm, and I think that there were some management shake-ups as a result of that.  And there was--and then there were other--there were some other interesting choices in, in covers that were around that time.  You know, it just wasn't that often that there were black people put on the cover, so to have that, you know, O.J. Simpson issue come out, it was--it was just--it was not good.  But you know, there is kind of a silver lining in all of this, so I think, think in the chronology I have it right.  So after that occurred, there was the first Million Man March [1995].  And the Million Man March issue was something that I was very intimately involved in, even as a young journalist at 'Time.'  And I was one of the reporters charged with going out and finding families that were going to the Million Man March and kind of telling their stories.  And I found a family in Queens, in Brooklyn, the Banks family, that--here in New York, where there were four generations, I believe, in that family that went on the Million Man March.  And the father, the most senior, was a police officer.  He had three sons.  One of them was an educator, another one was a police officer, and the other one I can't remember if he was a business person.  They brought their sons.  And this family was just--it reminded me of home, interviewing them.  They were a close-knit family, a faith-based family.  This was tremendous for them, this Million Man March.  It was just something that they seemed they've always waited for.  They were also very active in a [One] Hundred Black Men, [Inc].  And I don't know if I just was able to capture their story, or I think their story just was a great story in and of itself, and, and, and that 'Time' also needed to do some damage control after what they'd done with the O.J. cover.  And so, once I filed my story, they said who are the--we want to photograph them.  So they cleared the block in Mr. Banks' neighborhood and did the photo shoot outside.  And I think neighbors were all looking and watching and you know, they had the whole family--all the men in the family come together and take this photo.  That photo ended up being the cover photo for that issue on the Million Man March.  And so that is one of the mo- proudest moments I've had in my journalism career.
Speaker 1: Well, to have--be able to do a cover story where there are images on the--
Speaker 2: Where the images are us--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --but where the images are so close to--you know, to home for me cause this is what this--to me this is what black family is about.  This is what my experience is about.  It's about faith, it's about family, it's about friendships, it's about supporting each other, and, and, and really being a testament to the community of what we can achieve.  And this family really had all of that.  And it wasn't a unique story.  That's why I wanted to--that's what I was hoping that this issue came--came across in this issue is these are stories of folks that are next to you all the time.  And you may not see this side or this story on the evening news in your--you know, on your local news or national news, but this is our experience.  So it was great.
Story_ID: 117636
Speaker 1: So are you mentored at all by Jack White and Jan[ice Simpson]--or not--are they--
Speaker 2: I would--
Speaker 1: They appear in your--here--I mean, that's--I'm just sort of wondering what's happening.
Speaker 2: So Jan--so Jan was my bureau chief.  So I certainly had a lot of interaction with her.  And I--without her ever saying I don't think, I always got the impression I have to be twice as good.  And I think that that was actually really, really good mentoring for me.  And I was at 'Time' when there were a number of--a couple in particular--hotshot young white male journalists that were obviously being guided probably by other editors.  And she was not one who would be outwardly sister girl and (unclear) or anything like that.  That would not have been appropriate.  But she was one who demanded excellence of all of us, but I think she really wanted to make sure there was no question that I was ready for whatever the next step would be.  And so she was the one who insisted that I get more business stories under my belt.  And that turned out to be tremendous guidance on her part, because ultimately, that's how I've spent most of my career, as a financial journalist.
Speaker 1: So why do you think she insisted on that?  Because there--
Speaker 2: Well, because we were in the New York bureau, and her view as you cannot cover New York [City, New York] and not cover business.  You cannot say you're a New York correspondent, and you wanna be a full--you wanna be not just seen as a junior correspondent, but a full-fledge correspondent.  You need to cover business.
Story_ID: 117637
Speaker 1: So how does--how does NBC [National Broadcasting Company] or CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel] happen?  Because really, in 1996, MSNBC [Microsoft/National Broadcasting Company] is launched.  And I think CNBC is launched around, around that time period.
Speaker 2: So this year is the twenty-fifth anniversary of CNBC.  So CNBC was launched before MSNBC.
Speaker 1: Oh, CNBC, okay.
Speaker 2: But I started at CNBC basically the week that MSNBC was launching.  And we were--kind of had my orientation with a bunch of people who were coming in for the first time with MSNBC.  And the way that CNBC happened was the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] convention.  So I went in the summer, I guess it would have been of 1995, and I knew I then had an interest in television.  And I'm not sure if at the time--I don't think my bureau chief--Jan[ice Simpson] had--was not my bureau chief at this time.  It was John Moody, who was then became an anc- executive at Fox News.  And I didn't know if it was--if he'd already taken this television job, but I'd already--I'd always been interested in television and so--and I'd always gone to the NABJ conventions.  So I took it up on myself to go to the NBC booth just to kind of check it out and see--let them know what I'd been doing with the television work I'd been doing at 'Time' and show some of my clips.  And it happened that they were looking for journalists who were great writers that had interest in CNBC.  And I know now going to these job fairs for CNBC at NABJ, it's hard to find people who are really interested.  It's not hard, but it is more challenging to find someone who's actually interested or not intimated by business and business news, who also wants to be on television or work in television.  And I did what I tell my students at Columbia [University, New York, New York], in my professional development class, I just spun it like, oh yes, definitely I love business.  I, I was intimidated.  That story was one of the greatest stories I did.  It was about a philanthropist for 'Time' mag- that I did for 'Time' magazine.  And it was a clip that they really liked, but it was a human story.  It was about a woman who gave away all of her--how she made all of her money and then how she gave it all away.  And my angle was how she gave it all away and what a great philanthropist she was.  But it happened to be in the business section of the--of the magazine.  So but it was a business clip--it had business on it, and they liked it, and it was a story.  I was telling a great story.  So I think that that's something that caught the attention of the talent folks at, at NBC that ultimately introduced me to people at CNBC.  And the person who kind of recruited me is still the head of talent for NBC today, Elen- Elena Nachmanoff. And we talk about the fact that it is--that that convention--and again, something that is just for us, for our community, but really trying to make sure that we're not alone there in these organizations.  That's what NABJ tries to do, and for me it absolutely worked.  That's how I got in the door.
Story_ID: 117110
Speaker 1: --the president of CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel], Pamela Thomas-Graham, for several years.
Speaker 2: Which was a big deal.
Speaker 1: Which was a huge deal--which was a huge deal, but it was also a huge fight.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Huge fight.
Speaker 2: So you, you get started there, and wh- what is the newsroom that you come into, cause this is your chance--
Speaker 1: So I come into--I come--
Speaker 2: --this is a chance for TV too.
Speaker 1: This is a chance for TV and this is a chance for TV with someone who has not had very much experience on air, so I really commend Larry Moscow and Jack Riley, the people who hired me at the time--John Meehan--for saying it's okay to help train her and develop her, which they would not do today.  You gotta come in, camera ready, ready, ready to go.  But I had a full-time producer who worked with me.  The good thing is, I didn't come in alone as a print journalist coming into TV.  I came in with two other white male journalists who were much senior than I was at--from 'Business Week' and from 'Fortune' magazines, and then I came from 'Time' magazine.  So they hired three magazine journalists to then do television.  So it was--with this idea that the producer who worked with us--you're gonna turn these people into TV people.  And ultimately, I think I'm the only one who's stuck with TV for this long, for seventeen years.  They ultimately went back, I think, and did--and did print for a while.  Some of the--I think one of them stuck with, with television, but that was very helpful.  So I was able to--she was also--she was a great producer, Dina Conte Schulz.  And she was a working mom, and a new mom, and dedicated to her job too, though.  So I could stay there late at night, as the young professional trying to strive to excellence--squared excellence and work on my scripts at 8:00--9:00 at night.  And she would be home after she put her baby girl to bed.  And she'd look over my scripts and she'd give me talking, you know, some, some suggestions on things that I could change.  And so it was really--I, I really did have to learn how to write for television, how to tell the story in the way that CNBC wanted.  And I also had to learn some of the business concepts and some of the things about the markets, and telling those kind of stories as well.  But I think it helped that early on in my career, they knew that I was a storyteller, and I did more of the feature-y (sic) type stories so that, that made it easier to tell.
Speaker 2: So what are--wa- how are you learning then about business because business hasn't been in your--you know, your--
Speaker 1: So I took economics in graduate school and as an undergrad, but that's about the extent of it.  I didn't take very many--you know, I took organation (sic)--organizational behaviors of sociologists, you know, but I didn't take very many business classes or take classes at the business school of Columbia [University, New York, New York] or Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], so I learned on the job.  I learned--my introduction really was at 'Time.'  And being in a bureau with much more seasoned journalists who were fixated on their 401K.  I didn't know what a 401K was.  But they would watch this channel all the time at--they weren't watching CNN [Cable News Network], and it wasn't the CNN-Time Warner relationship at that time either.  But they were watching CNBC, and these--and some of them might have been--they might have been today's version of boomers at that time.  So they were closer to retirement.  They had a reason to wanna watch this stuff.  But I'm like why are you so fixated on this stock, and why are you, you know, looking at--and I remember one of them telling me "You don't know about the 401K?  How long have you been here?  You need to get to HR [Human Resources] right now.  You need to make sure you bring your 401K, you know, and start investing in mutual funds."  And then I'm researching mutual funds and what are they and what kind should I get involved in, you know.  So that's kind of how I learned.  And I think that's why I'm so interested in personal finance, because I learned about business because I wanted to learn about it for myself.  I wanted to know more about it for myself.
Speaker 2: And when you--so how are the first--I wanna talk about your first year and then how long is the producer working with you that, you know, has been brought into work with you?
Speaker 1: I think she only worked with us for about a year.
Speaker 2: For a year, okay.  That's pretty good that they did that.
Speaker 1: It is great.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 117111
Speaker 1: And what are they wanting to be at this point?  Because CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel] has also had, over the, the seventeen years you've been there, has been defining itself--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in some respects.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Cause there was--there were some--there was F&N [CNNfn, Cable News Network Financial News], too, at one time, and I'm not--I'm not sure--
Speaker 2: It was F&N and many of the people from F&N then went on to come to CNBC, and the Consumer News and Business channel kind of was the idea maybe--
Speaker 1: And then you have--
Speaker 2: --at the beginning.
Speaker 1: --Bloomberg [Television], right?
Speaker 2: I think at the beginning it wanted to be a kind of full-service business channel to tell consumer stories and business stories and market stories, and, and over time has streamlined and expanded at, at various points depending on what the markets are doing.  I think that it's--the network has now discovered that often our success and failure goes along with the market's success and failure.  That's happened over the years.  More recently, though, I think that people are very interested in just protecting what they have after the financial crisis in 2008.  So that's now the next level of stories that we're telling, that we had this pretty much bifurcated society of this upper, upper top, top, top fraction of one percent.  And we need to tell stories for them because they're the wealthy, you know, advertising dollars that our sponsors and advertisers are going after.  But, then you also have to be able to tell stories for people who are just trying to get by and make sure that they maintain what they have.  So we're telling the story for--and then we also have our bread and butter of the market.  So we're kind of telling almost three, three different stories in the business world to three different constituents, traders, our bread and butter markets coverage, and you know, the wider mass audience, which is why CNBC is kind of the business channel and, and leader for business news, not just for CNBC, but for all of NBC [National Broadcasting Company] News and all of our properties.  And then we have for our core elite CNBC viewer, that super ultra wealthy.  We wanna be able to tell stories that are gonna appeal to them about how they can be wealthier.  So the--it has changed over the years.
Story_ID: 117112
Speaker 1: And so what are the first like five years like for you?
Speaker 2: (drinks) It's funny that you ask how the first five years were, because when I came in to CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel], having been at 'Time' magazine, two Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--two Ivy League degrees, Harvard and Columbia [University, New York, New York], I thought, you know, I'm gonna rock my wor-I'm gonna rock the world and this is gonna be terrific.  And my--the person who came after the person who hired me--'cause in television there's a, a new person every five minutes.  So the next--so the next person who came in heading business news said, you know, you're doing good; you know, you're doing pretty well, and you know, these are some things you need work on, and don't worry about it cause it's gonna take at least five years or so for you to find your voice.  And I thought, five years for me to find my voice?  Do you know--have you seen my credentials?  Do you know where I've come from and who I am, Sharon Epperson, you know, of the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] Eppersons.  I'm thinking to myself and always humble and appreciative and taking criticism constructively, but he was absolutely right.  He was absolutely right.  Because in that period of time, in those five years, I kind of figured out--and probably was more like ten years to really figure out what type of stories I wanted to tell, what type of stories I was good at telling, what type of stories needed to be told, how to tell them to, to really make sure that the--as many people could appreciate them, learn from them, and, and be educated by them.  That's kind of what I see my voice as, so I'm not a ranter.  You know, we're in television age now of pontificating and ranting, and that's really not my role.  I see my role, I guess because I come from a family of educators, as educating, and particularly educating our people, black people, and people who have not had the education about finance and business.  So that we can be on at least near a leaven (sic)--level playing field.  So it did take me time to figure out how to--if I had to learn the material, understand the material, and then be able to interpret and educate others about the material, that takes time.  It's still--it's still evolving; it's still evolving.  So that was very, very humbling.  At, at, at the time I found it very insulting, but it was extremely insightful.  It was probably the best advice I've, I've gotten on that job.
Speaker 1: So how were--how are--how are stories assigned, and how can you bring your--I mean, how much autonomy are no--you know, or lack of autonomy do you have--
Speaker 2: So much has chan- it's evolved over the years, in terms of my level of autonomy and what I've been covering.  And--
Speaker 1: But let's talk about those five--those first--
Speaker 2: Those early five years, I was assigned to cover mutual funds, and I thought like for--like all day?  That's what I'm--that's what I'm gonna cover all the time?  But that's kind of the foundation of an early investor, what they need to know, so that turned out to be an excellent assignment, too, to kind of learn about that industry and then take that and--as--try to tell people how to work that into their own personal finances.  I was--
Speaker 1: But that was--
Speaker 2: --assigned things on a daily basis.
Speaker 1: So you were--
Speaker 2: And so it's one of those--you know, you get a call in the morning--go here--might be, you know, to cover this bank.  Something's happening in this location or that location.  It varied, it varied.  It was a very--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, very much a general assignment reporter's life, but just covering business news.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so what was an average day like?
Speaker 2: So an average day would be I'd either come in and get an assignment or get called to go somewhere immediately from where--from my home to an assignment; be able to research and report, interview and--about that story and then ultimately, most of the stories I did packages would be toward the later end of the day, like after the market closed.
Story_ID: 117113
Speaker 1: You know, I wanna ask the ques- the difference between--cause I read someplace where you were talkin' about someone asked you about 1997, which is close to you know, when you started.  And what was the--look that's, you know, a financial sort of meltdown.  But then you've been through--how many of those?  I mean, the most recent being 2008, but how many of those and how are they sort of different?  And I'm just gonna change the chronology--you know, chronology--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --here, but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: Well, I think during the--during the early crisis when I first landed at CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel], I didn't know enough about the history of the markets or have enough sense at the time.  I was covering in the moment without the historical knowledge of what had happened, really.  And so I was really relying on my sources to help me, you know, interpret and analyze what we were going through at that time.  During the tech bubble in 99' [1999], 2000, I really--that was fascinating for me because a lot of my contemporaries, people I had gone to school with, were trying to get into that, and were either hitting it or you know, blowing up with it.  So I really felt like I had some first-hand knowledge of how that was working.  And I also again had never seen anything like it.  But I don't think very many people had.  But you know, it, it, it goes back to one of the reporters of my--my WCVB internship--when it's when it just does seem right, Sharon go with your gut.  When's this--how are they making money from this?  How are they gonna sustain this?  How is this a business plan that's gonna really last?  And, and for in many cases it, it didn't, right, so that's what we ultimately found out.  So being able to tell those stories was a little bit easier I think because I'd been in--covering that for a while.  What I had found about the 2008 crisis, because by that point, I'd written my book and you know, been covering this for a decade or more, that I found it to be a silver lining and a wake-up call, that all of this time that I had spent learning about the markets, reporting about the markets, but I don't know how many people were listening.  Now everybody's listening.  Everybody wants to know what happened?  How did this happen to me?  How can I prevent this from ever happening to me again?  What do I need to know?  And so it just--I think created a tremendous opportunity for me to go back to and to continue with, I guess, my passion in--as a financial journalist, which is to tell people how to manage, grow, and protect their money.  And there's been--since then there continues to be a huge, huge appetite for that information, and a, a tremendous void for many people in knowing about that.  So there have been a lot of--there have been a number of significant events, in terms of either the financial markets or business development.  But I think that 2008 was the strongest wake--wakeup call that I've seen, and, and it continues.  The reverberations are continuing even today in terms of people really wanting to focus more on, not necessarily what's the hot stock or what--how they can you know, get rich quick, though some are still fixated on that, but how to really maintain wealth.
Speaker 1: And protect--
Speaker 2: And protect their wealth, yes.
Speaker 1: --what you have because I think really what people, they were--what has happened that 2000--it's just people lost--
Speaker 2: So much.
Speaker 1: --what they had.
Speaker 2: Right, cause they didn't understand--because they didn't understand and they didn't--they weren't protected.
Speaker 1: Right, and they were following too.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 117114
Speaker 1: Now I, I wanna ask about--cause you--when, when did you, though, grow into your own?  That's what I'm trying to sort of--when were you feeling comfortable?  I mean, so you start with mutual funds as a--as an assignment.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who are you also interviewing?  Cause you've interviewed over the years a lot of different--
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of people.
Speaker 1: --CEOs [Chief Executive Officers] and--
Speaker 2: CEOs and--I've interviewed a ton of people.  I've interviewed [John Willard] "Bill" Marriott, [Jr.], and [HM Robert ] "Bob" Johnson, and Angela- Andrea Jung, and--you know, I think some of the biggest stories to me have been people who have achieved success in business with something that I can relate to that's tangible to me.  And so, of course, Bob Johnson with--growing up with BET [Black Entertainment Television] and how he started that, and the raising the money for that, and the networking, and the--what he did to really create that entity and then to go beyond that and become much more than just a television executive and owner, is tremendous.  So I did a very long piece on him many, many years ago.  I did a profile of Bill Marriott, which was fascinating to me as a Mormon, interviewing him and talking to him about the Marriott family and Marriott Hotels [& Resorts].  And, and that was an interesting experience.
Speaker 1: And what was interesting about that?
Speaker 2: I wasn't sure how much--whether he'd ever had someone who looked like me talk to him and interview him in the way I did.  And I, I thought it was a very good interview, but it was a very telling interview to me at the time about where people still think you might be, the box that they'd still want to put you in.
Speaker 1: So was it his body language?  Was it how he responded?  Was he--
Speaker 2: I think it was--I think it was all of the above.  I think it was his body language.  I think it's somewhat how he responded, but he--but at that level, you know what to say and it's gonna be on CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel].  But it's just how--you know, as an interviewer, how I felt in that situation--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So he--when you walked in the door, was he--that was he was surprised.  Then there's that--
Speaker 2: I feel that he--I, I felt he was.  I felt he was.  I would assume that his public relations team had prepped him on who was gonna be interviewing him, and so he may have been somewhat aware.  But, you know, people are always surprised, and then you went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and you know--you know, that kind of--that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--story--
Speaker 2: It's my reaction, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: A story, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 117115
Speaker 1: I did--about ten or fifteen years ago I did a series on female CEOs [Chief Executive Officers].  And I interviewed the CEO of Ogilvy & Mather [Rochelle "Shelly" Lazarus]; I've interviewed Andrea Jung from Avon [Products, Inc.]; I talked to a number of women that were CEO [Jane Friedman] at the time of HarperCollins [Publishers Worldwide], and that was really a wonderful assignment for me to see how these women were able to achieve so much and still try to maintain their family life.  In many cases they were married.  I think in all cases they were married.  Some of them had children, and, and often they were the only women up there, you know, at the levels that they had reached.  So that was a fascinating story.  And that helped me to develop a strong relationship with the CEO of HarperCollins, who ultimately was someone who suggested I write a book.  So in terms of coming into my own, I think it was when I landed the contract and started writing 'The Big Payoff: [8 Steps Couples Can Take to Make the Most of Their Money and Live Richly Ever After].' And that--well, that happened around 2001 or so.  Because then I think I was taken more seriously by my employer, by the network as an author, because now I'm an author.  I've done this all on my own.  CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel] didn't help me in any way in terms of setting this up for me or making any of the introductions to me.  They did in the sense that this was a story that I pursued, and I met someone who suggested, you know, that I do it and kind of put the bug in my ear.  But I wrote the book myself.  I didn't have a ghostwriter and all that.  So, as one of my colleagues said, you know, it may not be--your first book may not be the most lucrative, you know, endeavor, but it is an endeavor that may open many doors for you, and it did.  It was a--what did he say?  It, it, it may become a legitimizing experience.  Those were his words, and he was absolutely right, because I had been fighting and I'd, I'd had some success getting on '[NBC] Nightly News' on the weekends.  And I don't know if I'd been on the 'Today's Show' yet, and it just opened so many doors within NBC [National Broadcasting Company] for me.  And then I--I think it gave me--again, it was a legitimizing experience for me at CNBC as well, for people to see that I was able to do this.  And at the time I was covering many things and not just personal finance.  So and when the book ultimately came out, I was actually covering commodities.  So it was also great for them to be able to see that I could--that I could do this; I could do both.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Was that something that the, the--you said the CEO of HarperCollins who was--who was that at the--
Speaker 1: Jane Friedman.
Speaker 2: Jane Friedman, okay.  Did she have--was she advising in that--cause you said the book--she was one of the motivating--
Speaker 1: She was one of the motivating factors in--she was not my editor or you know, did not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, I know, but--
Speaker 1: --but, but she was absolutely one of the motivating factors.
Speaker 2: Why?  How?
Speaker 1: Because well, I think I had been talking to her about, you know, being a relatively newlywed and feeling that there wasn't much out there for me in terms of talking about how my husband [Christopher John Farley] and I should talk about money and manage money.  And she just felt like there was a void at, at HarperCollins for an author in that realm.  They didn't have really a, a big financial author at the time.  And she thought that this--a personal finance offer at the time, and so she thought that there was something that could work really well for HarperCollins.  And so she was--she's very ha- very helpful in that regard in, in kind of helping me formulate--or, I guess just to--I'd already had an idea that I was ar- articulating to her, but to then give it some validation, saying yeah, this does sound like it could be a good idea.  And so I, I pitched HarperCollins and, and got the proposal accepted.
Speaker 2: And the book came out when--it came out in--wait a minute--
Speaker 1: You have it there, right?
Speaker 2: I have it here (unclear)--I'm very sorry.
Speaker 1: It came out in 2007.
Story_ID: 117116
Speaker 1: Yep, 2007, that's right.  Okay but I wanna--I wanna--
Speaker 2: It took me a long time to write that book, though.  It took me four years to write it.
Speaker 1: How many years?
Speaker 2: It took me four years to write the book.  And I probably, you know--I started writing--my son [Dylan Farley] was born in 2002.  So I had this idea to do the book and then my son was born; I went on maternity leave.  I started kind of researching it and really getting heavy into it.  And then it took me four years to write it.  So I probably finished writing it a year before it came out.  And you know, with the publishing world and, and then it came out.  And then, of course, the crash happened so then you know, we had the financial crisis in 08' [2008].  So then it was more important afterward, but people weren't thinking how--didn't realize how important it would be until after the crisis.
Speaker 1: So you know, what--so how did you find your voice in the book.  You're a new, new writer and so--what I think about the book is that it's very ea- it's a very easy read, and it's comedic.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, cause you're using yourself as an example.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I love the way it starts about, you know, your husband [Christopher John Farley] and you know, like--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Cause people go--
Speaker 2: I mean, it's very true. I think people--I think people are so intimidated about money.  And so what I wanted to do in the book, and what I try to do in my reporting about personal finance is to make it attainable and real, and make people realize that we're all here together.  I don't have like some financial journalists may have or people who speak about money--some woe, woe is me story, which was already determine about you know, I grew up and so poor, and I had so much credit card debt or student loan debt.  But I don't have that kind of story.  But I do have a story of one who always wanted to try to make sure I could take care of myself.  That's the way I was raised.  That's the way my father raised his two girls.  So how do you--how are you able to do that?  And as a couple, it's so important for both people to be able to take care of themselves.  And so I kind of--I think I wrote with that in mind.
Speaker 1: But it's--I mean, I don't know.  I've never--I mean, you seem to be a very serious per- I mean, you're a serious--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --person but--I mean, when you tell that, you know, you're in the--you have this financial counselor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you look over and your husband is sleeping--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you're like we're in trouble.
Speaker 2: It's because people think that--I think I wanted to--I want to kind of lay it out there that it's not perfect.  You know, trying to get to the same place about money, whether it's you with your spouse, you with your children that you're now trying to educate and say I'm not gonna pay for you at twenty-seven to stay in my house anymore or you with your parents to say you have to have a will, we have to know am I taking care of you or is my cousin doing it, or is my sister?  We all need to have these conversations, and they're not easy.  So in my--in the book 'The Big Payoff,' I talk about, you know, I do think it's very important to have a third party help you because these conversations aren't always easy to do on your own.  And you may not even know how to start them or what the important things are to bring up.  And so I, I found, again, another NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] connection.  I found our financial advisor through Joe Boyce, who is a terrific journalist for the 'Wall Street Journal' for many, many years.  And he was retiring and I saw him at NABJ, and he was really excited about retiring.  He said he was gonna be just fine.  I thought a journalist retiring, just fine, okay, at 2000--in 2000 or so.  And, and I said well--he said well, my guy's--you know, he in near you--you know, he said in, in Connecticut.  And I said okay.  All right, I'll find out about him.  And I ultimately decided to work with him and brought--and then so I'd made the connection.  I'd set up the appointment.  I'm the one who found the financial advisor, and then my husband and I came in together for the meeting because that's also how it should work.  They should meet you together.  And I'm--you know, I love looking at online calculators about trying to figure out money.  I read stories; I cover this stuff; and I already knew some of things he was talking about.  But when this financial advisor started talking about insurance and annuities and--all of a sudden I see my husband like this (closes eyes).  And I thought I was gonna lose my mind.  I was like no he did not fall asleep.  We're trying to talk about how we are going to stay together, build a life together, a financial life together.  And we hadn't you know, had kids yet and we were just--and I'm like this is not--this is--this is not gonna work.  This is--but almost like a therapist, because often these advisors need to play that role as well--what are your goals?  Where do you see yourself?  What do you like to do with the mon- extra money you have?  And I realized we both--both my husband and I, we love vacations; I love warm weather; he loves Jamaica.  He's from Jamaica, so we both wanna vacation there as often as possible.  We both wanted to be able to provide for our children, send them to college.  We're on the same page there.  We don't wanna work forever, so we have retirement goals.  So once I realized that we actually had similar goals, I was like then we can--we can make it.  We can get through this.  But it was that initial, no he did not fall asleep, you know, that just--so I had to put--I wanted to put out there in the book that it doesn't start off like you're, you're both--you know, we're gonna do this and then on Wednesday we're going to have this appointment, and then we're gonna do this in three months.  There's--it, it just--you know, it--it's not always an even path to get there, but I try to lay out eight steps of things that you should think about together, that you should talk about together, and that you should talk to someone like an advisor maybe to help you through these different steps.  But, but it's the way to, to get to the financial strength that you--that you need to have.
Story_ID: 117117
Speaker 1: So who helped you structure the book?  And what about your writing voice?  I mean, it took you time, so who's helping you structure--
Speaker 2: So I think being married to a journalist is very, very helpful, and being--and writing about your financial life with this other journalist is also helpful.  My husband [Christopher John Farley] is--has been writing about arts and entertainment and, and has written a number of books, fiction and non-fiction.  So he's a fantastic writer, and he's an even better editor, or just as good an editor.  So I think he was very helpful in making me understand that people don't want to be lectured to.  They don't want a textbook.  They want a real live book, so they wanna hear stories of real people, and that's what I bring to the table, right.  I'm a journalist; I'm a storyteller, and that's why I love my field.  So I want to bring that sensibility to this book about finance.  And I'll interview the experts, and I'll have charts and things in there too, but really, I wanted you to hear the story of how this couple dealt with this.  How did they buy their first home?  How did they set up their estate plan?  How did I do it?  You know, those--so those are things that I bring into the book.
Speaker 1: Now what would take, take this long at the be- is it because you were balancing work and family?
Speaker 2: So I think I had this idea that, you know, I would take off maternity leave and write a book.  I didn't realize that maternity leave is actually the time when I was learning and reading the books about how to be a mom.  And that learning curve for me was so steep.  And I'm in New York [City, New York].  I have no family in New York, and I really focused on my son, Dylan [Farley], for eight months exclusively.  I mean, I didn't--I didn't even turn CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel] I don't think hardly at all during that time.  I was really trying to, to figure that out and, and how to be a mom and how to be my kind of mom, cause I couldn't necessarily do it the way my mother did, cause I knew I had to go back to work.  But I didn't--I wasn't able to spend that time working on the book that I thought I was gonna be able to during that time, to really get a lot of it done.  But I did the majority of writing and, or I should say the majority of research and some of the writing when Dylan was very small, and just kind of laying there as a newborn.  But it just--it just took time.  It took time, and then you know, trying to focus on work and, and get back into the--after taking time off for maternity leave, get back into work, kind of reclaim your position and continue to climb up in, in that, it's hard.  It's hard.  It's hard to write a book, and then marketing the book too.  That was--that was really difficult.
Speaker 1: Because you have to--you're on your own even with a publisher.
Speaker 2: Totally on--and I was even more so on my own because I--when my book came out at that point, there had been a management shakeup at HarperCollins [Publishers Worldwide].  Jane Friedman was no longer there.  My, my--the person who edited my book left the--HarperCollins, and then ultimately, my imprint imploded.  So, so my--so you know, I did-- the imprint no longer existed.  They reconfigured the whole structure of HarperCollins and did away with that particular imprint, and then kind of later made copies of my book on a different imprint.  So it's--there were just so many personnel changes in addition to me realizing that when you write a book, you are really on your own in terms of marketing it and everything.
Story_ID: 117118
Speaker 1: I want to--I wanna go back to the--you know, the, the--CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel] because you have--how many African Americans have come and gone during your time there?  And--
Speaker 2: Many.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Several.  On-air or--well, we had--you know, at the very top level, we had a President.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But Pamela [Thomas-Graham] only was there for a few years.
Speaker 1: Right for a few--cause that was--and what--those years were 2000--let's see.
Speaker 2: Maybe--I think she's been gone about ten years, so 2000, 2003 maybe or 2004.  Let me think.  (Pause) Yes, because our children are friendly--friends, so they're, they're around the same age.  We were gone at the same time, so she was there 'til about 2004 maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So maybe 2000 to 2004.
Speaker 1: So do you remember--talk about her what--you know, when she was made president and--
Speaker 2: That was just--when Pamela Thomas-Graham was made president of CNBC, that was tremendous for a black woman on-air on that network.  It was just--first of all, I'd known her already.  I'd talk to her.
Speaker 1: When did you first meet?
Speaker 2: I--well, I, I met her--I probably--I met her through her husband.  Larry Graham was at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] when I was an undergrad, so I knew him and then I'd met her on some occasion subsequently. And she had also been running the digital component of CNBC before becoming president.  So the first iteration that we had at CNBC.com was her baby.  So I'd met her through that, because that's where all the young fiery talent comes right--you know, when you start these new, new ventures.  So she, you know, I met--I'd had a number of friends who were working for that department at the time and met her through that.  When she was named president, though, I was very proud.  I mean, it was just a great moment to see a black woman in that role.  And--but I was not an executive.  I was not a--in on the management team in any way that I would have to report to her on a daily basis.  So I had ideas of probably the trials and tribulations she was going through in trying to do that job and do it with the personalities involved.  But I didn't really know.  I was--I was kind of in the weeds doing my day-to-day activities.  And she was--I, I would say very supportive of what I was doing from her level in terms of, of helping me in my career.  I do--I do know that people still have a hard time.  They can't figure out like, you know, how to--how to address a working relationship between two black women that may also have a friendship as well.  And I remember someone asking me, you know, so when you talk to--when you go to her, her office, do you say hey, girlfriend, like you know?  And I said excuse me?  Excuse me?  No.  I mean, she's my boss.  She's your boss.  Do you address her that way?  I'm--you know, our friend--and because Pamela and I are both in Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.], and our kids you know, had play dates together and did things together, but we always had a very professional relationship when I was working for her at CNBC.  And we continued to have a working relationship as well as a friendship.  So, it was just--it was very odd, but that--that's from someone who's more on my level.  But I can only imagine the discussions at various levels that she would have had to deal with, as, as all of us do as black professionals.
Story_ID: 117119
Speaker 1: So that's, that's why I wanna--now she [Pamela Thomas-Graham] ultimately--what do you think hap- I mean, what happened?  Because around the time that she's, she's in that position, you're hearing about I think her slow burns.  And--and then I think also ad [advertising] agents.  Isn't Ann Fudge--I mean, there was--there were things--
Speaker 2: There was num- there are a number of, of African American women executives at the time, and I'm, I'm sure that there were--you know, if you look at "Black Enterprise" or "Ebony" or "Essence," you would all chronicle--you know, their achievements at that time.  And I think--I don't know the other professions, exactly how they work, but I know that a television executive's life can be very short--professional life could be very short.  And I don't know exactly what happened, but her tenure there was not necessarily much shorter than some people, at other--at that level at other networks.  We had--at CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel] we have had a long--a longer tenure now with the person who's been there since she was the President.  But it's not unusual at all for top-level news executives to only be in those positions for a short period of time.  In fact, we had a--a Black Professional Alliance is the affinity group for NBC [National Broadcasting Company] Universal.  And we had a discussion for Black History Month abut networking and kind of career advancement, a professional development panel that I was on a few weeks ago.  And one of the other panelist has been at NBC for I think--oh man, Val [Nicholas]' been there may be--over 20 years--25 years maybe.  And someone--he's a vice president.  And someone was saying well why--you know, why didn't--why aren't you a more senior executive, and he said vice president is just fine for me, because I, I wanna stay employed.  I wanna keep working.  And then, you know, I realized that if I'm slightly below the radar, you know, I have a better chance of creating jobs that I wanna do that are gonna allow me to, to have the life that I want and also do what I want professionally.  And I thought that is really smart.  People often think I have to be--and that's kind of my view.  Like, I get asked often, you know, when are you gonna have our own show?  Why don't you have your own show?  And I think what is the daily appetite on CNBC, and what is my passion, and how much of that daily appetite on CNBC is my passion?  And so at this moment, there's not a lot of appetite for what I am most passionate about in terms of covering personal finance.  That may change.  That has changed over the years, but I don't wanna be doing something where I'm under scrutiny for my ratings and for my appearance and for--on a daily basis for that hour, two-hour, three-hour period and not be passionate about what I'm doing.  So I think that that's you know, what this person was saying.  So in Pamela's case, I have no idea why--you know, what happened at the end of--and what, what--whose choice and where.  You know, but ultimately, she's had a flourishing career, you know, now in fina- financial services.  But everyone makes the choices that work best for their lives, and I think that people need to realize that work for some is everything.  But work for many, and certainly for me, is only a part of me.  And I wanna be able to do something that I'm gonna be proud of tomorrow--tonight, tomorrow, twenty years from now, fifty years from now, and when I'm gone the people will be able to say, she made a contribution.  So that's kind of how I approach every day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 117120
Speaker 1: So was there a point in time that you were at a point where you wanted to leave?
Speaker 2: I thought about other pla- I've thought about other television networks, and I've always come back to, this is kind of what I really enjoy talking about.  And even though there may not be at this moment an appetite for a daily show to talk about my perspective on you know, personal finance for two hours a day, there is definitely an, an appetite for it within this, this company as the, you know, leader in business news.  So this is where I wanna be.  And the platforms, now that what I did all those years ago at "Time" [Magazine] and you know, the idea of keeping the Hi8 camera in my desk and doing something for the magazine and for--now I'm actually doing, and I'm required to do, and I'm encouraged to do, and it is so tremendous for trying--for my desire to educate people about money.  So I could do it--you could find me on your phone; you could find me on your--on your laptop; you can find me on TV; you might find an article I wrote in the magazine.  You know, I'm out lecturing, so I'm able to do all of that, which is--which is tremendous.  And it's exactly where I wanna be, so I'm very--I'm very fortunate.  I know I'm very blessed to have--to be able to do what I enjoy doing every day.
Speaker 1: Well, because it--this is--we're talking about it--
Speaker 2: And helping people.  I do--the one thing that I, I--that I enjoy about where I am now and what I'm doing is because I am, I think, doing more of an education for a lot of people, in terms of what they should be doing with their money.  Sometimes I get people who are like why is she wearing that, or her hair looks crazy or whatever, but it's not really just about that.  And often for anchors, it is just about that.  It's all about the hair, the makeup, why is her eye shadow this way or what have you?  But they--most of the feedback I get from viewers is really asking me some substantive questions about what they can do with their money, which is very, very important to me.  And I'm also able--I'm one of those people who I actually like to go out and talk to people and give speeches, 'cause I wanna connect and see if I'm really getting through to you.  And the feedback that I get is tremendous.  There is such a hunger from people to want to know more about how to take care of themselves financially.  And there's now so much information out there.  There is a lot of information about markets and about investing and about--but what, what, what do I really need to know?  And the bottom line is if you have a credit card debt, you really don't need to know much about any of that yet, cause you, you haven't even started with the basics.  You haven't even started with the basics, so I'm encouraged that, you know, when I talk to people they seem to really appreciate what I'm talk--speaking to them about and the way that I'm telling it in what I hope is a very real, very frank way.  That's not a woe is me story and not a--but a story that--of empowerment--of financial empowerment.
Speaker 1: Now with--so how much of your audience is black and how much of your audience is white or, or minority, versus (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I actually do not know the answer to that.  I don't know how, how much of the audience is black.  I think probably more than the network imagines is, is black watching it.  The one thing that I'm-Prudential [Insurance Company of America] has done some very interesting studies about African Americans and many other groups and our financial habits.  And one of the things that has stood out in their research is that African Americans more so than whites get our information from the Internet, from books, and from television.  And so I don't know if CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel] realizes that we're not checking with our financial advisor and watching CNBC.  We're watching CNBC and then doing it.  Because advisors are not trying to find us.  They're--for the most part.  They're--you know, they're slowly realizing that we are an untapped market that has money and they need to help us.  But by and large, you know, we're kind of trying to figure it out on our own.  And, and so it's very--so the, the information that they're getting from CNBC and other media outlets is very important in terms of the financial planning that they ultimately do on their own or that they don't do at all.
Story_ID: 117121
Speaker 1: So what--one, one--I wanna go back to CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel] similar and the changes.  And you were talk--and the changes in media period.  Because you know, you were even saying you know, at time I had my Hi8 camera.  So in this time period and these seventeen years have been way--there, there probably the most profound changes in the landscape and (unclear)--did it ever--I mean, have ever existed in fact.  Traditional media, a lot of people will say, you know, really but by the wayside journalism schools were changing though you didn't go to, you know, journalism school.  So what was--and then CNBC has recently gone through--you know Comcast [Corporation] bought NBC [National Broadcasting Channel], you know Universal.
Speaker 2: And now maybe Time Warner Cable too.
Speaker 1: And then Time Warn- that's crazy.  It is, it's crazy.  So I'm just wondering in the world of financial news re- you know reporting.  And with all that happening around, what is happening in your newsroom and how have those changes affected you?  Were you required then to learn how to--
Speaker 2: So I don't think--
Speaker 1: That's why--I'm just--
Speaker 2: Although there have been a number of changes at CNBC and NBC Universal in terms of the management of the company and the ownership of the company, I don't necessarily think that is what has dictated the changes that have taken place in the newsroom.  The changes that have taken place in the newsroom have to do with the way the consumers are getting and wanting to get their information.  And it's not that Comcast has dictated that we focus on digital and mobile.  It's not that, you know, prior to you know, that GE [General Electric] eventually, you know, was coming around to wanting us to have more of a focus on online journalism or online in tandem with what we doing on the television network.  It's that consumers are saying I wanna be able to read this on the train without people, you know, on either side of me, my newspaper flipping open, I wanna actually see my program.  I wanna see my favorite CNBC show or read this story or watch this video, and I can do it on my phone.  So we need to figure out, as a news organization, how to be able to make that happen for people.  And that I think has really dictated more what has changed in terms of journalism than any of the entities that are owning it.  What I think has been a big benefit for CNBC and for NBCUniversal is to now have an owner that is all about television and content.  And so now we have ownership--
Speaker 1: 'Cause the previous owner was G--was GE.
Speaker 2: Was, was General Electric.  So, so now being able to have a company whose focus is as a content company, and we are the providers of excellent content, it's a per- I think it's a perfect match.  I think it's an ideal match.
Story_ID: 117122
Speaker 1: Now what do you wanna do that you haven't done in your life to date, and the other--I wanna know that and then I wanna also understand cause you said my work is just part of me; it's not all of me--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so I wanna ask that question.
Speaker 2: So I've, I've--you know, over the years I've thought about different career fields.  I said that I thought about other networks, but I always come back to CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel].  I've thought about because I have been a business journalist, actually just going into financial services and doing that full time.  And I've also thought about--we were speaking about philanthropy and how important that is to the black community, but how important that is to me as well and the best way to pursue that.  And so I've thought about working at a non-profit and you know, probably leading a non-profit at one point.  And that's ultimately what I think I'd like to do.  If I'm not doing this, I think that I would like to be at an--some type of non-profit organization that is about educating people in some way about finance or about just giving them the tools to be stronger individuals, so that--you know, I don't know exactly what that will be, but it's definitely something that I've thought about and something that I haven't done yet.  But I definitely see myself doing it at some point.
Speaker 1: Because really you could not have envisioned your--well, you could have envisioned your career in terms of being on-air.  But you could not--I don't know if you would've envisioned your career--you envisioned your career being a financial (unclear).
Speaker 2: I never envisioned my career as a financial journalist.  I mean, you know, my parents [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson and David Ernest Epperson], elementary education, and social work, and--I mean, that's not--I didn't come from a business background.  My--certainly, my mother's family was entrepreneurial, but I still didn't see myself as a financial journalist from that.  I don't think I realized at the time that that foundation, being the child of you know, the founders of the grandchild, the founders of Trower's Cleaners, [Shirt, Laundry and Monogramming Service Inc.] one of the most iconic African-American businesses in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], that was probably something that definitely helped to formulate ultimately what I might be interested in.  The fact that when I would come home some days and my mom would be frowning at the dining table, the checkbooks out.  She's doing, you know, the bills.  She always did our family's taxes by hand with a pencil--did 'em in pencil first then went over them in pen, sent them off herself.  She was very much into--very interested in accounting, even though she never got her CPA.  So I never thought about how important that was, because I wasn't one who owned a stock.  It was not like my grandfather [J. Edward Trower] gave me IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] when I was six, like one of my colleagues told me once. And I said wow, I'm in a different world here.  I didn't have that kind of experience, but I did have experiences where my family wanted to be financially strong.  And the way they did it was either through owning a business or through my mom making sure that bills were paid all the time.  My dad making sure that he stayed employed at a place that he enjoyed I think for the most part, but that actually was a very, very good job.  It was a great job with great benefits enabled, enabled him to take care of his family and allowed my mom to stay home and raise us for eighteen years.  So things were important in creating a sense of financial strength for me, and then ultimately in my journalism career, I'm just talking to people about how can you have that; how can you have some idea of what financial strength is like, and how can you, if you're not in that place, get to that place?  And if you're already there, how can you maintain and protect what you have?  So it does seem--you know, when I think about it, it seems like, how did I--how did I get here?  You know, I wasn't an economics major; I didn't--I don't have an MBA.  But because I'm telling these stories from the perspective of a human so- side of the story, not the side of someone who's an--who's an expert on derivatives or the options market, or the stock market, or you know, mergers and acquisitions, but someone who is a human who has gone through different things with families, with my family and watched others and figured out how they got to a place of strength financially.  That's kind of how I'm telling the story.
Story_ID: 117123
Speaker 1: Now if someone were wanting to be you, what would--what would they need to know?  You know, what is your job like right now?  What, what, what is--what would they need to do to be you if it--if it--let's say a student--a journalism student or a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So I have a great--and I just wrote a letter of recommendation last night for a young woman who is part of the Emma [L.] Bowen Foundation.  Are you from--familiar with that?
Speaker 1: I've heard of the Emma Bowen Foundation.
Speaker 2: So it's--I just became familiar with it in the last year or two.  But it's an organization that provides scholarships and internships for minority students starting in the summer after their high school year, and takes them through college all four years, gives them internships every summer at a media company.  And then whatever that media company pays--it's a paid internship, that money is then matched by the foundation and scholarship aid to them.  And so I had an, an intern last summer and she basically kind of asked me that.  Like, she--I wanna do this, and how do I--and I think it comes from--a couple of things that you need to be.  You need to be inquisitive, you need to be diligent, and direct, and strategic in terms of what you're studying, what your--how you're going about making--how do I wanna say this?  (Pause) How, how did I describe this to her?  When you start--you start by being inquisitive, because as a journalist you have to be able to ask the right questions and ask good questions, and not be afraid to ask too many questions cause you need to get to the right answer.  But you also have to be diligent and determined in terms of as you're doing this to not get frustrated when you don't get the answer, to not get frustrated when it takes longer than you expected to get to where you wanna go.  And then you also have to be willing to be around a lot of different types of people.  And I think that's why ultimately that international affairs degree and the international experience I've, I've had have been so important because I don't wanna just be--I don't want my experience, though it was broader than many in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], to be my only experience, that--to be the only experience that informs how I tell stories.  I wanna be able to understand what's going around the world and how that experience kind of feeds into others that others may be having.  So I think, you know, you have to be open to, to different types of experiences, and I, I'd say--so I've said all of that and I haven't said that you need to have an Ivy League degree, and I haven't said that you have to have a number of internships.  Because in today, in 2014, I think you also have to be extremely entrepreneurial.  I think that it would--it's great if someone has a tremendous education and has many degrees cause you can learn a lot of things in the classroom, And I wouldn't be teaching at Columbia [University, New York, New York] if I didn't think there was merit to that.  But there's also something to starting it on your own.  So for me as a journalist that means having more things that are--that may be my own blog, or that may be you know, writing more freelance, or, or simply just making sure that I'm not just a one-trick pony.  I'm not just on television, but I'm also online, I'm also on mobile, I'm also doing speaking engagements.  So I'm still working all--doing all of this under the auspices of CNBC [Consumer News and Business Channel], but I'm entrepreneurial in that I'm cre- I'm trying to create new ways and new opportunities for myself and for my company in, in non-traditional sect- in non-traditional sectors, whether that's a group of African-American female executives, which are definitely part of our audience but are not talked to that often, because you may go all day and not see one on the air.  Or it may be a group of community college students who desperately need to figure out how to manage their money, because they're all kind of first generation paying out of pocket, and they need to figure out what this whole student loan thing--or it might be a group of six to twelve year-olds who are just now trying to figure out well, what's that thing that goes around in the Stock Exchange floor, and it has numbers and letters and stuff on it?  What's a ticker and how do you explain that?  So all of those different things and all of those different groups of people I wanna be able to, to be speaking to.  And I think if you wanna be me today, if you wanna be a financial journalist today, you have to be able to, to speak in many languages.
Story_ID: 117124
Speaker 1: Now what is the other part of your life that you--you know, cause you've said that--
Speaker 2: So I love my family.  I mean, that--that's the Epperson way, right.
Speaker 1: So you have two--
Speaker 2: So my number one--number one are my, my husband [Christopher John Farley] and my Dylan [Farley] and my Emma [Farley].  And Dylan is 11 years old; Emma's eight years old.  And as my mother [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] always says, they didn't ask to be here.  Your children didn't ask to be here.  And so it is your duty, it is your job, it is your--it is your gift actually that you've been given to be able to raise them and to be able to make sure that they're able to be strong, independent, loving, caring individuals.  And it is a full-time job.  And I--you know, I work with many professionals that share that view and many that don't necessarily, you know.  And it--and it--there's--I don't necessarily think there's a right or wrong, they're just--it might be the way--some people will raise their children the way they were raised.  So if they weren't that--if their parents weren't in- that involved, they may not be that involved.  Some may decide to flip it and, and be more involved.  But the way that I think that I need to live, live my life so that I can feel good about myself and--is to be involved in their lives and to be around.  So that's another reason why I've chosen the career path that I can.  I mean, I love to be able to tuck them in at night.  I love to be able to--if I can't be there for dinner, I wanna at least be able to be there to say their--say our prayers together.  And so when my--when my son says "Mom, can you come and can we say our prayers together?" Then I know that I've done something right, cause one, he wants to say his prayers.  He knows he'd better say his prayers before he goes to bed, but he also wants me to be there to do it with him, and that's important.
Story_ID: 117125
Speaker 1: The world that, that they're growing up--and I wanna ask, some, now, some philosophical questions about what, what do you feel about the future about the African-American community that--
Speaker 2: That their world that they're growing up in is so different.  Both of my children [Dylan Farley and Emma Farley] have been with me in the voting booth, and they have voted for Barack Obama.  Both of my children have been to the White House on--not numerous occasions, but several occasions.  They see that as normal. They see that as he needs to be leading this country.  Why wouldn't he be leading this country?  Wasn't he the most qualified for the job?  That's why he got the role.  And it's such a different experience, and, and while I want them to understand how long and how hard and how many people fought and how many people lost their lives for this to occur, the fact that they think that it's normal and that it's right, and it's expected is just amazing, amazing that we've come that far.  We were watching a, a program last night, and it was about the Holocaust, and they didn't--you know, they, they have no idea.  We--again, I grew--I live now in a--in a neighborhood that is pra- not--probably predominantly Jewish neighborhood, as I grew up in a neigh--in a school district that was predominantly Jewish.  And so they can't understand why would--just because of that?  That's the only reason?  It was--it was really interesting to watch with children that really had--didn't have any knowledge of that experience, what that was--what that experience was like.  We watched a documentary, my daughter and I, about women's rights.  And I'm gonna forget what it was--that came out earlier this year and it has a title.  It's not just called women--"[Makers:] Women Who Made America."  Have you seen that?  It's phenomenal.  And we were watching this march that occurred in New York [City, New York] that I wasn't even that familiar with.  Because it was in New York, and it was about women's rights, and it was--there were a number of media executives involved in the--kind of what led up to this big march.  And, and my daughter's watching it and she's thinking--she's eight years old.  She said why were they giving these women such a hard time?  Why--what was the problem?  They don't see it.  They don't--they don't have that experience.  And so I think it's very important for them to understand stories, and that's why I'm so--I'm so glad my mom [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] is able-bodied and that, you know, she's willing and, and, and loves to have my children.  My ca-my children will go to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] every summer.  We spend at least a week or two there.  I want them to see where I grew up.  I want them to experience that kind of--you know, my--what my life was there--like there where you could be in a car and in ten minutes you're gonna be all over the city of Pittsburgh because it-or fifteen minutes 'cause it's not that big.  There's more traffic now than it was back then, but still it's easy to get around, great colleges and universities and museums and things for them to explore.  So we always do that so that they can stay connected to where I'm from, but to my family, to my mother's family, my father's [David Ernest Epperson] family.  And I want them to hear the stories of what--my mom's--you know, growing up and, and going to Virginia, and, and ha- and what it was like, you know, going on the train to Virginia and, and, and things like that.  But I also want them to have the experience of what they're doing now in their school, where it's just normal for them to be with friends of all types, to go to you know, a Bar Mitzvah and a Bat Mitzvah, and you know, to have--to take Bollywood dance and to do the--you know, it's, it's all part of their existence.  And I think that's very, very important, that it's not just black or white, that it's everybody, and that they don't really see it like that.  It's really interesting.  It's very different, but it's very interesting.
Story_ID: 117126
Speaker 1: So you feel positive about the future.
Speaker 2: I feel that I do.  I feel positive about it.  I do feel positive about it.  I know that there's still--there's still a long way to go, but if there are more people in my children's generation that have that same view where this is all normal, that we're all together, we're getting along, we're all gonna--then once the people who have had--the vestiges of the animosity, the hatred, the--all of those issues, once that--our generation is kind of gone by the wayside, they won't know anything different.  That's my hope.  And maybe that is just, you know, too pie in the sky and, and that's the utopia that we can all hope for.  But they have a very different attitude.  I remember seeing--and maybe because--but they have seen some of these programs and things.  But I remember seeing "Roots" in 4th grade.  And I remember fights breaking out in school, and I remember feeling just--I could--I just--I couldn't even--I can't--I can't even explain how hurt--hurtful it was to--for me to see that.  But then when I was in Egypt, I met Alex Haley.  He was there for a lecture or something, and I remember thinking what he wrote about and where we are right now and what I'm experiencing, and I'm traveling the world, and I'm--it's so different.  Look how far we've come.  So now with my children's generation, you know, going into the voting booth with me, voting for [HM] Barack Obama, going to the Easter Egg Roll on the front lawn of the White House, touring the White House, all that, that's normal for them.  So we are making progress.  We are making progress.  There are definitely, definitely issues along the way, and there are definitely gonna be vestiges of all that we have gone through as a people for a long time to come.  But we have made tremendous progress, so I am definitely hopeful.
Story_ID: 117127
Speaker 1: Well, here's, here's the issue about what the future holds if we continue to have this truly bifurcated society where there are the super, super wealthy and then those who are so far down that how are they gonna ever get back up?  I--and again, this may be utopia, but my hope is there--that there is enough in the wealthy group that are willing to do and to create foundations and to come up with money; that private enterprise will ultimately work along with government to help the other peep--help other people.  It's--I don't know if that's going--I don't know exactly how that's gonna work with not only a bifurcated society, but a government that, where everyone hates each other.  But eventually I think it's gonna get to the point where those who are super wealthy may realize their con-they may not be able to keep it like that.  Our ultimate--when we--when we see it--I guess over the course of history when you see civil wars, when you see major uprisings, often it is over the economies, right, over what--and it's often over a bifurcation that is so severe.  And we don't want that to happen.  So I, I, I don't--again, you know, maybe being a hope--hopeful prayerful person--but I have to think that it has--there, there have to be some that come together.  And I'm, I'm only doing a little thing, but if my little thing can be to try to help people figure out how to--I mean, I can't create jobs for them.  But once you get one, realize that that's the best thing that could happen to you.  And how do you protect that and grow that and keep that?  So you know, I'm, I'm again coming down to, to another level that is not--again, I'm not creating the job, but I wanna be able to help people protect what they have.  And I think we don't do enough of that.  People take it for granted, and that can't happen.
Story_ID: 117128
Speaker 1: So if you--when you look back over--well, no, let me--let me--let me-I'll say it this way.  What do you want the legacy of your generation to be?  What do you think the legacy of your generation--when all--when you look at the continuum of black life and culture in this country, what do you think the legacy of your generation will be?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, I think the legacy will be that my generation, through the doors that were opened in the previous generation, in terms of getting a foot into either--I don't know the higher society or something--getting a foot in the door of a corporate, corporate world or top levels of government or into government positions, being able to then take the leadership roles of those positions and actually effect some change, whether it's in the corporate world, whether it's in politics, whether it's in social service organizations, non-profit organizations, we are in some of those very, very top positions.  We are able to effect change.  Now whether not we take full advantage of that and actually make change that is gonna be lasting and something that is going to be able to help generations to come, remains to be seen.  But we had the previous generation open the door and allow us to be able to have the access to get some of these positions.  Now we have been able to excel, and to climb, and to reach the upper levels.  Will we be able to effect enough change to help people who are less fortunate to also get in the door and to, to reach those levels?  That remains to be seen.
Story_ID: 117129
Speaker 1: So what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I hope that my legacy is one of someone who is, as my family's taught me to be, firmly rooted in my faith and my family and helping other people.  And in terms of my spin on it, helping other people gain financial strength and financial independence.  And so, I think if that can be my legacy, that I do this through, through my work; I do this through example with my own family; I do this through work eventually with maybe leading a non-profit organization.  That's what I hope that my legacy will be.
Story_ID: 117130
Speaker 1: And if you had any part of your life to live over again, or you would do differently--I know that when--you know, when I was-- what would you do?  That's the question.  I know that when I was reading, you were talking about maybe I wouldn't have--and you alluded to it.  Maybe I wouldn't have just been at the "black table."  You know, maybe I would have--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, so I would a couple of things.  So that early on--so things that I would have done differently.  In my Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] experience, I think I would have been more broad in my friendships and trying to network and develop those friendships.  But at that time I was so looking for my own sense of family.  Being away from home for the first time, I think that that was difficult for me.  I think I did a better job of that in graduate school [Columbia University School of International Affairs, New York], and that's why I gravitated toward doing a, a graduate degree in International Affairs.  I would have spent more time perhaps abroad.  And I don't think it's too late professionally at some point in my career to spend some time, you know, being abroad, cause I think that's very important.  But I think much of it I would have done the way that I've done it.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty good life to have that response.
Story_ID: 117131
Speaker 1: And then I have--I wanna ask you just because you--your mother [Cecelia Marie Trower Epperson] was involved, and I don't--are you part of The Girl Friends, [Inc.]?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're not.  Okay so, Girl Friends need to--okay, what if they die?  Okay (laugher).
Speaker 2: I know, I know.
Speaker 1: --You're not-- so you're not legacy.  What about Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.], are your children [Dylan Farley and Emma Farley]--
Speaker 2: Yes, they're with Jack and Jill.  My children are with Jack and Jill.
Speaker 1: --in Jack and Jill.  Okay so was your--your mother wasn't in Jack and Jill, though?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so can you talk about Jack and Jill and what that has had in your life and why you have your children involved?
Speaker 2: So-- I joined Jack and Jill rather late compared to many people in my, you know, friendship group in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  I was probably twelve or thirteen years old, and I didn't really--I don't--again, I never really saw myself as a one percent or upper middle class person.  And so I definitely saw that group as that, so I didn't really think I connected initially with Jack and Jill.  But I will say it turns out that my closest friends to this day are people that were in Jack and Jill with me.  My very best friend and godmothers to my children were friends of mine from Jack and Jill and we continue to, to be very close today. So definitely had a very--it was a very important part of my life and my friendship and, and my friendships growing up.  But I wonder if part of that was also because, you know, at the time our, our mothers were friends and you know, it just--it maybe would have happened that way anyway.  I don't know, but, but I, I think that Jack and Jill definitely helped to foster those friendships.  They became even stronger, I think, when I was applying to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and, and, and getting into you know, going that route in terms of my education because that's when I really got to be closer friends with Susan Davenport and some of the other people who are a little bit older than me who are also--had similar pursuits in terms of their, you know, academic career and such.  So it was very hap- helpful in that regard.  I, I joined Jack and Jill for my children because at the time, when my son was about two, I felt like I just didn't know anybody in Westchester [New York].  I didn't know that many people, that many black people I thought, at that time.  Granted he was two, so what I didn't realize is I didn't know that many people cause I didn't go anywhere cause he was a little toddler, and I was just going to the same places.  But I remember going to playgroups and mothers would say "I'm gonna give him a time out," and you know, "I'm just talk to him in the corner."  And I said I wanted someone who could understand that I got spankings when I was growing up.  Like, I don't--I know that may not be what people do today, black or white, but at least someone who understands that that's, you know, kind of what I'd like to do even though maybe I know I shouldn't do that now.  So I just--I just had to--I wanted to connect with people who kind of understood why I went to church on Sunday.  Like, why I thought that was an important thing to do.  And, and, and I'm, I'm not saying that this with--this was mostly-- mostly an all-white playgroup that I was in with, with my son, but there might not have been some other white people that I would have found either in that group or another they would have felt the same way.  But I just knew Jack and Jill already cause I'd had that experience.  And so now, I've found that my kids really enjoy it.  They don't have to have it because they have black students that they see in their school and you know, friends that I've-- that I have outside of Jack and Jill.  But it has been good for them.  They, they enjoyed, you know, what we're doing.  And I think as an organization, we really focus on trying to give our kids special opportunities, opportunities that we hear that they might be getting from--that other kids might be getting, but we want our black children to have it.  So whether that's taking them on a ski trip or--a couple of weeks ago I took them to a virtual trading floor, mock trading floor at a university and had some other students, mostly black and Latino students, mentoring them about investing.  You know, this is something they're not gonna see all the time, so it--it's more--for me it's more program as well as friendships that I'm hoping that they're developing, but programs that they're--that they're going for.  When I was growing up, I think it was just--you know, it was-- it was just that-- it was a nice group of friends to have.
Story_ID: 117132
Speaker 1: So, you know, when you look at the history of Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.] though, it started--it was for kids, you know. Parents were trying to protect their kids and give them an opportunity to meet other kids that were like them.
Speaker 2: Like them.
Speaker 1: There's been a paramount shift and yet parents are still feel the need--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --even in a--okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I think--but okay, so my understanding, kind of, of it, and I think it's-- it's tried to play out with some parents, but it, it never really worked, was that so we would be with the right people, right.  So that, you know we would eventually marry the right kind of other black person.  I don't remember anyone from my Jack and Jill chapter in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] growing up that married someone else or you know, ultimately ended up with someone from our Jack and Jill chapter.  So that didn't really work that well.  But what it did do was, if we were the only ones in our--for some of my friends in Jack and Jill at the time, they were the only ones, as in the only black people in their classes or whatever in school.  For others who were in public school like me, we were the only ones who were actually in the top classes or really trying to get to the elite schools or what have you.  So to have a group that is supportive and nurturing and determined to get their children to that level, that was definitely something that happened with Jack and Jill when I was growing up.  Today I'd say the same thing, that we all kind of want our kids--many more of us have already been in those places, and we want that legacy to continue.  And we know that it's become more and more competitive, and so we're trying to, to create a supportive environment so that our kids can ultimately get there.  But what's interesting is that this sense of entitlement--this sense of they've already had so much, it doesn't always work.  And it is--part of it is that it's become so competitive.  But part of it is also that kind of fight is now so many generations removed that I don't know if it's in some children--if it's--you know, if it's in there as much.  So it, it'll be interesting to see how, how it ultimately plays out.  But yeah, the, the, the reason why it was started I think--there's still some twin- twinges of that, you know, that you want your children to be with the right people.  But it's more that you want your children to-- be with people who also want to be--who wanna excel and wanna get into top schools and wanna do those things.  And as we become, as we've discussed, more of a bifurcated for--society, then it does--it still does have merit because you want your kids to be at that top level.
