Story_ID: 612053
Speaker 1: All right, we're going to get started with our HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.
Speaker 1: My name is Cheryl Butler, I will be conducting the interview.  Matthew Hickey is also joining us as the videographer.  And I'd like you to say your full name and spell it.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ralph Bernard Everett: R-A-L-P-H, B-E-R-N-A-R-D, E-V-E-R-T-T--E-R-E-T-T.
Speaker 1: What is your date of birth, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is June 23, 1951.  And I was born in Orangeburg, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: What's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 1, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we conducting this interview today?
Speaker 2: We're conducting this interview at the offices of the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, 1090 Vermont Avenue, Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your profession?
Speaker 2: I am a lawyer by profession, and today I am president and chief executive officer of the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies.
Story_ID: 612054
Speaker 1: All right, just a few questions that are kind of fun.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, I like fish and chicken.
Speaker 1: Any particular kind of fish?
Speaker 2: I know it's unhealthy, but I like fried fish (laughter), but no particular, no particular type.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: What about a favorite season?
Speaker 2: My favorite season of the year probably is summertime.  But I really enjoy all seasons because I like the change from one season to the next.  Love fall for the colors that one sees, particularly in this area [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Do you like to travel?
Speaker 2: I like to travel, I do like to travel.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: No, I don't; I just like to go different places.  My favorite city is probably San Francisco [California], which I don't get there often enough.  And I just like seeing different places and doing different things.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite quote, or saying, or bible verse?
Speaker 2: My favorite quote probably would be one from Dr. Mays [Benjamin E. Mays], you know, "Whatever one does, you should try to do it better than--do it so that no man living or dead can do it any better."
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite book?
Speaker 2: I love biographies, and I just read a lot of them.  So, I don't know whether I have one that I would say is a favorite.
Speaker 1: But biographies are your favorite genre (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Yes.
Story_ID: 612055
Speaker 1: Like to find out a little about your family history.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: What's your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Francis Gordon Samuel Everett, Jr. [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.]  And he goes by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Spell--
Speaker 2: --F.G.S. Everett, and if you spell his name, it's Francis, F-R-A-N-C-I-S, Samuel, S-A-M-U-E-L, Gordon, G-O-R-D-A-N [sic.], Everett, E-V-E-R-E-T-T, J-R.
Speaker 1: Do you know when he was born, and where?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He was born on October 25, 1925 in Live Oak, Florida.
Speaker 1: And what's your mother's name, and where and when was she born?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's name is Alethia Gloria Hilton Everett [Alethia Hilton Everett].
Speaker 1: And spell her name--okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Alethia, A-L-E-T-H-I-A, Gloria, G-L-O-R-I-A, Hilton, H-I-L-T-O-N, Everett, E-V-E-R-E-T-T.  And she was born in Alcolu, South Carolina, A-L-C-O-L-U, in--on April 13, 1926.
Speaker 1: All right, let's find out a little bit about your father's family.  How far back can you take us?
Speaker 2: Not too far back.  I knew my father's mother and father.  His father died in 1955, so I only knew him as a very young boy.
Speaker 1: And what's your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name is Francis Gordon Samuel Everett, Sr. [Francis G.S. Everett, Sr.].
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And do you know approximately when he was born, and where?
Speaker 2: He was born in Tallahassee, Florida, and I'm trying to think of the year.  He died in 1955 at the age of sixty-nine, so I need to track back and remember the exact year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was an educator and a minister.
Speaker 1: Did he go to college?
Speaker 2: He did go to college, and I can't remember where.
Speaker 1: What kind of minister was he?
Speaker 2: He was a Baptist minister.
Speaker 1: Pretty well known in his town?
Speaker 2: He was very well known in his town, and he was very well known in Baptist circles.  And he also was the president of two Baptist colleges at the time in Florida--
Speaker 1: What colleges (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) back in the, back in the, back in the '20s [1920s].  Florida Memorial College [Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida] and Guadalupe College in Texas [Seguin, Texas], which is no longer in existence.
Speaker 1: Did he come from a family, an educated family?
Speaker 2: He did come from an educated family.  And his family, they were educated but they were, they were farmers, and I don't know too much about them.
Speaker 1: Did your father ever tell you stories of slavery that may have been passed down from generation to generation?
Speaker 2: He, he, he did not.  And I am not aware of that, actually.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your paternal grandmother.  What was her name and when was she born, do you think?
Speaker 2: Susie, Susie J. Wright Everett [Susie Wright Everett].
Speaker 1: And it's Susie?  Spell that for us.
Speaker 2: S-U-S-I-E.
Speaker 1: And that's Wright?
Speaker 2: Yes, W-R-I-G-H-T, Everett.  And I forget the year of her birth.  I should have checked before I did this, but I forget the year of her birth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she work?  Was she educated?
Speaker 2: She was educated.  She graduated from South Carolina State College [South Carolina Agricultural and Mechanical Institute; South Carolina State University] in Orangeburg, South Carolina.  She worked for many years in New York for a family as a maid.  And when I was growing up, I remember after she returned from New York she was a seamstress, and she would sew for people.  But then, she was really just a homemaker then in terms of taking care of the household duties and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 612056
Speaker 1: Does your father [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.] have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father had two sisters, two brothers and one adopted brother.
Speaker 1: Do you know the names of his siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  His sister's name was Ruth Everett Cain: Ruth, R-U-T-H, Everett, E-V-E-R-E-T-T, Cain, C-A-I-N.  Mildred Everett Williams: M-I-L-D-R-E-D, E-V-E-R-E-T-T, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.  T.O., T period, O period, Everett [T.O. Everett] was his brother, and Ernest O. Everett, E-R-N-E-S-T, O, Everett, E-V-E-R-E-T-T.  And all of his brothers were Baptist ministers.
Speaker 1: Did they all go to college?
Speaker 2: All of them went to college except for Mildred Williams.  And Mildred Williams was a cosmetologist--cosmetologist, a hairdresser, in--for a long period of time in White Plains, New York, and she moved back to South Carolina about twenty years before she died.
Story_ID: 612057
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your mother's [Alethia Hilton Everett] side of the family?  How far back can you take us?
Speaker 2: I can only take you back to her, her mother and father, my grandparents.  Because her mother, Mary Ida Robinson Hilton, M-A-R-Y, I-D-A, Robinson, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N, Hilton [Mary Robinson Hilton] died before I was born.  She died in 19- in 1948, so I did not have any experience with her.
Speaker 1: Do you have an idea around when she was born?
Speaker 2: I do not, no.
Speaker 1: And what about your maternal grandfather?
Speaker 2: My maternal grandfather's name was William Hilton: W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Hilton, H-I-L-T-O-N.  And I--he died around 1963, and I was about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old was he when he died?
Speaker 2: He was his early eighties, and I forget the exact age.  I can go back and check programs, but I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was a homemaker, and my grandfather was a turkey farmer.  He actually worked at someone else's turkey farm, and as I understand it, took care of the turkeys for a living.
Speaker 1: In what town was this?
Speaker 2: Alcolu, South Carolina: A-L-C-O-L-U, South Carolina.  And my--and the other grandparents [Susie Wright Everett and Francis G.S. Everett, Sr.] were in Vance, South Carolina.
Story_ID: 612058
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Alethia Hilton Everett] tell you stories of her childhood growing up in the Deep South?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She talked about segregation a lot, and what they had to go through and endure.  The town in which she lived in was a mill town, where almost everybody that worked, worked at the mill in Alcolu, South Carolina.  And of course that was before a lot of the laws in terms of pollution and environment.  So, a number of people ended up getting ill from things which they breathed, you know, at the, at the plant.  She came from a fairly large family where she had eight sisters and two brothers.  And a lot of members of her family also had a lot of children.  So, I had tons and tons of cousins.  I did not go wanting for cousins on my mother's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Do you know the names of her siblings?  That's a lot, ten.
Speaker 2: I do not, probably do not know the names of all ten, but I can, I can try and see how far I get.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her brother's name was A.K. Hilton, A initial, K initial, Hilton, and he was a farmer in Lynchburg, South Carolina.  Her sisters were Carrie Hilton Brooks, C-A-R-R-I-E, Hilton, H-I-L-T-O-N, Brooks, B-R-O-O-K-S.  She was a homemaker, first in New York and then in Willingboro, New Jersey where they moved for, for retirement.  Cora Hilton Jenkins, C-O-R-A, Hilton, H-I-L-T-O-N, Jenkins was a, was on one of her sisters who ran a lot of little businesses that she had stores, little community--what we would call now 7-Eleven type stores that basically served the African American community in Alcolu, South Carolina.  Then there was Lula Hilton Frierson: Lula, L-U-L-A, Hilton, H-I-L-T-O-N, Frierson, F-R-I-E-R-S-O-N.  And she was one of her sisters who died at a fairly young age, and I actually forget right now what her occupation was.  But she actually--I remember her very well because she died at thirty-eight years old, but she had eight children.  Matter of fact when she died her youngest was less than two years old.  So, I remember that very well.  And then another one of her sisters was Kate: K-A-T-E, Hilton, H-I-L-T-O-N, Gipson, G-I-P-S-O-N [Kate Hilton Gipson].  And she was a homemaker, and she also had eight children (laughter).
Speaker 1: Big family (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that's why, so that's why she was a homemaker, probably.  And those are, those are the ones that I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any others--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, there's one other I remember, Jessie Hilton Cribbs: Jessie, G-E-S-S-I-E, Hilton, H-I-L-T-O-N, Cribbs, C-R-I-B-B-S.  She's the only one of her siblings that's still living.
Story_ID: 612059
Speaker 1: Very good.  And I meant to ask you if your father [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.] told you any stories about growing up in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: My father did tell me stories, and they were mainly along the same lines as my mother [Alethia Hilton Everett], in terms of the types of things that you had to endure, you know, growing up in the segregated South.  And of course I remember some of that myself in terms of, you know, going in, you know, back doors, you know, and not being able to stop and get anything to eat or go to the bathroom.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's talk then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a little bit about your early childhood. You were born in Orangeburg, South Carolina--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in 1951.  Tell me about your earliest memories in Orangeburg.
Speaker 2: Well, my earliest memories actually did not take place in, in Orangeburg.  I was born in Orangeburg, which was the county seat of Orangeburg County [South Carolina].  But we actually lived in a town called Elloree, South Carolina, E-L-L-O-R-E-E, in South Carolina, about twenty-one miles from Orangeburg.  So, I actually lived there until I was in the seventh grade.  My father was the principal of the all-black school there.  It went from the first grade to the twelfth grade, and it was called Elloree Training School, which is what they called a lot of those schools in the South at that time where African Americans were going, Elloree Training, training you to (laughter)--
Speaker 1: What do you remember about your days at Ellor- Elloree Training School?
Speaker 2: Well, Elloree Training School you know I did not go to kindergarten, because in South Carolina at the time there was no kindergarten for African Americans.  What I remember doing is going to, to Elloree Training School where my father was the principal, and everybody knew that I was the principal's child.
Story_ID: 612060
Speaker 1: But one thing that really stuck in my mind is that when we would go to school at that time [Elloree Training School, Elloree, South Carolina], starting in September, less than one third of your classmates were in school, even in the first grade.  Because at that time people were picking cotton and harvesting different crops, and they were living on other people's lands.  So, they could not go to school until all the crops were harvest.  So a lot of the families, the kids did not show up until the first week in October when--and a lot of them ran into problems, where they were kept behind because they had missed the number of days to qualify for, for going to the next grade.
Speaker 2: Can you remember any specific stories of kids who had to work the farms?
Speaker 1: Well, I remember quite a few stories, you know, of people coming in and telling me how lucky I was to be able to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tell me, tell me one story.
Speaker 1: Well, I guess one story would be just talking to kids who would come in very late.  And they tell me--
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: --how lucky--.  Who would be the person that would tell me this?  Lucius Pelzer is one of my classmates I remember who worked, who lived on the land.  He was--his father and mother [Vera Pelzer] were sharecroppers, and they lived on someone's land.  Lucius actually ended up being a dentist, but he would come and tell me how lucky I was to be the son of educators [Alethia Hilton Everett and Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.] because teachers' kids tended to be able, to be able to come to school.  And he would talk about, you know, life on the farm.  And even at a young age his hands were much harder than mine from the, you know, from the type of farm work that he had to do.
Speaker 2: He was picking cotton, or other crops?
Speaker 1: He was, he was picking cotton, beans, cornfields, even as a--you know, carrying things, whatever a young boy could do at the time.  And I did pick cotton with him, you know, one time, or two times, but it wasn't because I had to do it.  It was just getting--across the street from where we lived was a big cotton field, and you ended up, you would get two cents per pound of cotton that you would pick.  And it takes a lot of cotton (laughter) to make a pound, so most--so people who could really pick cotton well probably could pick a hundred pounds a day.  But that was a lot, so you get, what, two bucks [dollars] or something like that for a day's work to support your family.
Story_ID: 612061
Speaker 1: Do you remember other classmates?  Who were--who was a part of your inner circle?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember quite a few of my classmates.  Raymond Sumpter [ph.].
Speaker 1: What did you--
Speaker 2: J.C. [ph.]--these were just people that we played with.  We played, you know, marbles up on the playground.  We played baseball.  We would visit each other's homes.  A number of my classmates went to the same church that my father [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.] was the preacher at.  I remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And which church was this?
Speaker 2: It was a small Baptist church in Elloree, South Carolina called Nazareth.  And don't ask me to spell that, please.  (Laughter) Called Nazareth Baptist Church [ph.], where he was the pastor for two Sundays.  You know, in the South they would have like first and third Sundays, and then third--second and fourth Sundays he would go to a, go to another church.
Speaker 1: So, your father had his hands full.  He was principal of the school for colored kids [Elloree Training School, Elloree, South Carolina], and he was also the preacher?
Speaker 2: The preacher.
Speaker 1: One of the preachers.
Speaker 2: So--and he also, you know, served on the, you know, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and, and a number of other activities while trying to, you know, raise me and my, and my sister [Brenda Everett Mitchell].
Speaker 1: So, he was a real leader in the community?
Speaker 2: He was a leader in the community.  And as you know, back at that time it was the--particularly in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] it was the people who had independent sources of income who could afford to be the leaders because the income was coming from the black community.  Of course it was, you know, even if you were the principal of a school that was a state job so, you may or not have a job, depending upon what activities you participated in.
Speaker 1: What kind of interaction did you have with your father at school?
Speaker 2: I would try to stay out of his office, because if--anytime you went to the principal's office--that was a bad thing.  (Laughter) That was not a good thing.  I would see him walking down the halls, but I tried my best not to go to his office, and to be sure that I was treated like any other kid who was there, whose father happened not to be the principal.  It was something that probably was used to other's advantage.  Because if I did anything wrong, or if I was about to get out of line, they warned me that I was going--they were going to send me to the office of my daddy.  And back at that time, principals actually could give you a spanking (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you remember a time when you were actually sent to the principal's office?
Speaker 2: I remember a time when I actually came close to it.  But you know, and I remember times when people would tell my father about things that I was doing that probably I should not have been doing, and I would pay for it later when I, when I got home.
Story_ID: 612062
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers [at Elloree Training School, Elloree, South Carolina]?  Who was, who was your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: My favorite teacher probably was my first grade teacher named Mrs. Bellinger [ph.], or my fourth grade teacher, name is Mrs. Hartzog, H-A-R-T-Z-O-G.  And these were favorite teachers because they actually took a--very much of a keen interest in me in terms of doing my work.  But I actually think that most of the teachers back during that period of time in segregation, they really nurtured all of the kids in the class.  They wanted to be sure that you were equipped to get ahead as best you could under segregation, so they took a personal interest in you.  They would visit your homes.  They would send notes home, you know, because that was before, before computers.  But these two teachers took a particular interest in me, and also my second grade teacher, Mrs. Parlor [ph.].  And I'm, and I'm amazed at myself right now that I still after all these years remember their, their names.  But they would push you to, to of course, do good work, but also to participate in activities, to be in plays.  And a lot of, and during that period of time, many black kids got their speaking ability from speaking either at school or at church, where you would go up, you know, and do your little, your little lines, and things like--
Speaker 1: Do you remember what plays you participated in?
Speaker 2: I do not.  But I did participate in a, in, in a number of plays, and I can kind of remember my parents [Alethia Hilton Everett and Francis G.S. Everret, Jr.] sitting there hoping that I would not forget my lines, so.
Speaker 1: Did you excel in any specific subject?
Speaker 2: I was a pretty good all-around student.  When I was growing up I had asthma, so I did not participate in any sports.  Because back in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], if you had asthma, the way they treated it was to tell you to sit on the sidelines as opposed to the way they do it now, is to give you an inhaler and tell you that when you feel something coming on to give yourself a couple of jolts of the, of the, of the inhaler.  So, I was basically a student who did well in my classes.  And I did well because I was pushed by my parents, and I did not want to go home and explain why I had a bad grade.  Now I did get in trouble in school, now that you remind me, because I got a bad grade in conduct, and that was very embarrassing to my folks.   That means that I was like the class clown, even though I was getting my, getting my work.  And I remember one year in the second or third grade I had an X, and I got a check by, "Whispers too much."  And that was (laughter) that was because I was very sociable in class.  And, but those--that was about the most trouble that I got into, other than a fight on the playground every now and then.
Story_ID: 612063
Speaker 1: Take me around your block.  Where did you live?  What was your house like, and what was your neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: My--I lived on a street that was almost like a highway.  So, it wasn't really like a neighborhood.  It was about a half mile from the school in which my father [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.] was the principal [Elloree Training School, Elloree, South Carolina].  A lot of times I would walk home with friends.  Because when school let out, a lot of us would be there, and I would walk to the--either the babysitter or to my house, which was on the same street.  So we had neighbors next door, but it wasn't like a neighborhood that we think of today.  They--the house itself was a frame house, wood, with two bedrooms.  It had a kitchen, a living room, two bedrooms: one for my mother [Alethia Hilton Everett] and father, and twin beds for me and my sister in the room (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what's your sister's name?
Speaker 2: My sister's name is Brenda, Brenda Everett Mitchell is her name.  She's five years younger than me, born in 1956, August 2, 1956.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the two of you when you were younger shared a room?
Speaker 2: Shared a room up until the time we moved, when I was in the seventh grade.  And we actually--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was going to say even before you moved--help me understand this neighborhood.  This is a all-black neighborhood?
Speaker 2: All-black neighborhood on a highway.  On one side of my house there was another neighbor.  On the opposite side there was the state highway department [South Carolina State Highway Department], where they parked their vehicles for roadwork.  So, it was a big fenced area where, where they parked.  And we also had pets, I had chickens and rabbits.  So we had a chicken coop in the backyard and we had a rabbit pen, which I had--at all times I had two or three rabbits there.
Story_ID: 612064
Speaker 1: What are your earliest sights, smells and sounds of your home and neighborhood [in Elloree, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: The sounds would be the railroad track nearby with, you know, with, with, with the train.  No particular smells, because we did not live near any factories.  But I would hear early in the morning the highway trucks getting ready, being cranked to go on the highway and do whatever they do to repair the roads and what not.
Speaker 1: Any particular smells inside your home?  Food?
Speaker 2: Just food cooking on the stove.
Speaker 1: What kind of food?
Speaker 2: Breakfast food.  I remember the smell of, you know, eggs, bacon.  I remember at the time, every now and then my father [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.] would, we would eat rabbit, which sounds kind of funny now.  But we would have like rabbit and grits, and it'd usually be a, it would usually be a rabbit that my father had gone out and killed.  Which he probably--if he were living now, he'd probably say, "Why are you telling that?"  (Laughter) But anyway--
Story_ID: 612065
Speaker 1: Did you go to church every single Sunday, I imagine?
Speaker 2: Every single Sunday, every single afternoon, dur- particularly on Sundays.  You know, and prayer meeting on Wednesdays during the meet--during the week.  We would go to eleven o'clock worship service, probably go to a member's house to eat.  If there were an afternoon program, we would go to the afternoon program.  If there were a night program, we would go to the night program.  So I was pretty churched (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Were your parents [Alethia Hilton Everett and Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.] pretty strict?  I mean your dad is this leader in the community.
Speaker 2: Very strict, in terms of--from right and wrong.  In terms--did not play.  Expected me to follow the rules, to not embarrass my family by doing things that I should not be doing.  But it was, but it was strict in a loving way.  You knew that your parents loved you.  You knew you were living in a segregated society that--just because you were doing something right did not necessarily mean that you would be treated right.  So, you really, so you tried to do the best that you could.
Story_ID: 612066
Speaker 1: So you were talking about the segregated South.  What are your memories of segregation in your early childhood?
Speaker 2: In my early childhood, I have clear memories of the separate water fountains.  Have clear memories of having to go in separate doors of restrooms when there were restrooms.  A lot of times there were no restrooms to use at particular places.  I have clear memories of mistreatment, of, of--particularly my mother [Alethia Hilton Everett].  One day we went to a five and ten cents store, what they called back then, called Ferners, and I wanted some candy.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the store?
Speaker 2: Ferners, F-E-R-N-E-R-S, or something along those lines.  But it was what they called back then a five and dime store.  And we went to buy, I wanted some candy.  And we were next to be served, but there were three or four or five whites that came up, and they would never really wait on my mother.  And I was about nine years old, and I remember getting--talking loud, saying, that that was not right, and, "They should wait on you."  And my mother cautioned me to be quiet, and we waited until they served all the whites.  And I remember having this discussion with her that that was not right, you know, when we, when we got in the car.  And she explained to me what the consequences would be if I, if I kind of got out of hand and (unclear).
Speaker 1: What did she tell you?
Speaker 2: That they might take me away (laughter) someplace like that.  And that stuck with me.  And I just remember going on long trips where we would have to, you know, pack our food because there was no place for us to stop to eat.  And a lot of times you know for going--in terms of going to the bathroom, we basically stopped on the side of the highway.  And (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Do you remember a particular trip?
Speaker 2: I remember going to Virginia Beach [Virginia] where my uncle worked during the summers.  He was a schoolteacher during the winter months, and during the summer--
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was, would have been 1960 or '61 [1961], '60 [1960] or '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: So, around the time of the incident at the five and dime store?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right in the same period of time.  And I remember going to Virginia Beach, and we lived at somebody's boarding house.  It was a boarding house for colored people, and we were just going up to take him to drop him off for the summer.  And we spent one night and we would drive back.  But it was an ordeal in terms of getting ready to, you know, make your food for the day as you'd drive up there, and to find or know where there were places you could stop to go to the restroom.  And you would just basically try get there as fast as you could.  But you also were very mindful that you needed to obey the laws in terms of not speeding, because even sometimes if you weren't speeding you would be stopped just for harassment, and you could not dispute (laughter) that you were not speeding.
Story_ID: 612067
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember the whites only, colored only signs in your town?
Speaker 2: Oh, ab- oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Where did you see them?
Speaker 2: I would see them every place there was an establishment, every place except for, for black town.  You see them in the department stores.  You would see them as you were driving down the highway in the little community stores.
Speaker 1: So, what stores did you know you couldn't go into?
Speaker 2: Well, you knew that you could not--you knew that you could go into certain stores, but you knew that you could not try on anything in the store.
Speaker 1: Which stores?
Speaker 2: Belk department store [Belk's department store], B-E-L-K.  That was one that I remember, remember very well.  That was basically the department store in my, in my hometown of twenty thousand.  We didn't have many, but that was the one, that--and it was long before Walmarts and stuff like that.  So that was the one that kind of stands out in my mind, and then the, you know, the five and dime stores that I mentioned.  And also, the movie theater.  There was one movie theater [Blue Bird Theater] downtown Orangeburg [South Carolina] where we could go, but we had to sit in the balcony.
Speaker 1: How did that make you feel?
Speaker 2: Not, not good.  But I ac- sometimes I actually thought the balcony seats were better seats because you were up.  And the only thing that kids would do for retaliation when we were sitting in the balcony is that they would drop popcorn and other things down on the people (laughter) sitting on the lower level.  You saw the same movie but you were just up--and your, your living a- your accommodations were not as nice as the ones downstairs because, you know, the chairs were either torn, it wasn't necessarily--nobody cleaning up in between shows.  But we just knew that that--if we wanted to go to the movies, we had to go in the balcony upstairs.
Story_ID: 612068
Speaker 1: Were there any other moments of racial conflict in your town?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The one that I remember the most was in 1968 at South Carolina State College [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] when they had the Orangeburg--what we refer to now as the Orangeburg massacre.  And that was an event that was started over a bowling alley called All Star Lanes [All Star Bowling Lanes; All Star Triangle Bowl, Orangeburg, South Carolina] that was owned by a fellow named Mr. Floyd [Harry Floyd], and I forget his first name now.  But he had--he was determined that even though the civil rights bill was passed [Civil Rights Act of 1964] that no black folks were going to bowl at his facility.  So, the students mount- at South Carolina State College mounted a protest where they would have mar- nightly marches down to his bowling alley.  And on day three of this event, the National Guard [South Carolina National Guard] had been called out along with the South Carolina Law Enforcement Department [South Carolina Law Enforcement Division], which is referred to SLED in South Carolina.  And one night after a rally at the bowling alley, students had gathered at the front of the campus at South Carolina State College.  And the law officers said that someone from the crowd fired a shot, which was later determined not, not to be true.  But the law enforcement agency, South Carolina Highway Patrol, opened fire on the students who were gathered at the front of the campus, ending up killing three students and wounding about twenty-nine.  And one of those students who was killed that night was a high school classmate of mine.  We were in the eleventh grade at the time, and he just happened to be on the campus.  And he was not sitting--he was not at the front of the campus where the protest was going on, but he was sitting on the steps of a dormitory, and one of the shots hit and killed him.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Delano Middleton: D-E-L-A-N-O, M-I-D-D-L-E-T-O-N, Middleton.  And then the other thing that stands out about--
Speaker 1: Well, what was the reaction to that event?  I mean imagine that event caused quite a bit of ruckus and?
Speaker 2: That event caused quite a bit of ruckus.  It caused quite a bit of hurt, particularly when the kids--this was before Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio], which happened the year before.  There was very little news coverage of this event outside of South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what month was this?
Speaker 2: This was February 8, 1968.
Speaker 1: Did you have any national leaders come down?
Speaker 2: Most of the national leaders came down after the event.  I remember Roy Wilkins coming down and speaking.  He's the one that stands out in my mind.  Because I remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, your father [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.] was active with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: My father was active in the NAA- with the NAACP.  And he was also involved--he was a graduate of South Carolina State College, so he was also involved.  There were a number of meetings held around that, trying to get an investigation.  But at the time there were no black elected officials, so there was not a voice.  I mean, basically there was an investigation done.  The investigation concluded that the officers did not do anything wrong.
Story_ID: 612069
Speaker 1: But the other thing that stands out in my mind about that whole event [Orangeburg massacre], which still sticks with me a little bit today, I mentioned that three students were killed, the--they dragged all three of the students who were killed and put them together in a pile and took a picture of that and put it in--very big picture, a very big picture on the front of the local newspaper called The Times and Democrat, with the headline being: 'All Hell Breaks Loose - Three Students Killed' ['All Hell Breaks Loose - Three Killed and Many Injured in College Nightmare'].  And they wrote it in such a way where it seemed as if the students were the ones who started this.  And--but at that time, we recognized that African Americans did not have a voice.  And if they had a voice, it would have been investigated.  And people--at the time, Governor Robert E. McNair was the governor of the state.  He was the one who ordered the troopers down.  And he died about six months ago.  But a few years ago, he apologized for this event.  But it was an event that, you know, if they had paid attention to what was going on at a predominantly black school [HBCU], who knows?  Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] may have never happened, even though that was about a different thing; that was more about the war [Vietnam War].  And so, a building was named at South Carolina State College [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] after the three students that were killed.  Every year on February 8th, they have a memorial still today.
Speaker 2: Was there large spread activism as a result?  I mean what happened when Roy Wilkins came down and your father [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.], another NAACP leader joined forces with him?  Was there protests (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We--there were protests.  There was a push for an investigation and a push for justice in terms of having actions taken against the people who did this.  And there was, as I recall, there was a trial.  But they were found that there was no--well, no wrongdoing.  Now, I do remember going to the Roy Wilkins event at South Carolina State College where there were you know, basically people were asking, you know, to continue the, you know, the strive toward justice and freedom, and things along those lines.
Story_ID: 612070
Speaker 1: One thing about being in a small town like Orangeburg [South Carolina], you were exposed--you may not knew it at the time--to a number of national leaders who would, who would come, you know, like doc- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like who?
Speaker 1: Like Dr. Benjamin Mays [Benjamin E. Mays], who was Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] mentor and did the eulogy at his funeral--funeral.  He would come to Orangeburg every Easter to do the early sunrise service outside.  He was a gentleman that I actually came to know, years, years later.  But--
Speaker 2: But Dr. Mays wasn't there around the time of the protest?
Speaker 1: No, he was not.  But, but he, he came two months later as a part of a regular thing.  I don't recall him being there before you--this happened in February--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --he was there in April.
Speaker 2: Okay, around the time of King's assassination?
Speaker 1: Around that time, whenever Easter was during that year.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Because only a month later was the sanitation strike in Memphis [Tennessee], where people like Roy Wilkins [Roy E. Wilkins] were active--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --involved in that protest.  Martin Luther King had been down there for that at least three times.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he was involved in, you know, another sort of--in this case high profile protest--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --which led to King's assassination.  So, were you following him?  I mean, this happened very close together.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Were you following the news?
Speaker 1: I was following the news, you know, from, you know, from newspapers.  And you have to also remember back then the news was very much sanitized.  We did not have all of the sources that we get news from today.  So, your news was what the people who ran the newspaper wanted you to know.  And then there were three TV networks, you know, ABC, NBC, and CBS.  So there was no CNN, so we didn't get news the way that we get news now.  And of course, you didn't know a lot about the sanitation strike [Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike].  I mean you remember the, you know, the bulletin coming on the news about the, you know, about the assassination.  So, the information that you would get, particularly in the African American community, came from Ebony and Jet.
Speaker 2: So, two months after the--
Speaker 1: Or the Afro [Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.  Two months after this incident in which three students were killed in Orangeburg, King was assassinated?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Was there any reaction in Orangeburg at this time--
Speaker 1: Oh, ab- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in April of '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.  I mean, the whole community was, was shocked, grieving.  You know, we participated in, you know, in protests, church services mainly, NAAC- [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)] what we called back then mass meetings, you know, where most of those were held at Trinity Methodist Church [Trinity United Methodist Church] in, you know, in, in, in Orangeburg.  And it was just a, again, back in the period, a very shocking kind of thing.  Because it's not like the world that we live in today where these things kind of happen more often.  I mean, we were shocked in '63 [1963] by the death of the assassination of President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  And then you had, you know, Dr. King, and then later on Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy].  So it was just, it was a time where violence was not the norm.  And--violence was the norm, in terms of African Americans--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but not in terms of assassination of leaders.
Speaker 2: And there was no rioting upon the death of Dr. King, as happened in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There were protests, but I'm having a difficult time remembering whether or not, you know, there were actually what we would refer to as riots in our hometown.  I don't remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What about--
Story_ID: 612071
Speaker 1: You were talking about in the early '60s [1960s] you started recognizing these racial divisions and racial disparities.  Was the Civil Rights Movement and those principles, were they making their way to South Carolina, to Orangeburg [South Carolina], in your community?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were.  And then we had a number of community leaders who were very, you know, working very hard in the Civil Rights Movement already in terms of the schools, in terms of preparing people to go and integrate the schools, you know, back at the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who, who were some of the leaders in your town?
Speaker 2: Some of the leaders in my town who were working on this--well, we all--I. DeQuincey Newman--I, period, DeQuincey Newman--was the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  He wasn't in my hometown, but he was always in my hometown.  And then you had a number of local leaders like Gloria Rackley, R-A-C-K-L-E-Y [HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell], who was a schoolteacher in Orangeburg, but who also was responsible for preparing the African Americans who decided to integrate the schools.  They would all have after school meetings at her house in my neighborhood to do--to prepare for the next day.  She eventually lost her job in the school system, and was basically run out of town for doing that.  And then there was Mrs. Ferguson, who was very active in the movement and participated.  And her two daughters were two of the first children to integrate Orangeburg High School [Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina]--
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: --at the times.
Speaker 1: Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I forget their names.  One was Leona [Jacquelyn Ferguson Romano], and I really forget the other one's name.
Speaker 1: When you were a small child--I mean some of these civil rights cases happened when you were a small child, and then, you know, the Brown v. Board case [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] happened a little bit later.  But were you aware of those seminal civil rights cases?
Speaker 2: I was aware--
Speaker 1: Briggs/Elliott [Briggs v. Elliott, 1952]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was aware of them, that something was happening.  I did not have any details.  I knew that there were protests, and that progress was being made.  I knew about the March on Washington because I had, you know, one friend who actually went and participated.  I remember seeing her on TV, and the excitement that that brought by seeing my friend Barbara Granger [ph.] actually there at the march.  So, you knew that things were going on that was going to make life better for a little boy like me.  You knew that people were being fired, people were being killed as a result of the protests.  So you knew that you were living in a very, very dangerous time.
Story_ID: 612072
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When did you enter high school, and what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I entered high school in 1966, roughly (laughter).  Anyway, I attended Wilkinson High School [Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School], which was the all-black high school there in Orangeburg [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Were you involved in the process of integration at all?
Speaker 2: No--no and yes.  I--around the time I was going to high school, they were getting certain black students to volunteer to go to high school.  And at the time, they were getting the students who they were sure that could do the work.  Because they did not want to send anyone to the white school and have folks say that they could not do the work.  So, a number of my classmates went, and I decided that I was going to go to the all-black school.
Speaker 1: So that was a choice you made?
Speaker 2: That was a choice that, that, that I made.  And today, while I made that choice, I'm not exactly sure, you know, why I decided not to go.
Speaker 1: What do you remember hearing about the students who did integrate the white schools?  And what were those white schools in town?
Speaker 2: It was only one.  It was Orangeburg High School [Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina], and there were some that went to different elementary schools around town, Mellichamp [Mellichamp Elementary School, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and Sheridan [Sheridan Elementary School, Orangeburg, South Carolina] is--are the two that I remember.  But I was mainly focus- since I was in high school on the kids who went to the local Orangeburg High School.
Speaker 1: Were there--
Speaker 2: They--
Speaker 1: --any events?
Speaker 2: Well, they--these--the people who went talked about how hard life was there; how they, how they were isolated, how people would spit upon them, how, you know, their books would go missing.  Just very, very difficult.  The isolation, no particular friendships because whites who would talk to you or would associate with you, they would not be accepted by, by their communities.  So, there was just sort of just isolation.
Story_ID: 612073
Speaker 1: Describe your high school experience [at Wilkinson High School; Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina].  Did you participate in any clubs?
Speaker 2: I participated in a, in a number of clubs, you know, Spanish club, something called the Highlight Society, which was almost like an all-boys fraternity.  I participated in the marching band.
Speaker 1: What instrument did you play?
Speaker 2: I played the alto saxophone for the four years that I was there in the marching band.  I was--let's see, Spanish club, I was in the honor society; I was very active in the school.  I was the editor in chief of the, of the yearbook, and things like that.
Speaker 1: Did you excel academically?  I imagine the honor society, that's a yes?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I did, I held my own, I did, did--I did fairly well.  I graduated in the top of my class.  I wasn't number one, but I graduated high enough to make a speech at graduation (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: Who are the teachers you remember from high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, from high school I remember Mrs. Annie Carol Williams [ph.], who was my, my English teacher, and pushed me, you know, very hard to do well.  I remember Mr. Henry Brown [ph.], who was my math teacher.  I remember Mr. J.B. Hunt, initials J.B. [J.B. Hunt, Jr.], who was my band instructor and my next door neighbor.  Because the band was a fun thing that you would do after school, but he was very strict about how you marched.  And you were always in competition for your band seat, because some people would challenge you at the end of band practice to see whether or not you could--and I--and it's funny about that.  My memory is this you know, a girl that was sitting next to me, who was in a class behind me, but I think she can, she could play better than me, and she challenged me for my seat one day.  And I said, no, I can't let this underclass girl get my seat.  And I really think that she probably outplayed me that day, but I think that the band professor felt sad for me.  So, he just said, "It was a tie.  And since it was a tie, you can keep your seat."  Her name was Mamie Felder, and I still remember Mamie Felder, Felder, F-E-L-D-E-R, trying to take (laughter), trying to take my (laughter), trying to take my seat (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 612074
Speaker 1: Were principles of black power prominent during your high school years [at Wilkinson High School; Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Principles of?
Speaker 1: The Black Power movement.
Speaker 2: Yes.  You know, we would always quote, you know, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and, you know, and others.  And there were, you know, there were some people, you know, in the school system who that made a little nervous.  Because the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] were, you know, preaching more violence than Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was espousing, you know, at the time.  But, you know, we would read a lot, a lot of literature.  And there were, again, there were a lot of things.  We were just sitting around hoping for a better life, a better life for, you know, people who would come after you.  All we were asking for was an opportunity to compete for the same jobs, you know, for the, you know, to get a good education.  I mean, at the little ele- elementary school where I grew up [Elloree Training School, Elloree, South Carolina], that I went to, we had hand me down stuff for everything.  I mean, all of our books were probably seven, eight years out of date, out of print.  And of course, there were no books that talked about black history or black anything, because they didn't necessarily want you to feel good about yourself and the kind of things that you were doing.  We had hand me down uniforms, you know, as far, you know, basketball uniforms or band uniforms, if we were lucky enough, you know, to have a band.  Where you would go a science class and you would expect fifteen or twenty microscopes, we had one, you know, for the whole class.  And it was a hand me down kind of micro- kind of microscope.  And it was the same thing with the equipment, whether or not it was, you know, on a baseball team, you know, having one bat rather than twenty, or either having a little pickup game and finding a good stick to be your, you know, your baseball bat.  So those were things that, that, that, that we grew up with, you know.  And it probably, you know, helped to appreciate some other things, you know, better.  And the funny thing is that you would compete with outdated books, outdated equipment, and could still hold your own when you were in a situation where you had to show that you were just as good as maybe a white kid.  And you were just, all you were asking for was an opportunity to be able to compete.
Story_ID: 612075
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school [Wilkinson High School; Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I graduated from high school in 1969.
Speaker 1: And did you have hopes of going to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That was really not an option in my (laughter) in my family.  Almost all of my relatives had gone to, had gone to college.  And I never thought about--as I was growing up, it never entered my mind that I was not going to go to college.
Speaker 1: Where did you decide to go?
Speaker 2: I ended up going to Morehouse College in Atlanta, Georgia in 1969.
Speaker 1: How did you choo- how did you choose Morehouse?
Speaker 2: As I said earlier, I did fairly well in my, in, in, in my studies.  And there were a number of predominantly white institutions at the time who were looking for black students.  And I decided after Dr., Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated that I wanted to go to a predominantly black school [HBCU].  And when I saw Dr. Mays [Benjamin E. Mays] deliver his eulogy, Dr. King's eulogy at Morehouse College in Atlanta--and I learned all this stuff about Morehouse, I had never ever visited the campus before, but I learned all this stuff about some of their--you know, the fact that Dr. Martin Luther King, Martin Luther King had gone there.  They mentioned other people who had gone there, like [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett and others who I had read about, you know, in Ebony and, you know, read, read his book, 'Before the Mayflower' ['Before the Mayflower: A History of Black America,' Lerone Bennett, Jr.].  So, I decided that I wanted to go to Morehouse College just based on that.  And decided I would not go to these other, these other schools.  The first time I saw Morehouse was after I had accepted--that I had decided to go there.  And me and my roommate went there for a high school graduation present for a couple of days just to look at the college campus.  We had been used to looking at South Carolina State College [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], which kept well manicured grounds and had some air conditioning in the building.  And when we got to Morehouse, it was not exactly like South Carolina State College.  But I really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were your first sights?  What did you see when you got to Morehouse?
Speaker 2: Oh, I saw some grass that had not been cut.  I saw a dormitory that--the freshman dorms.  And it--let me put it like this.  My room at home was better than the freshman dorm.  But it wasn't the physical facilities or the manicure of the lawn or anything that was attracting me to Morehouse.  It was what I knew about Morehouse, and what it had meant in terms of the black struggle, in terms of people who had graduated from there and what they had built.  Morehouse provided you with the confidence that you would need to compete when you left there four or five years later, however long you chose to, you chose to stay.
Story_ID: 612076
Speaker 1: Now, I know Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] generally has a kind of initiation during the first week, freshman week.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you exposed to that initiation?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I don't know whether I called it an initia- initiation.  But it was freshmen week, where you were, for lack of a better word, indoctrinated with the Morehouse spirit, the Morehouse myth, and More- and everything else, in terms of the chapel.  And so, we were so--
Speaker 1: The Morehouse mystique.
Speaker 2: The Morehouse mystique, and it is a mystique.  And you would, you know, you would go to chapel, and you had a--I don't know what they called them.  But you had a big brother or somebody assigned to, you know, number of students.  And you would just go and do that.  So it was, it was--yeah, and being away from home for the first time and being around people, and seeing [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, who was a young state legislator at the time on campus, being introduced to him, knowing that he was a Morehouse man.  And you know so, it was a great thing.
Story_ID: 612077
Speaker 1: You were talking about your indoctrination into the Morehouse mystique.  What were some of those rituals you recall?
Speaker 2: I just remember going to, to chapel and listening to a lot of people talk about going to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and how--you know, look to your left and look to your right, you know, the first thing, you know, left, right; won't be there.  But, but, but, also just give you the sense that you were entering an institution that had a great history and a number of graduates, and that if you graduated from the place, you too were going to be great and make your mark on society.  One thing about Morehouse is, even 'til today, kids who graduate, even if they don't graduate at the top of their class, if they graduate as a C student, they still leave Morehouse with a lot of confidence that they can do whatever it is that they want to do.  And it's something that is unique to Morehouse in terms of the time and the efforts that people there on campus take with you.
Story_ID: 612078
Speaker 1: Were you required to attend chapel a couple days a week?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I don't remember how many days, but chapel was a requirement, and you would get in trouble if you did not go.  And I don't know what the trouble is because I went all the time.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the speakers who touched your life?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I remember, as a matter of fact I ran across an introduction that I did in chapel in around 1970 when I introduced Reverend Joe Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery].  And I ran into him at the Candle in the Dark ceremony [A Candle in the Dark] at, for Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] several months ago, and I mentioned to him that I ran across the introduction that I did for him in 1970.  And his introduction was very short, because he hadn't done much (laughter) by, by that time.  But I remember, you know, interacting with him as a speaker, with Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], you know, and as a speaker with Ralph Abernath- Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy], you know, at the time, because they all would come to Morehouse.  I remember when Shirley Chisholm was running for president in 1972 I think it was, and she came to campus.  One thing about being a part of the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] at the time is that most leaders would come through at some time of another.  And since you had the five or six African American schools there located together, they would end up speaking on one of the college campuses.  So if you were interested in that type of activity, you could actually go and interact and sometimes even meet these people.
Story_ID: 612079
Speaker 1: Did Maynard Jackson ever come back to speak?
Speaker 2: Yes, Maynard came back to speak--Maynard Jackson, Howard Thurman.  And I would, you know, I would see, you know Maynard Jackson, and actually I worked and handed, handed out leaflets and stuff during, during his campaign.  So, I remember that very well.
Speaker 1: Who was mayor in Atlanta [Georgia] during your tenure at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: During my tenure I think it was Sam Massell I believe.  I can't remember his last name.
Speaker 1: And, and Maynard was running?
Speaker 2: And Maynard was running at the time and, you know, and was elected.  I think I have a picture back there with Maynard when he was--during his first term as mayor.
Speaker 1: Was that a proud moment for students of Morehouse, to have one of their own become mayor?
Speaker 2: It was a very proud moment at, at Morehouse to have a Morehouse man as, as, as the mayor.  And then we were also proud of other mayors that were getting elected around the country.  Because again, it was a voice that we did not have at the time that you know, now getting into city halls and actually being able to make the laws, or at least impact the laws that were going to have, have an impact on your life, and the lives of your children.
Story_ID: 612080
Speaker 1: Do you remember who the president of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] was at this time?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The president of Morehouse was Hugh Gloster.  Hugh Gloster was the president of Morehouse during my tenure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A real legend, Hugh Gloster.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And he came, came right after, right after the other legend, Dr. Ben E. Mays [Benjamin E. Mays].  So (unclear)--
Speaker 1: What do you remember about--you talked a little bit about Benjamin Mays.  But Hugh Gloster, what kind of president was he?  And what do you recall?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I remember him being compared a lot to Dr. Mays, since Dr. Mays had been there for so long.  And Hugh Gloster was more of a quiet man.  I remember him walking around campus.  He t- he spoke very slowly.  He did not have the same type of sayings as Dr. Mays, but he was very, very well respected, you know, around Morehouse.  But it's all--was such a difficult job to come right after Dr. Benjamin Mays.
Speaker 1: What was Benjamin Mays' legacy at Morehouse?
Speaker 2: Benjamin Mays' legacy was that he trained, and he was a great philosopher.  And every Morehouse man now talks about the impact that Benjamin Mays had on their lives, even if they were not there during that period of time.  Most Morehouse men have the 'Quotable Quotes' ['Quotable Quotes of Benjamin E. Mays'] by Dr. Mays, and they often refer back to him.  They know that he was the mentor to, to Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and they know that he inspired these men who graduated from Morehouse to go further and do, do great things.
Story_ID: 612081
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your required reading at the time?  Were you required to read 'The Mis-Education of the Negro' [Carter G. Woodson]?
Speaker 2: We were required to read that.  We were required to lead--read 'Before the Mayflower' ['Before the Mayflower: A History of Black America,' Lerone Bennett, Jr.].  We were required to r- to read, you know, 'Black Like Me' [John Howard Griffin].  Most of the books during that period of time we had basically had a long list to read, you know, Richard Wright's books--so that you could (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ralph Ellison?
Speaker 2: Right, Ralph Ellison, so that we would know about, you know, their lives and things that they did.  And of course [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett you know came down and spoke a few times, you know, on the college campus.  And again, you were meeting people and interacting with people that you'd only read about before.  So Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] was (unclear) a great you know place for it.
Speaker 1: And you were talking about your reading list.  Also, the Black Arts Movement, popular at this time.  Was that considered to be radical, works by [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez, and [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Amiri Baraka [LeRoi Jones]?
Speaker 2: They--at the time they, you know, they were.
Story_ID: 612082
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you reading these people, and listening?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of it was--I was reading, you know, a lot of things, you know, back then, and you know, in between, you know, doing the social stuff at Morehouse and just (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was some of the social stuff?  Did you belong to a fraternity?
Speaker 2: I did belong to a fraternity.  I--in 1970, I pledged Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], Alpha Rho Chapter at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: That is a famous chapter, Alpha Rho.
Speaker 2: It is a very famous chapter.
Speaker 1: Did Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] pledge?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was an Alpha also.
Speaker 1: Alpha Rho?
Speaker 2: Alpha Rho--I think Alpha Rho, yes.  And--
Speaker 1: What do you recall from your fraternity days?
Speaker 2: Having a lot of fun (laughter).  I recall, you know, having a party to go to every weekend.  I was the vice president of my chapter, so I was responsible for being sure that our queens got to the parties.  And I did have a car at the time.
Speaker 1: Because you had homecoming queens?
Speaker 2: We had homecoming queens who were a part of the, you know, the Alpha court (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Alpha court.
Speaker 2: And most of them came from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].
Story_ID: 612083
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, did you have a lot of interaction with Spelman women?
Speaker 2: I did.  I probably had more interaction with Spelman women, at least the f- my first year at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] than most Morehouse men.  And that was because when you enter Morehouse you take a number of placement exams, you know, reading, math, and I forget the others.  And I took these exams, and I placed out of a number of courses (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Core.
Speaker 2: And as a result, I had free time on my schedule.  And after looking at the schedule, there were courses at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] that they did not offer at Morehouse.  So, I decided to take my first nine year- nine hours of my fresh- freshman year at Spelman.  So, I actually took more courses at Spelman my freshman year than I took at Morehouse, so I got to know a lot of people at Spelman.  But anyway, with Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] with all the colleges there, you could take classes on each one of the campuses, whether it was Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], or Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], or Spelman.
Speaker 1: What was your impression of Spelman compared to, you know, the mystique associated with Morehouse?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) At the time the campus looked very nice.  The Spelman--the people who were students at Spelman, they appeared to be very, very studious.  I had, I had all positive impressions of Spelman (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were focusing simply on the intelligence of the women (laughter).
Speaker 2: On the intelligence, on the studies.  Making sure I got my work and all like that.  But, no, yeah, I was happy to have the opportunity to be able to know people at Spelman and Morehouse.
Story_ID: 612084
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you know Sam Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson], he's a 1972 Morehouse grad, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond who was a 1971 Morehouse grad?
Speaker 2: Okay, I did--at the time I did not know Julian Bond.  I did know Sam Jackson a little bit, but we were not in the same circle.  I would go watch Sam Jackson perform in plays, but I did not know him, you know, very well.  But he--
Speaker 1: What do you remember seeing?  You know, did you see some of the plays?  Do you remember specifically?
Speaker 2: I did see some of the plays, I don't recall the names right now, but I did see a number of the plays that he participated in.  And I actually may have some pictures at home of different plays that he participated in back in, back in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Did he show promise back then?
Speaker 2: We thought that he was a very good actor.  Little did we know that he was going to be the Sam Jackson, you know, of today.  We didn't know it at the time, but he was really into participating in the plays, and he was very good at it.  But who knew that he was going to be in Hollywood (laughter).
Speaker 1: What about Calvin Butts [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Calvin O. Butts]?
Speaker 2: Calvin Butts, I did know him at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], he was a year behind me.  He was in a different fraternity I recall; I think he was in--I think he was a Que [sic. Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  And I did not know that he was going to end up being, being a minister, but I do talk to him from time to time, and have seen him and have heard him preach.  He actually preached here in Washington [D.C.] last year at the Morehouse Luncheon.
Story_ID: 612085
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, speaking of preachers, you come from a family of ministers.  Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] you had to go to chapel a couple of days a week.  Why is it that you veered off and went in a legal path, as opposed to--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --religion?
Speaker 2: I did grow up with, with a family of ministers where every man in my family--all of my uncles were ministers.  My father [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.] was a minister, my grandfather [Francis G.S. Everett, Sr.] was a minister.  And that's probably why I'm not a minister, because I wanted to do something different.  And I knew what lawyers were doing in terms of helping, you know, African Americans at the time, you know, learning the law and learning the legal profession.  And I just wanted to do something--and I majored in history at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], and really thought about writing, you know, black history books, because not many of the books at the time were talking about the accomplishments of African Americans.  However, when I got to be a senior in college, reality kind of set in.  And I thought that, you know, probably nobody would buy my books, and I needed some additional education.  So, that's when I decided I would go to law school.  And I remember going back to South Carolina and having a conversation with my [paternal] grandmother [Susie Wright Everett], telling her that I was going to go, going to go to law school.  And I remember what she said.  She said, "Law school?  So, you are going to be a liar?"  (Laughter) "You're going to go to law school?"  And I explained to her what I thought, you know, lawyers, lawyers did.  And she wasn't really pressing me to be a, be a minister, but I think everybody thought that I was going to be a minister, having grown up in the church, you know, participating in church activities, being in church all the time.
Story_ID: 612086
Speaker 1: But I decided (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you belong to clubs on campus that were associated either with religion or the law?  What kind of clubs did you belong to?
Speaker 1: I don't think that I--I was a member of the political science club.  I was, you know, the editor, feature editor of the Maroon Tiger, which was the school newspaper, first starting out as the assistant feature editor.  I held--I was a class officer.  I had participated in the Spanish club and then, of course, in the fraternity, Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity.  So, those are the activities that I remember, I remember doing at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Do you remember the environment at Morehouse before you graduate and go on to Duke [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina]?  Was it a political environment or was it--I know it was highly social as well.
Speaker 1: It was social, but it was also very political, because we had political leaders who would come in a lot.  Because again, the Civil Rights Movement was very active in Atlanta [Georgia].  Atlanta was a place where--of course, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] lived there when he was living.  And then, you know, we had a lot of interaction with, you know, Ralph Abernathy, Hosea Williams.  Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] came down and spoke to the student body.  And he--at the end of our freshman year, that was 1970, was when a lot of African Americans were taking over buildings at predominantly white schools at, you know, at Duke, at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], demanding more, you know, black pro- history programs, more black studies (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black studies?
Speaker 1: More black studies programs.  And there were a number of students at Morehouse and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] at the time who got together and said that we needed to support the students at these schools.  So someone knew Reverend Jesse Jackson, and they called Reverend Jesse Jackson and we had a rally and a, and a big march.  And as a result, we did not have to take final exams.  Exams were you had to prepare a paper for most of your classes at the end of the freshman year.  So the community was very active, but it was active in a different kind of way because you were in a predominantly black environment.  So, you could choose to be as black as you wanted to be on the campus, whereas on the predominantly white college campuses, you know, folks had to wear--or, not had to.  But, you know, in terms of, you know, the Afros and dashikis and what not, it was a part of your calling card.  So you could wear a dashiki at Morehouse or not, short hair or not, and nobody questioned your loyalty to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was that popular, people going back to their roots, Afros and braids?
Speaker 1: Very, very popular.  We, we, we, most of us had Afros.  I had a small Afro, because my hair would grow a certain height and then it would curl back in.  (Laughter) So, so I could not, I could not have a big Afro.  But no, it was, it was what we did.  And most of our--I mean would have our homecoming activities, and the theme was around, you know, going back to your roots in Africa.  And those were the types of things that we wore.
Speaker 2: Was there any tension around complexion at some--Spelman and Morehouse at that time, colorism?
Speaker 1: There was a lot of talk about that.  And when I say a lot of talk, not much talk.  There were some fraternities who were accused of only having people of a certain complexion.  So, there was, there was dialogue about that.
Speaker 2: But nothing major, nothing that stands out?
Speaker 1: Nothing stands--nothing that stands out that I remember, other than, you know, certain fraternities being accused of having a bias toward light complexion or long hair.  But nothing that didn't end in a, in a friendly discussion or a heavy dialogue.
Story_ID: 612087
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I graduated from Morehouse in 1973.
Speaker 1: And did you go immediately to Duke law school [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I did.  I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you choose Duke?
Speaker 2: Oh, I chose Duke--I applied to a number of schools.  And I decided in the end, after a conversation with my father [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.], that Duke was an up and coming law school.  It was about four hours away from my hometown [Orangeburg] in South Carolina.  It was a smaller school at the time; there were only 150 people in each class.  Another school that I considered at the time was the University of Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia], and University of Virginia had about 260 people in each class.  And I thought at the time that still--that since Morehouse was a smaller school, I wanted to be known by my name rather than a number.  So, my thought being, after talking to my father I decided that I would go to Duke, which was a national school.  I did not know where I wanted to practice at the time.  The University of South Carolina [University of South Carolina School of Law, Columbia, South Carolina] made a strong run at me to come to the University of South Carolina.  But I thought if I had gone to University of South Carolina that I was limiting myself since it was a regional school, and if I wanted to practice somewhere else, I wanted to have a school that had a national reputation.  And Duke fit the bill for me at the time in 19- 1973.
Speaker 1: Well, one thing we didn't talk about, and that is your achievement at Morehouse, your academic achievement.  You were Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society]?
Speaker 2: I did okay at Morehouse, and I was inducted into Phi Beta Kappa.  And (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I think that's more than okay.
Speaker 2: No, I did okay.  And I also was a member of the history club, and was the president of that for a little while.  So it was, it was a great achievement for me to be inducted into Phi Beta Kappa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is partly why you were so sought after by these law schools?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I did have, I was--I did have good grades at Morehouse, and had a good track record in terms of the activities that I was involved in.  I was a fairly well rounded individual.  And at the time, again, you know, many schools were seeking, you know, African Americans who, you know, had done, had done well.
Story_ID: 612088
Speaker 1: So, what are your first memories of Duke University law school [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: My first memories of Duke law school--(laughter) and you mentioned the Phi Beta Kappa thing [Phi Beta Kappa Society]--was they sent out a little book before you go, with all the bios--short, brief, bios of everybody in your class.  And you flipped the pages and you said, almost everybody is Phi Beta Kappa (laughter).  So, how are you going to distinguish yourself?  Because nobody there has gotten basically B's and C's before.  And then you would think that at law school, somebody's going to get a B or a C for the first time.  So, my first, and my first memory, too, was there being very few people who looked like me when we went to the orientation.  And again, having been in an all-black environment throughout elementary school [Elloree Training School, Elloree, South Carolina], high school [Wilkinson High School; Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina], and Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], this was my first time in a predominantly white environment.  So getting used to the different color eyes, the different color hair.  And you know, I found everybody to be extremely nice because to a lot of people there, it was almost like a social experiment, too, because they had not been around any African Americans.  I found myself getting invited to a lot of people's houses or apartments for, for dinner or social activities.
Speaker 1: Tell me about one of those experiences.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) One that stands out in my mind is I got invited--the fellow was, was a Republican, and they had a Republican chapter on campus.  And he and his wife invited me and my wife at the time--actually my girlfriend then, she wasn't my wife then (laughter)--my--to his--
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Gwendolyn Harris Everett.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And you went on obviously to marry her?
Speaker 2: Yeah, went on to marry, and she was a Spelman graduate [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  But I remember going to Rick's [ph.] house, which was a, a, a mobile home.  And this was funny.  And he probably wouldn't remember this.  But I walked in and I said, "Oh, this is an extremely nice trailer."  And his wife said, "This is not a trailer.  This is a mobile home."  And she immediately kind of corrected me, and I felt a little, a little embarrassed.  But we, we just had just an interesting discussion at dinner, nothing political.  But I think, again, a number of my classmates again had not been exposed or had not been around African Americans before.  And I--and one thing that I found, even in my life today, is I enjoy being around peoples whose views are different than mine, not because I agree with their views, but I think it helps you grow as a person to learn why somebody thinks the way that they think, and to have these, these discussions.  So you know, I, so I developed friends who were to the left of me, friends who were to the right of me, and friends who thought like I did.  So, it was just, it was just, it was an in- I had an interesting experience at law school.
Speaker 1: So there were roughly 150 students in your class?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How many of those were African American, and how many were women?
Speaker 2: There were, there were ten African Americans, which is the largest number of African Americans ever to attend Duke law school at one time.  And of the numb- of the women, there were one, two, let's see, one, two, three--five.  I think it was about five and five, about five and five.  I actually brought a picture to show you of them (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: You said five and five?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think there were five women and five men.  If I named them, I probably could tell you.  I can name them, I think.
Speaker 1: Oh, so the black students were split by gender?  Five men and five women?
Speaker 2: I think that's right.  And I, and I--
Speaker 1: Were there many white women as well at the law school?
Speaker 2: At the time I was there, I think there were--it was somewhere between--the total women population was probably right around 20 to 25 percent, maybe about 20 percent, about 20 percent.  But we had--I think it was, was, was five and five.  If I name them, I probably could--
Story_ID: 612089
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you active in any groups on campus like BALSA [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was very active in BALSA.  I think I was the president of BALSA one year.
Speaker 1: What kinds of activities did you do?
Speaker 2: We mainly invited speakers in, you know, speakers who were judges or who had kind of done things on a monthly basis.
Speaker 1: Do you remember who came to campus?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember Judge Crockett from Detroit [Michigan], George Crockett [George Crockett, Jr.] coming to campus.  I remember [HistoryMaker] Julius Chambers from, you know, from Charlotte [North Carolina] who had the civil rights firm.  And we ended up actually naming the Boston [Massachusetts] chapter after George Crockett when, when, when I was there, the judge in Detroit.  And we would just invite other--and we would invite some former graduates back who had gone on to do good things, or people who would just come back and tell us what it's like to be in law school, and how you survive and how you get out.
Speaker 1: What classes did you take?
Speaker 2: There were the standard, standard classes that all first year law students had to take: contracts, constitutional law, civil procedure, criminal law, property and legal writing.  Those were the six courses, and I'm surprised that I remember them.  (Laughter) But those were the six courses that you had to take during your first year.
Speaker 1: How did you do?
Speaker 2: I did okay.  I was worried about how I was going to do, because at the time, at Duke you went a whole year without getting a grade.  So, your, your whole career (laughter) was determined by your final exam.  So, you would go through the whole year.  You would study and you had no idea how you were, how you were doing in law school.  So--
Speaker 1: Tell me about the Socratic Method.  Was that a shock to your system?
Speaker 2: It was a shock to my system.  And you waited in great anticipation for your turn.  Because they brought, they--each professor had a seating chart.  So, most of the time, you were seated in alphabetical order.  So you had an idea when you were going to be up for--and, a lot of times the professor would stay on you the whole, the entire class.
Speaker 1: Tell me about a specific professor, and your experience.
Speaker 2: Professor George Christie [George C. Christie], who was my torts professor, he was very smart, but very hard.  He was particularly hard on I think the women and the African Americans.  But you knew when you--at least he was not like another professor I had, who would a lot of times skip over the African American students when it got to be--
Speaker 1: Do you remember who that was?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember who that was.  That was Professor Pascal [Robert A. Pascal], who was the civil procedure professor, who now hangs on the wall at Duke law school [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] because he's dead.  But, but I--
Speaker 1: Do you remember any specific incidents with him?
Speaker 2: No.  They, they were more subtle kinds of things, just subtle things, but nothing just outright, other than, you know, other than skipping over you.  But, but, really, in terms of the Socratic Method, and going in alphabetical order, the waiting and anticipation was almost worse than being called upon.  Because again, you're sitting with people who all have done well at their respective schools, have never really been embarrassed by being called upon.  And you're just hoping that if you did (laughter) did your preparations well, that you, you would not embarrass yourself, and you would be able to answer the questions.  But invariably, there would be something that you would have to kind of think about and give an answer.
Story_ID: 612090
Speaker 1: Well, a very prominent person is a graduate of Duke law school [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina], President Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon].  At the time you were there, there was a lot going on in terms of a political election.  What do you recall about Richard Nixon at that time?
Speaker 2: I recall that at Duke at the time we had a very active Republican student movement on campus.  I just remember him sitting out in front of the library with different leaflets and pamphlets to hand out.  But the incident that I remember the most surrounding President Nixon is as they were going through Watergate, and he--I'm sorry, you were about to say something?  As they were going through Watergate, we had a portrait of President Nixon that hung in the moot courtroom at Duke law school.  It was the only portrait that hung, it hung right behind the judge's bench.  And one night that portrait disappeared during the height of the controversy in Washington [D.C.].  They called in the Durham police [Durham Police Department], the North Carolina bureau of investigation [North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation] to find this picture, because it was a valuable picture at the time because President Nixon had actually sat for the picture.  They looked for it for about two days, and they eventually found the portrait in the moot courtroom behind the suspended ceiling.  Someone had moved it, and that portrait never hung in the law school again; it went into the vault at Duke.  Now, there was some discussion a few years ago about bringing it back out, and I don't know what happened as to whether or not they brought, brought it out.  But also at that time there was a very heated discussion amongst the Duke faculty about the Richard Nixon papers, as to where the papers would go upon his departure as president.  And the faculty at Duke, after a great debate, voted that they did not want Ni- Richard Nixon's pictures--papers at, at Duke.  So--
Speaker 1: Was a moment of disgrace for the law school?
Speaker 2: Well, it was the law school's only president, so they would talk about the fact that, unlike University of Virginia [University of Virginia School of Law, Charlottesville, Virginia] that had tons of presidents, that Nixon was--but the faculty and the school was embarrassed by what had occurred in Washington.  Now fast forward to today, I think that they regret that they did not vote to accept Richard Nixon's papers because Richard Nixon could have decided to put them someplace else.  But I think that, you know, in a conversation I had with, you know, was Governor Sanford [Terry Sanford] who was the president at the time, he regrets that Duke did not see fit to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 612091
Speaker 1: So that's the end of his presidency.  So, the beginning--you were starting to talk about the beginning of Nixon's role as president of the United States.  What was that energy like?  What was that excitement like on campus?
Speaker 2: Well, I was not at Duke [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] at that time.  I was at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] during the beginning of his presidency.  So, I was only at Duke as a first year student toward, toward the end.  So, I don't really have a feel for the energy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, Watergate started?
Speaker 2: In '72 [1972], '72 [1972] and I enrolled in Duke in '73 [1973].  And I think Nixon resigned in '74 [1974], if I remember correctly.
Speaker 1: So, the entire discussion at Duke at that time was the debate and the negative--
Speaker 2: Right, the debate.  You know, what--you know, what did Richard Nixon know?  When did he know it, and what happened to the--you know, what happened to the tapes?  Who did he--what was the connection of these people that broke into Watergate [Watergate Complex; Watergate Hotel, Washington, D.C.]?  You know, but a lot of discussion was around, you know, the missing--the seventeen minute gap on the tapes.
Speaker 1: What were the leaflets?  You said a lot of the Republican students were handing out leaflets.
Speaker 2: Oh, mainly campaign leaflets for particular Republican candidates, you know, when Nixon was up for re-election, because remember he had just gotten re-elected, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, so that's what I wanted to hear more about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.  He just gotten elected, and he was up for re-election, you know, where he kind of won by a landslide.  But there was great activity on campus in terms--'cause this was before Watergate.  Before--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --they knew that there was a--
Speaker 1: Right, that's what I wanted to hear about.
Speaker 2: --that there was a Watergate.  So, there was a fairly active Republican chapter on campus at the law school.  So there were, you know, a lot of discussions and debates around campus about Nixon and the presidency, and McGovern [George McGovern] and who--other people that were running.  And some people on campus would engage in those discussions, and some did not, because the political discussions get to be very personal and very heated.  And you're there as a law student trying to, to, you know, to graduate and not lose friends.  But it was just--and you knew who the activists were in terms of the Republican Party.  The Republican Party actually was a lot more vocal on campus and a lot more visible than, than the Democratic Party in North Carolina at the time.
Story_ID: 612092
Speaker 1: Do you remember Kenneth Starr?  He may have been leaving when you were starting?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I don't remember him as a law student, but I, you know, have come in contact with him in later years.
Speaker 1: In Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: In Washington.  And--
Speaker 1: What can you tell me about Ken Starr?
Speaker 2: Well, Ken Starr and I served on the Duke board of visitors at the same time.  So, we'd be down at the law school for different activities.  And Ken Starr, you know, spoke at a couple of alumni events.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of--excuse me, what kind of person is he?
Speaker 2: He's interesting, very smart person, very conservative.  But from a social standpoint, as long you don't talk politics, if you don't agree with his politics, he is a decent person.  I've had a number of conversations, you know, with him about, you know, on different subjects.  So, but, but, he is a true believer in what he believes in, you know, in terms of, you know, more conservative principles.
Speaker 1: Are there any other graduates of Duke law [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] who went on to great success, who were in school with you?
Speaker 2: There are many graduates that have gone on to great success, and you are challenging me to name them (laughter) to name them now.  I mean I do stay in contact with, you know, the African American graduates who were with me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were some of the people in your cohort?
Speaker 2: Barbara Arnwine [Barbara R. Arnwine], who is head of the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights [Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law], where she is probably, and I told her this when I had lunch with her recently, that she is probably one of the few people in my class who said back then what she wanted to do and stuck with it, in terms of she wanted to be a civil rights lawyer.  So, she headed up the lawyers' committee on civil rights after working for Legal Aid [Legal Service of North Carolina, Durham, North Carolina] for a long period of time.  Then another classmate of mine, Johnnie Mask heads up legal aid in the state of, in the State of New Jersey.  And then there's Yvonne Mims [Yvonne Mims Evans] who is a judge, a district court judge in Charlotte, North Carolina.  And then there's Paul Bland who is a lawyer in private practice in Petersburg [Virginia].  And there is Lonzy, Lonzy Edwards, who just recently won a seat on the Macon, Georgia city council [Macon City Council], and he is the pastor of one of the biggest Baptist churches in, in Macon [Mt. Moriah Missionary Baptist Church, Macon, Georgia].  And Marian Gervay [ph.], who works at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] in a program that she heads, and I'm kind of forgetting the name of the program there.  And who did I, who did I miss?
Speaker 1: So, the black students remained pretty close?
Speaker 2: Yes, they--we did.  And we would, we would do things together.  And a lot of folks depend on me to kind of tell them what everybody else is doing and, you know, and keeping together.  You know, half of them attended my fiftieth birthday party, so that was good.  And then there's Martina Bradford, who used to head the office here at Lucent Technology [Lucent Technologies, Inc.], and now works for the majority leader in the [U.S.] Senate, Senator Reid [Harry Reid].  So, I, I have--and then there's one of the ten who died about four years ago, Ken Marshall [ph.], who worked in, worked in Atlanta [Georgia] with the DA's office [district attorney's office].  So, that's--I think that's our, that's our crew.
Story_ID: 612093
Speaker 1: Are there other highlights--
Speaker 2: At (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) from Duke?
Speaker 2: At Duke law [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina]?  You know, I am a people person, so I think that the, you know, just, just being able to meet, associate, be with people from all around the country who later went on to be different things, I think it was a pretty, it was a pretty good environment, you know, for the time, just dealing with, you know, with the issues that you would, you know, you would deal with.
Speaker 1: So, no major racial conflict?
Speaker 2: Not that I can, not that I can recall.  I mean, I don't, I don't recall any kind of protests.  You know some of my classmates can probably remember better than me, or would remind me of something that happened.  But I don't remember any, any major protests.
Speaker 1: Did you have any affiliation with North Carolina Mutual [North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, Durham, North Carolina] or any of the leaders there?
Speaker 2: I knew a couple of the leaders there because a fellow who went to school with me, two guys who went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] with me.  A fellow by the name of Kennedy [William Kennedy III], his father [William Kennedy, Jr.] was the president, or the assistant president at Mutual.  And then Maceo Sloan [Maceo K. Sloan] was at Morehouse with me, and had a big involvement, his family had a big involvement with North Carolina Mutual.  So I think I went there one time for a lunch, or something along those lines.
Speaker 1: What do you remember?
Speaker 2: Just going into this building, nice building, tall high rise building in Durham, North Carolina where there were people that looked like me who were in very high positions in terms of, you know, the president's office and things along those lines.  And I thought it was a very nice--I mean as a kid thought it was a very nice building at the time, and that black folks actually owned this eight-story building, or whatever height it was at the time.  So, I had, had good memories there.
Story_ID: 612094
Speaker 1: When did you graduate from Duke [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I graduated from Duke in 1976.
Speaker 1: And what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I went and worked at the North Carolina Department of Labor as administrative assistant for legal affairs.  OSHA [Occupational Safety and Health Administration] at the time was a new law in terms of safety violations.  So I did a lot of administrative hearings, for lack of a better word, prosecuting people for violating different OSHA standards.  And we stayed in North Carolina because my wife [Gwendolyn Harris Everett] was doing some graduate work at University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill [Chapel Hill, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: What year did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got married in, at the end of my first year of law school.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: That was 1974.  I got married in June of '74 [1974] in between, in--during the summer after my first year of law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I got married very young.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Any--what were some of your experiences with the North Carolina Department of Labor?
Speaker 2: Mainly looking at safety violations and seeing how different companies put their employees in danger.
Speaker 1: Which companies did you focus upon?
Speaker 2: All of the corporations in North Carolina.  I don't remember specific companies in terms of--you know, we would have violations for unsafe equipment, where people would get their, you know, fingers cut or something like that.  And we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember any of the incidents?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember one case where we cited someone.  There was a building, it could have been the civic center [Raleigh Convention Center], being built in Raleigh [North Carolina].  And they had some boulders or something that they were unloading, and because of the way they were loaded, they were loaded incorrectly, and when they removed the chain this equipment came sliding off, and a worker was killed.  And the company was cited for the unsafe way in which they, which they stacked the stuff on the, on the, on the truck.  I also remember OSHA had a rule or regulation at the time--there were a number of migrant farmworkers in the State of North Carolina, and you had to have portable potty johns in the fields at certain intervals.  And [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis came to the State of North Carolina to protest the unfair treatment of migrant farmworkers, and to say that the potty johns weren't located--.  And I remember standing with the commissioner of labor at the time with Angela Davis--a picture that ended up in the paper at the time, not identifying me by name, but you know, talking about lawyer negotiating the potty john, you know, toilets in the, in the field.  And that was one picture that brought me to Senator Hollings' [Ernest Hollings] attention, which I can tell you about, tell you about later (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you win those cases?
Speaker 2: We--I think what we did, if I remember correctly, is we made sure that the regulation was being enforced.  I think, and what Ms. Davis was saying at the time was that we were ignoring that regulation, and we were not requiring people--not requiring the potty johns in the, in the fields for the migrant farmworkers.
Speaker 1: And the case of the worker who was crushed?
Speaker 2: Yes, that--the company was given a very significant fine at the time, and I don't remember the name of the company.
Speaker 1: How were you treated as an African American attorney?
Speaker 2: I was treated, you know, fairly, fairly well.  And a lot of that depends upon the people that you are working with at the time, and how enlightened (laughter) they were back then.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your colleagues in the department?
Speaker 2: There was the commissioner of labor, T. Avery Nye [T. Avery Nye, Jr.].  I forget what his chief of staff, his name was.  There was a fellow named Jack Cozort, C-O-Z-O-R-T.  And those are the people that I remember the most, because I worked a lot with Jack Cozort there at the department of labor.  And I only, I only stayed there nine or ten months before I came to Washington [D.C.].
Story_ID: 612095
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how did you make that move?
Speaker 2: Well, I was sitting in my apartment one night in, in Washington [sic.], and my--and I got a phone call.  And the phone call was from a fellow by the name of Michael Copps, who was Senator Hollings' chief of staff, who is now a commissioner at the Federal Communications Commission [FCC] today.  And he called, and the conversation was brief.  He identified himself, said that Senator Hollings [Ernest Hollings] had heard about me, and that he had a position in his office available as a legislative assistant.  He said that he could not pay my way to Washington [D.C.], but I were ever in Washington, please come by and talk to him, he would like to talk to me.  I didn't know the background of any of this at the time, but I found out later, you know, how I came to his attention.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was in 1977, 1977, in early 1977 because I ended up working, starting to work for Hollings in March of '77 [1977].  So this was probably around, around January, late January of 1977.
Speaker 1: And what was your job title?
Speaker 2: When I came to work for Senator Hollings?  Legislative assistant.  So, I actually came up and I interviewed with him a couple of weeks later on a Friday.  And on Monday, I got a call back from Mike Copps saying that he wanted to, you know, offer me the job, and that's how I came.  I had no desire at the time to spend a lot of time in Washington, because I thought that having grown up in the South and going to school in the South, I actually thought at the time that Washington was too far north.  So, I said I would come up here for a couple of years and then go back and settle in one of the southern, one of the southern states.  As a result of me doing this, my wife [Gwendolyn Harris Everett] was in the middle of a program, a master's program at the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina].  So, she actually came up here to finish that work after the birth of our son because I learned the first week that I was on the job here in Washington that she was expecting a baby.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: 'Cause she stayed down in North Carolina to finish up her last five weeks of, of class.  So, I would go to North Carolina on the weekend.  I was supposed to finding us a place to live here.
Speaker 1: And she was getting a master's [degree] in?
Speaker 2: In art history.
Speaker 1: And when was your son born?
Speaker 2: My son was born October 17, 1977.  So, about six (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me his name.
Speaker 2: His name is Jason Gordon, G-O-R-D-O-N, Everett [Jason Everett].  Gordon, after my father [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.].
Story_ID: 612096
Speaker 1: And so you come to Washington, D.C.  What's your first impression of this town?
Speaker 2: I was very excited about being here, because I was a news junkie and would watch TV all the time.  And all the people that I saw on TV more or less, at some point in my life I would see them walking around the halls of Congress [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.], whether they were there to testify or--.  What I remember the first day that I was on the job running into Hubert Humphrey, who at the time was very ill, he was dying of cancer.  So he did not look like--I had met Hubert Humphrey before at, at an event in Atlanta [Georgia].  So, he did not look himself; he was very, very frail.  And seeing him and then walking down and then seeing Senator Kennedy for the first time--Senator Teddy Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] for the first time.  So it was an air of excitement, being, saying that you are working--and again, on the [U.S.] Senate side there were very few African Americans in professional jobs at the time.  And there aren't that many more (laughter) today.
Speaker 1: That's funny.  We were talking to another HistoryMaker, Imagene Stewart [HistoryMaker Bishop Imagene Stewart]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --house of Imagene, who she said when she first got to Washington one of the first people she met, Humphrey as well.
Speaker 2: That is funny.  I mean I just, you know, I saw him.  And he didn't, he didn't know me, you know, and I didn't know him.  So other than just, you know, like the other thousands of people that he shakes the hand of.  But he died a few months later, I forget exactly, exactly when.  But, but again, just kind of--it's just the whole air of excitement, in terms of being around and about, and--
Story_ID: 612097
Speaker 1: Now what did you think of Senator Hollings' [Ernest Hollings] background?  This was a man who has roots in the Deep South, who was in favor of flying the Confederate flag, and things like that.  Were you aware of his--
Speaker 2: Now, I'm not, I'm not sure that he was in favor of flying the Confederate flag.  I'm unaware of that, but if you say that.
Speaker 1: Well, the 19--in the early--in the late 1950s--
Speaker 2: Okay, well--
Speaker 1: --or early 1960s.
Speaker 2: Well, okay, way, way, way back.  Because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But he changed, he changed his political philosophies over the years, and became much more accepting of diversity over the years.  But were you aware of some of his early background?
Speaker 2: Well I, I had, Senator Hollings had spoke at my high school [Wilkinson High School; Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School, Orangeburg, South Carolina].  I did not know him, but he spoke at my high school in 1968, and he was just there as a speaker.  And I remember at that time there was one student who got up and started yelling at him, in terms of something that he had done.  And I remember, we thinking that that was the first time that a senator had come to our high school, and that his treatment that he got was a little different.  So--but he handled himself very well.  And I knew about Senator Hollings' tour that he had done on hunger, and had read his book on hunger ['The Case Against Hunger: A Demand for National Policy,' Ernest F. Hollings] with a number of the civil rights leaders like I. DeQuincey Newman, who had been the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], to go around in--I forget the name of that county now.  I think it's Colleton County, South Carolina, where there were extremely poor people.  And as a result of his tour on hunger, he had worked with Senator Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] to get the WIC program, Women, Infants and Children feeding program, because he had seen, you know, what that kind of stuff does to, does to babies and what not.  I knew that he was the one who led the successful integration of Clemson University [Clemson Agricultural College of South Carolina; Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina] when Harvey Gantt was the first student there.  That's when other governors were standing in the schoolhouse doors, whether it was in Alabama or Mississippi.  And Clemson University was one of the first southern schools to be successfully integrated without all of the violence and stuff associated with it.
Speaker 1: But I wonder what changed his stance?  Because early on in his career he was actually in favor of racial segregation in the schools, and then, and then shifted.
Speaker 2: Well, I think that when you look at a lot of your southern politicians, what changes is the fact that there was a Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], that there were more people who had a voice, who were voting.  And you look at the political realities.  I think they came in contact with, you know, with more people of diverse backgrounds who could talk to them about it.  Even when there was segregation, Senator Hollings was enlightened enough to--I think it was in 1949 to offer the first anti lynching bill in South Carolina, because lynching was a thing that was going on on a fairly regular basis.  And--
Speaker 1: Do you have recollections from your childhood of lynchings (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't have recollection of lynchings, other than I would hear about them or I would, you know, read or see something, you know, in a book, you know, I mean mainly not any mainstream white publications, but stuff like Jet and Ebony.  Because it was such a violent thing, it was something that your parents would kind of shelter you from, to see somebody dangling from, from a tree, or to see people smiling while somebody is being, being lynched.  But I understand, you know, back in '49 [1949], for someone to even do that as a white politician--
Speaker 1: In the South.
Speaker 2: --in the South, it was detrimental to their political wellbeing.  And I did know that Senator Hollings in 1956 was one of the people from, one of the few people from the South who supported John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] in his first presidential run, because the Kennedys were not popular people in the South at the time.  So, he did take some bold stances--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Story_ID: 612098
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that what sort of attracted you to his--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --office?
Speaker 2: No, to--you know, to his office, again, they called me.  I was very much of a political junkie, interested in politics.  I had had a letter that I had written to Senator Hollings [Ernest Hollings] in 19--around 1969, 1970 asking to be an intern in his office.  And he sent me back a nice rejection letter which I held on to, not knowing that seven years later I would actually be a member of his, of his staff.  So--
Speaker 1: So, he was pretty embracing of diversity by the time you made your way to his cabinet?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  At the time, he had one African American staffer.  He had never had a black lawyer on his staff, so I was the first black lawyer on his staff in 1977.  There was a woman working with him by name of Diane Fields [ph.], who did loan and grant work for him.  She was a professional staffer, but she would work to be sure that different communities back in South Carolina who were looking for, you know, water, sewer, fire trucks or whatever, that she would look and help them to get these, to get these grants.  So, when the opportunity arose for me to work with Senator Hollings, there was, at the time there were two senators from South Carolina: Senator Hollings and Senator Thurmond.
Speaker 1: I was about to ask you--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --did you know Senator Strom Thurmond?
Speaker 2: I did know Senator Thurmond.  And Senator Thurmond, and Senator Thurmond of course, was the Republican senator, and a conservative Republican senator.  And Senator Hollings was the Democratic senator from South Carolina.  So, you assumed that the Democratic senator was a little bit more liberal than the Republican senator.  So, to have the opportunity to--and there were a few other blacks that were working with southern senators at the time.  Because in the end, southern senators probably ended up having more African American staffers than some of the more liberal senators at the, at the time.
Speaker 1: Why was that?
Speaker 2: Because I think of the population base in their states, and actually just having the right mind.  Senator Hollings probably still holds the record of having the most African American lawyers employed on his staff at one time.
Speaker 1: When was that?
Speaker 2: This would have been in 1984 or '85 [1985], somewhere around there.  That was when I had moved over to be the chief counsel of the Senate commerce committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation].  And he had, I believe there were six African American lawyers working on his staff.
Speaker 1: Do you remember who they were, some of them?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There was Sheryl Webber Washington.  There was Toni Cook Bush [Antoinette Cook Bush].  There was Thurgood Marshall.  There was fellow by the name of--last name of Cunningham [ph.], and I'm forgetting his, you know, his first name now.  And there was a fellow who worked on the OSHA [Occupation Safety and Health Administration] policies study committee.  I can get you the names, I just forget his name right now.  But--
Speaker 1: Did you have interaction with Thurgood Marshall?
Speaker 2: Yes, he's a personal friend of mine.  You mean Thurgood Marshall, Jr.?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Not his--I met his dad.  But Thurgood Marshall, Jr. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When did you meet his dad?
Speaker 2: He introduced me to him at the court.
Speaker 1: What was that meeting like?
Speaker 2: That meeting was like walking in history and seeing someone that you'd only, you know, seen in, you know, pictures on the wall.  And you know all what he did.  And you knew--I mean you know people would talk about him even when he was working on the South Carolina cases and coming down through Summerton, South Carolina to work on those cases.  So, so Thurgood, Jr. and I are still friends today, and we still talk a lot.
Story_ID: 612099
Speaker 1: We were talking about the first time you met Thurgood Marshall.  And of course, as a man from South Carolina you were familiar with the, the Briggs/Elliott case [Briggs v. Elliott, 1952]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and all the work Thurgood Marshall was doing on Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  So, that first meeting, was he as--
Speaker 2: He--
Speaker 1: --magnificent as you had hoped?
Speaker 2: He was just as magnificent as I thought he would be.  He filled the room.  You know, he was older at the time when I, you know, when I met him, but still on the court [U.S. Supreme Court].  And this was his one day that his son introduced me to him.
Speaker 1: Well, let's--
Speaker 2: So it was, it was again like walking through history.
Speaker 1: And what year was that?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  It would have been early '80s [1980s], but I don't remember.
Speaker 1: What was son like as a colleague?
Speaker 2: His son was, was very, very smart.  He worked on consumer issues on the Senate commerce committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation] with me, you know, things like product liability, [U.S.] Consumer Product Safety Commission.  He, you know, was very studious.  Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall, Jr.] was very, you know, a little bit quieter than I thought he would be in terms of his demeanor, but a very good staffer.  At the time he was doing these issues on the Senate commerce committee, the chairman of his subcommittee, who he reported to on a regular basis, was Al Gore.  So Senator Gore at the time, of course, was a member of our committee.  And, and Thurgood reported to him, and, and, and staffed him when he chaired committee hearings.
Story_ID: 612100
Speaker 1: What are your early recollections of Al Gore?
Speaker 2: Al Gore, I got to know very well when he first moved over from, from the House [U.S. House of Representatives].  He (unclear)--my first recollection was him being a very young man compared to the other senators on the committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation].  He was very well studied in terms of the issues that he, that he did.  He was more than a surface senator, in terms of he could ask more than two questions and also knew what the answers were.  This is when he was talking--when nobody else was talking about global warming he was doing that, and trying to tell us that bad things were going to happen if we didn't focus on that.
Speaker 1: Back in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Back in the '80s [1980s].  Back in--and also back in the '80s [1980s], in the mid-'80s [1980s], he and Senator Hollings [Ernest Hollings] traveled together on a trip to Antarctica I believe, where the whole purpose was to look at climate change kinds of issues.  And I remember Senator Hollings coming back and telling me that Al Gore really knew this subject area.  Because they had to spend a night together in one of the rooms in Antarctica or something I remember as bunk beds or something like that, so they had a lot of time to talk about that.  Now, Senator Gore, in some respects he rubbed a few of the older senators the wrong way.  Because he was young, and the [U.S.] Senate had a tradition of waiting your turn, and a lot of people thought that Senator Gore was a young man in a hurry.  And so, some of them did not like him as, as well.  But he was always at the top of his game in terms of his knowledge on a particular subject.  He was always very mindful of press coverage on everything.  He would have a lot of discussions in his office on various subjects, where he was growing and actually learning things by having discussions with staff and, you know, question back and forth.  So, I would say that Senator Gore was very well prepared in all that he did.
Story_ID: 612101
Speaker 1: Also, working for Senator Hollings [Ernest Hollings], you mentioned meeting Strom Thurmond, I imagine a number of times.  Tell me about those meetings.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Strom Thurmond was known for his constituent service.  So, if you said that you were from South Carolina, he would meet with you almost at any point.  He would always speak to you when he would see you.  When my son [Jason Everett] was born in 1977, the first gift that I got was a gift from Senator Thurmond on the same day that my son was born.  He sent a little baby blue New Testament, signed by Strom Thurmond, along with a letter to me and my wife Gwen saying, "Congratulations."  But he also sent a letter to my son saying, "Congratulations on choosing Ralph [HistoryMaker Ralph Bernard Everett] and Gwen Everett [Gwendolyn Harris Everett] as your parents."  (Laughter) So, so Senator Hollings was a little miffed by that, because Hollings did come to visit, but the Strom Thurmond New Testament got there before (laughter).  Because it was always a little bit of a competition with the South Carolina senators, particularly on the announcement of loans and grants to the state.  You wanted to be the first one to call the mayor, or to notify the council that the town was going to get a grant.  And since the Republicans were in charge, even though Senator Thurmond would vote against a lot of the programs that he was giving money for, the Republicans would give him like a fifteen or twenty minute advanced notice so he could call the local paper and he could call the, you know, the grant recipient before Senator Hollings.  So, it was--yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, Strom Thurmond is a complex figure--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --historically, when it comes to issues of race.  How did you perceive him vis a vis race?
Speaker 2: That a lot of the things that, that he did, you know, particularly when he ran for president and the things that he said that were not kind to people who looked like me, those were the views that he held at the time.  And I think over the years, it, you know, it evolved, you know, around to be more tolerant; to hire, you know, some African Americans on his (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But in the inner circle--because you were part of the inner circle--was he perceived as a racist senator?
Speaker 2: Who is the inner circle that you are asking me about?
Speaker 1: The cabinet, other people in the [U.S.] Senate?
Speaker 2: He was perceived as Strom Thurmond, once a staunch segregationist, who had the longest filibuster record in the Senate.  And he was, he was perceived as being a very complex man who was the politician who did what he needed to do to get elected no matter what.  If it meant that people like me were supposed to be called names or that we couldn't sit certain places--.  He evolved over a period of time.  Remember, when I first met Senator Thurmond was probably around the time, around the time I came to the Senate in 1977.  By that time, he had started this, this process of evolving.  He had hired the first black staffer on his staff, a fellow by the name of Tom Moss [Thomas Moss], who was basically in the State of South Carolina.  He would bring, you know, loans and grants back to, you know, black communities, but I mean he was still Strom Thurmond with the record that he had.  I mean, he still voted against a lot of the programs that would be helpful to, to African Americans.  But again, it was this--you know everybody changes a little bit.  I can't tell you what was down, in, you know in his mind or in his heart, but all I can, you know, talk about is what I saw over the period of, of years (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 612102
Speaker 1: There any other memories that would suggest his, his kindness?
Speaker 2: You know, I talked to--about him, him, him seeing people, trying to be helpful.  He worked with a number of the African American mayors in, particularly in the small towns, in terms of trying to get them--almost every mayor in every small town in South Carolina wanted a fire truck.  (Laughter) Fire trucks were kind of hard to come by.  Strom Thurmond would work with them on this, just as Senator Hollings [Ernest Hollings] would, in terms of doing that.  So, he had a group of people that actually grew to like him over a period of time.  Then there were others who had a sense of history of what he had done to keep African Americans from succeeding, or from, you know, gaining--having opportunities to do certain things.  So, there are some people who never forgave him for what he did, you know, back in the '60s [1960s].  So, he was a very, very complex fellow.  Conservative?  Yes.  But--
Speaker 1: Were you surprised the day it was announced that he had a black daughter?
Speaker 2: I had heard the rumors over a period of years.  Because my mother [Alethia Hilton Everett] was a student at South Carolina State College [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] at the same time that Elsie [sic. Essie Mae Washington-Williams] was there, and they would often talk about Strom Thurmond.  I mean, she'd sit around, talk with her friends, sit around, talk with her friends about Strom Thurmond coming to South Carolina State College.  And there were always rumors that he had a black daughter, but nobody knew that for sure; at least in their minds they thought that they knew it.  So I'd heard the stories, and I think my biggest surprise was that it was all confirmed, you know, later on, and I was glad to see that.  And then when she tells her stories about her relationships, you know, with him and you know and what he did, I mean it just--you know, everybody in South Carolina who was at South Carolina State College in '48 [1948] and '49 [1949], just kind of said, "I told you so," (laughter) you know, because that's what they, they thought.
Speaker 1: So, he had a public persona and was very different privately?
Speaker 2: Different kind of--yes.  And again, I mean, you know, his black daughter would know that better than anybody (laughter).  But, but, again, I don't know.  You see a lot of these people in five minute spurts or ten minute spurts, or you read about them, or you follow their activities on the [U.S.] Senate floor that help you form your opinion of them.  So, there's some good and bad in, you know, in everyone.  And you know, one thing about southern politicians is that they have lived around masses of, you know, black people for long periods of time, and they are fairly honest in whether or not they like you or they don't like you.
Speaker 1: So, you don't have to guess?
Speaker 2: You don't have to guess.  You know, it's basically, "Ralph [HistoryMaker Ralph Bernard Everett], I have to meet--I'm having this meeting with you.  Or, I have to work with you.  But after five o'clock, I don't really have to work with you."  So it, it's fresh- it's refreshing in politics to know exactly where people stand--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and how they feel.
Story_ID: 612103
Speaker 1: Tell me about 1984 when Senator Hollings [Ernest Hollings] was ru- was running for the presidential election, the Democratic nomination (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a very exciting time for, you know, all of us who were close to him and who knew him.  He had decided that he wanted to focus on budget issues, and that he was going to be right for the country at this time.  There were eight people running for president at the time, including, including Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], and he and Senator Hollings had a, had a very good relationship.  This allowed me an opportunity to, to travel in my spare time or my, or my off time or my vacation time, you know, with the campaign, and you know, and go certain places with him to, you know, to speak to a number of the other candidates and participate in, in some meetings to (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, what were some of those interactions like?  Like, you mentioned Jesse.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Reverend Jackson and Senator Hollings would talk on a fairly regular basis because they had the South Carolina connection, with Reverend Jackson being from, from Green- from Greenville [South Carolina].  And in 1988, Senator Hollings ended up being the only senator who was a Jesse Jackson delegate in 1988.  But in eight--
Speaker 1: Do you remember any specific meetings in which you also were involved with--?
Speaker 2: I do remember one or two meetings that we had with Reverend Jackson where we would talk about defense issues or appropriations issues.  Because, remember, Reverend Jackson was running not as a member of [U.S.] Congress, and he did not have access to some of the information that they had.  So, they would just kind of discuss some of the general issues, and I sat in on a few of those, a few of those meetings.  So--
Speaker 1: What were some of the other highlights from that presidential run?
Speaker 2: The highlights, you know, going up to New Hampshire with him and being the first box that's opened up in Dixville Notch [New Hampshire], is that what it's--?  The first box that's open in New Hampshire.  At midnight, Hollings actually got more votes.  It was probably only like ten votes, but he got more votes than anybody else.  Even though we were trailing in the polls at the time, we thought that, well, that's a good sign.  But it was downhill from there (laughter) when the, when the real votes started being counted, and I remember having breakfast with him the next morning up in New Hampshire when Vice President Mondale's daughter came by and joined us for a little bit.  I think her name was Ellen [sic. Eleanor Mondale Poling], came by and joined us for a little bit at the table, and just kind of sitting there with Senator Hollings and, and Peatsy [Hollings' wife, Rita "Peatsy" Hollings] waiting for, you know, for the votes to come in.
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet any other members of Mondale's family?
Speaker 2: I met (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Newmans, the Newmans from Homewood, Illinois?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.  I met Joan [Joan Adams Mondale], his wife, just in passing, and his, and daughter.  I don't think I ever met any of his--and I think I would be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you get a sense that Mondale [Walter Mondale] was going to be the nominee?
Speaker 2: At that time since there were so many candidates running, and since he--you got the sense that he probably was the front runner, but you just didn't know at that time.  We didn't have all the sophisticated polling that (laughter) folks have now, and we didn't have the kind of money.  I mean, actually Senator Hollings ran his campaign on a pay as you go basis.  So, he did not want to end up in debt, so that's why he actually dropped out after New Hampshire.  Because he knew that if he continued on, that the only way he could continue on would be to get in debt that he was going to have pay later on.
Story_ID: 612104
Speaker 1: You were talking a few minutes ago about a debate in which your name was mentioned.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: This was a debate that--my memory is, is not that good on it.  But this was a debate when they were talking about minorities and employment, and who had minorities on their staff.  So Senator Hollings [Ernest Hollings] in his, in his response mentioned me by name as being the first African American in the history of the [U.S.] Senate to be the chief counsel and staff director of a Senate committee, which he appointed me to eighty--in late 1982.  So, I had my name mentioned on national TV as a young fellow back then.
Speaker 1: Pretty exciting moment.
Speaker 2: It was all right (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, what committee--you were chief counsel of what committee?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was the staff director and chief counsel of the [U.S.] Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, which is the business committee of the Senate.  Almost every business in America has business before the Senate commerce committee.  It was also the committee that the airlines, buses, trucks, rails were all regulated through the Senate commerce committee; product liability, consumer issues.  It was also the committee that the nation's space program, we had the oversight.  We had NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], and everybody there who had their budgets associated with NASA had to come through this committee.  So, it was a committee with very broad jurisdiction.
Speaker 1: What were some of the tasks you took on?  Can you remember a specific situation?
Speaker 2: Well, I ran the committee on a daily basis.  So we had seven subcommittees, all the subcommittee staff directors, chief counsels reported up to me.  So, I was in the--the person who kind of set the day to day policy as to what we were going to have hearings on, who we were going to get for witnesses.  There were twenty senators on the committee at the time.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were some of the senators?
Speaker 2: Senators Packwood [Bob Packwood], Danforth [John Danforth], Rockefeller [Jay Rockefeller], Gore [Al Gore], Senator Exon [J. James Exon] from Nebraska, Senator Ford [Wendell H. Ford] from Texas [sic.], Senator Nancy Kassebaum [Nancy Landon Kassebaum] from Kansas.  So, you had a sen- I think I mentioned Breaux [John Breaux] from Louisiana, he was a young senator on the committee at the time.  These, but these were all senators who were fairly well known.  Senator Inouye [Daniel K. Inouye] from Hawaii was a fairly senior member of the committee.  So I would be, I would be the point of contact for them as a top staffer on a lot of the committee, the committee work.
Speaker 1: So that's an awesome responsibility.
Speaker 2: It was a pretty big responsibility, pretty big responsibility.  So, when they couldn't get ahold of Senator Hollings on something, I was the person that they would talk to.
Story_ID: 612105
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are some of the things you're most proud about?
Speaker 2: Well, I think--you know, we, you know, I'm proud, first of all, to have run the committee for the number of years that I did.  I'm proud that we were able to create, or to have the diversity on the Senate commerce committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation] that they'd never had in the [U.S.] Senate before.  And the diversity, the people who were up to the task, they were top notch in their field.  And, you know, particularly for African American lawyers, all we ask for is an opportunity to succeed.  And you--if you can't do it, you do just like they do white folks; you get fired.  So, we had people who were top in their field who guided the Senate commerce committee through a number of issues while we were, you know, during my tenure there.  So, one of the things I'm most proud of is creating that diversity on the committee.  And then we also--that was the time when airlines were being deregulated and the rails were being deregulated, and we participated in that.  It was also the ti- period of time when the Challenger blew up with the first teacher in space [Christa McAuliffe].  And we were the people there who were helping to conduct the investigation.  We had the astronauts--
Speaker 1: Did you know Fred Gregory [HistoryMaker Colonel Frederick Drew Gregory]?
Speaker 2: I did not.  I had met him.  He had come, you know, by my office and we'd taken pictures, but I did not know him, did not know personally.
Speaker 1: What did you do in response to the Challenger disaster?
Speaker 2: We had, we did an investigation and we convened congressional hearings to find out exactly what had happened.  Because there'd been a number of allegations as to why the spacecraft would have been launched on that day with the icicles kind of hanging off.  They knew it was cold, you know, what the contractors were doing, and what President Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] role was in the launch.  There were some allegations that he was giving his State of the Union message that night, and he had wanted to announce that the first teacher was in space.  So, there were some people who were accusing him of being the person who told them that they had to launch, so we investigated things like that.  And, but it was a very sad time in American history to go back and, and you know, look at what happened.  Because most of the--the Senate commerce committee would usually have a staffer at most of the launches.  On this one, we had gone down because they had been delayed.  So, the person that I sent had actually come back, so they weren't there on the day that the Challenger exploded.  But I had gone down to other launches where it actually, you know, seemed like--I was there for the first nighttime launch of a, of a spaceship.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  It's interesting hearing from your perspective.  Fred Gregory talked about it from his perspective.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Being in the tower that day, and then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and sort of overseeing certain aspects--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the difficulty.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, again, it was a sad time.  Because I mean we kind of looked at all--you know, all, every school kid in America was looking that day, because it was the first teacher in space.  And to see the spaceship disintegrate like it did, to watch the look on their, her parents' faces who were just kind of sitting there watching.  It was something that was, you know, unprecedented, something that, you know, should not have happened, but, but happened (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 612106
Speaker 1: What did you do next?
Speaker 2: Next.  After I left the Senate commerce committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation] in 1989, I joined the international law firm of Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker [Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker LLP; Paul Hastings LLP].  And I guess, you know, one thing just in terms of a memorable thing--when I left the Senate commerce committee there was a reception that was held for me in the Senate caucus room [Kennedy Caucus Room], the same room that the Watergate hearings were held, the same room where John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] announced for the presidency.  And because I was the first African American ever to run a Senate committee, most of the senators knew me by name, just because of that.  So at my going away party, about seventy-two senators came to the going away party.  And Senator Hollings [Ernest Hollings], Senator Danforth [John Danforth], Secretary Mark Spacker [ph.], who was the secretary of commerce under President Reagan [sic.] at the time, Strom Thurmond and Senator Hollings all spoke at this event.  And I remember when Strom Thurmond spoke, because we had talked about this earlier.  But when he spoke at this, talking about what a good, great lawyer and person I was, there were people who remembered Strom Thurmond as, as the segregationist.  And they were standing there with tears rolling down their eyes, that he would be sitting, standing here speaking at an event for the first African American ever to head a Senate committee.  So, that kind of stands out in my mind.
Speaker 1: How did you respond?
Speaker 2: I responded by thanking (laughter), you know, him and everyone else, and mainly focusing on Senator Hollings, and recalling certain events during my thirteen years of working with him, and thanking him again for giving me the opportunity to be the chief counsel of the committee, or to be his legislative assistant, and trying to say to the other senators who were present to please give others opportunities, people who don't look like you, people who you have not worked with, people who you may not feel comfortable with.  Many of you probably have never been to the home of an African American, don't know what to expect, but assuring them that it's okay (laughter) to do that.  So, that was basically my message that night, but really praising Senator Hollings for giving me the opportunity to do this, and for hiring all of these other people.  Because I mentioned to you that Jet magazine did do a story on Senator Hollings, that he had all these black lawyers working for him at the time.  So (laughter).
Speaker 1: History in the making.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 612107
Speaker 1: Did you have lots of contact with members of the Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] during those years?
Speaker 2: I did on certain issues.  Because again, depending upon what we were working on, they would--.  Of course at the time, you know, for a period of time there were not any African American senators because, you know, Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] had gotten defeated, and that was in between, before [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun came.  So, a lot of your leaders, the only people or contact that they had in the [U.S.] Senate were through Senate staffers.  We created an informal black Senate staffers group where we would meet once a month in the Capitol [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.], and we would invite various black leaders to come in and talk.  And we would share ideas, exchange things, tell them what was, you know, going on: you know, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Urban League [National Urban League], Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois].  And then as things were going on, doing our jobs as staffers, you know, we would do what we were supposed to do in terms of providing the right kind of counsel to our, our members.  But at the same time, we would try to help, you know, African American leaders as they were preparing their agendas.
Speaker 1: Did you have contact with Congressman Sanford Bishop [HistoryMaker Sanford Bishop, Jr.], another Morehouse graduate [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, not, not as much.  And Major Owens, and you know, and others.  But we would see them from time to time.
Story_ID: 612108
Speaker 1: And then you decided to move into the private sector?
Speaker 2: I decided to move into the private sector in 1989.  This was, again, something that I had not really been thinking about a lot.  And I had gotten a call from someone asking whether or not I'd be interested in talking to a law firm.  And I thought about it a little bit and I went and had an initial, initial conversation, and that led to about five other conversations.  And I eventually was elected as the first African American partner of Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker [Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker LLC; Paul Hastings LLC] in 1989.  And the law firm experience, the big law firm experience, was a different one for me.  At the time, there were 450 lawyers at Paul Hastings.  And when I left, there were 1,250.  So, it was quite a big operation.  But I was blessed and lucky that when I joined Paul Hastings I did end up getting a number of, of clients to, to work on.
Story_ID: 612109
Speaker 1: So, you were talking about the law firm you were working for [Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker LLC; Paul Hastings LLC].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You mentioned you had some interesting clients.  Who were some of your clients?
Speaker 2: Well, I represented all of the Bell operating companies at the time: NYNEX [NYNEX Corporation; Verizon Communications, Inc.], Bell Atlantic [Bell Atlantic Corporation; Verizon Communications, Inc.], U.S. West [U.S. West, Inc.].  You know, a lot of them had been--you know, Qwest [Qwest Corporation].  A lot of them had been, you know, bought out, Bell Atlantic.  And I represented the American Trucking Association [American Trucking Associations], American Moving and Storage Association, the Automobile Dealers Association [National Automobile Dealers Association].
Speaker 1: So you were dealing still in the realm of transportation?
Speaker 2: Railroad transportation and communications, which was my area of expertise.  I did a lot of legislative work and some regulatory work for some maritime companies, I participated in a number of rail merges when Norfolk Southern [Norfolk Southern Corporation] was one of my clients when they were buying a portion of Conrail [Consolidated Rail Corporation], and there were a lot of regulatory hearings there.  So I was very, again, very blessed to have some clients to share with my law firm.
Speaker 1: You were the only black partner?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were there other black attorneys?
Speaker 2: There were a few other black attorneys in the office--
Speaker 1: Do you remember who they were?
Speaker 2: --but, but, but, but not many.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not many at all.  And then
Speaker 1: And you were still a, you know, a young man.  You're still young, but you were very young.
Speaker 2: I'm still relatively young.  Yeah, I was in my, in my mid- mid-thirties.  And then later on, we were fortunate enough to get four additional African American partners after I had been there for about three years--
Speaker 1: And who were they?
Speaker 2: --in different, different offices.  It was Barbara Johnson [Barbara L. Johnson], who is a labor and employment lawyer; Charles Hamilton in New York [New York] who was a real estate lawyer; and Judge Hill, William Hill in Atlanta [Georgia] who was, who was a litigator.  And one more that I'm missing, in in California, California.
Speaker 1: Was race an issue at all at the firm?
Speaker 2: At law firms, it's mostly about the money.  And so a lot of--we would raise the issue a lot in terms of getting more diversity at the firm because many clients were re- were requiring law firms who worked on their cases to have diversity within the teams that are working on their, on their cases.  And a lot of our clients were people who were doing the hiring, who looked like me as, you know general counsels or senior counsels.  So, it made good business sense to have a lot of diversity in your firm.  So, we would talk about it a lot.  And I remember speaking at a partners retreat in California around 1993 where I talked about that, and how important it was.  And I think that's when I was the only African American in the partnership.  Because one thing that I have done in my entire career is try to create peop- opportunities for others that look like me.  And, you know, once you get into a place you should try to do whatever you can to help other people come along.  It's no fun to me being by myself, or having--not having--I'm most happy when I have created opportunities for others.
Story_ID: 612110
Speaker 1: Were you involved at all in local politics in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] in these years--
Speaker 2: No, I--
Speaker 1: --with [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry and [HistoryMaker] Sharon Pratt?
Speaker 2: --I was not, you know, other than when I was called to--you know, asked a question.  But I did not get involved in local politics.  I had friends who worked--
Speaker 1: Do you know Marion Barry?
Speaker 2: I only met him, but I, and I have friends with people who worked for him.  But I did not have a personal relationship with him.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So, 1992 you make another political decision, political move career wise.  What happened then?
Speaker 2: In 1992, what was that political move?  Parliamentarian, or--
Speaker 1: Or, you tell me.  What did you do next?
Speaker 2: No, in 1992 I stayed at, I was still at the law firm [Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker LLC; Paul Hastings LLC].
Speaker 1: At what point did you start working with Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --and Gore [Al Gore]?
Speaker 2: I started working with Clinton/Gore about six months before the Democratic convention.  And I worked in his Washington office as one of his legislative people.  And I did that through, until--up until the time of the convention.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what year did you leave the law firm?
Speaker 2: I left the law firm just recently, in 2006.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were doing this simultaneously (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I was doing this simultaneously in my spare time, or taking vacation.  So, I--
Speaker 1: Okay, so in the early '90s [1990s]--
Speaker 2: That's why I was confused.
Speaker 1: --in addition to your work at the law firm, you were working on the Clinton/Gore campaign?
Speaker 2: In the Clinton/Gore campaign, doing mainly legislative work, you know, contacting state officials, helping with, you know, preparation of different issue papers and stuff like that.  And then I served as a parliamentarian at the 1992 Democratic convention [1992 Democratic National Convention, New York, New York] where Ron Brown was the chair of the, of the convention.  And then after the convention, I worked a little bit more on the Clinton/Gore campaign over at the national Democratic headquarters [Washington, D.C].
Speaker 1: How did you decide to work on that particular campaign?
Speaker 2: Because I knew Vice President Gore personally.  I was excited about the Clinton, you know, campaign, and just wanted to be involved in the process, with no particular rewards in mind, you know no administration job or anything like.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your relationship with President Clinton in those years.
Speaker 2: In those years, I would just--I was just one of hundreds of staffers.  So I would, you know, see him from time to time.  But I wasn't the person who was the mouthpiece.  I wasn't the George Stephanopoulos or anything like that, who would be the first one to see in the morning and the last one to see him at night.  So--
Speaker 1: What were your impressions of Bill Clinton?
Speaker 2: I thought he, I thought he was a very--I liked him a lot.  I was very comfortable around him whenever I had the opportunity to be around him.  He seemed, you know, very down to earth.  We could have, you know, conversations about nothing.  And, and, and I, you know, actually would spend some time with him down at Renaissance Weekend in, in Hilton Head [South Carolina].  But I mean, I'm not saying--I mean, I'm not a personal friend of his.  I just had to--you know, I had an opportunity to be around him and form an impression.  But I liked him a lot.
Story_ID: 612111
Speaker 1: And so at the Democratic National Convention [1992 Democratic National Convention, New York, New York] and on the campaign trail, did you meet some of the other Democratic contenders, people like Jerry Brown and--?
Speaker 2: I did not meet Jerry Brown at the time, no.  And--
Speaker 1: So, tell me about Ron Brown.
Speaker 2: Ron Brown was one of my best friends.  Ron was the person who, one of the persons who is the most coolest under pressure.  You never would see Ron Brown sweat.  Ron Brown was always very calm, cool, and collect.  When I came to the law firm [Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker LLC; Paul Hastings LLC], we would talk on a regular basis.  And I would talk to Ron about, oh, well, I'm having this problem.  You call your other friends and they say, "Yeah, I know exactly what you mean."  You call Ron Brown and he'd say, "Okay, don't worry about it.  This is what you need to do: one, two, three," very calm, cool, and collect.  He was always the calming influence.  When Ron was asked by President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] to be the secretary of commerce, you know, his real desire, he really wanted to be secretary of state.  So, he called and he asked--we--he asked about the commerce department, and exactly what was it?  Because he knew that the committee that I ran on--the Senate commerce committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation] was the one who had oversight of the, of the, of the [U.S.] Department of Commerce.  So after--as we talked about it, and as he realized what the breadth of things were that they could do, he got very excited about it.  And I ended up being his law- being his lawyer for his confirmation hearings.  So, I'm the only person that attended all fifty--so many, he had fifty-some meetings with various senators before his confirmation on January 6, 1993.  And I attended all those meetings, all those meetings with him and then participated as a part of his little kitchen cabinet after he became secretary of commerce because I stayed at my law firm.  So, he was one of--there was only one Ron Brown; there was no one else like him.  And again, I just, you know, I miss his advice and everything else that he would give me.
Speaker 1: What was your last conversation with him?
Speaker 2: My last conversation with him was about seven to nine days before he went on the trip.  And he was having lunch with some of his staffers at the J.W. Marriott [Washington, D.C.], right across the street from the Department of Commerce, and we just talked about the law firm and how it was going.  And, you know, the commerce--just small talk.  You never know the last time that you're going to actually see and talk to someone.  And then we did not talk for a long period of time, because you know, he had some of his staffers there, and I think they were doing some commerce department work, maybe even talking about, you know, about this trip.
Speaker 1: Where were you when you heard about the accident?
Speaker 2: I was sitting in my, in my office at my law firm, and a blurb came on--I have a TV in my office, a blurb came over the news.  And at that time his plane was missing, and they were looking for it and they did not know where it was.  It just didn't sound good.  So, when I heard that, I immediately left my office, and I drove over to his house.  But there was so much activity at his house that I decided it wasn't appropriate for me to go in.  So I drove (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Reporters and police?
Speaker 2: Reporters, police, neighbors.  And I just decided that it was a very private moment for Alma [HistoryMaker Alma Arrington Brown] and the family, and they didn't need anybody else sitting there.  So, I drove back to my, to my office.  But it was a bad day, bad day.
Story_ID: 612112
Speaker 1: You continue to work with Clinton/Gore [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton/Al Gore] on the campaign.  What was the reaction in that, again, inner circle when all of those allegations started coming up: Paula Jones, Gennifer Flowers, draft dodger, pot smoker--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  That was above my pay grade (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So I, so I was, I was not in those meetings.  Those meetings--everything I know about those meetings is what everybody else saw on TV.
Speaker 1: Any highlights from your experience as the parliamentarian at the DNC?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as the parliamentarian at Democratic convention [1992 Democratic National Convention, New York, New York], I guess my highlights from that was just--when you're the parliamentarian, you basically work all the time.  So, all of the other things that are going on around and about in terms of the receptions and the parties, (laughter) you don't get to do any of those.  And you basically rule, when you're the parliamentarian, based on what you thing the right ruling is.  You have the book and, you know, and everything else.  And then each one of the delegations has a direct phone line to the parliamentarian's chair.  So, you're always kind of on pins and needles about, what am I going to be asked next?  But it was a very exciting time for me.  There were five of us during that period of time that served as the parliamentarian, because we'd do it on a rotating basis.  And there would be two of us up there at any given time, you know, doing that.  And there was one person there who had done it probably for twenty years.  So you were more, you were very comfortable when he was sitting in the second chair (laughter).  So I really, I enjoyed that period of time.  And that was--Ron Brown was responsible for me being able to be the parliamentarian, because he was chair of the Democratic Party at the time.
Speaker 1: And you guys had a strong f- personal relationship as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Friendship?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I did.  I knew him, you know, very well, and he was very helpful to me.  Because again, you know, he had been a lawyer at a major law firm before me, at Patton, Boggs and Blow [Squire Patton Boggs], so he could tell me about some of the things that you experience.  Because I think he may have been the only African American partner over there at the, at the time.
Story_ID: 612113
Speaker 1: Did you know Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] at the time?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And Mr. Jordan has been extremely helpful to me over the years.
Speaker 1: In what ways?  Tell me about some of your interaction?
Speaker 2: Well, when I first came downtown in 1989 as a partner at Paul Hastings [Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker LLC; Paul Hastings LLC], Mr. Jordan called.  We would go to either lunch or breakfast from time to time at Joe and Mo's [Washington, D.C.], which was in between our two offices; I was at 1050 Connecticut Avenue, he was at Dupont Circle.  And he would just share with me his experiences and, you know, things that would be helpful to me.  And he has stayed in contact over the years.
Speaker 1: What kind of advice did he give you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The--advice on clients, advice on things that you do at a law firm.  He talked about how important it was when your colleagues invite you to their houses for different things, that you reciprocate and you invite them to yours, just things that we--common courtesies and experiences that, you know, that you can do to do well in a law firm.  Talked about how you go about getting, getting clients and, and keeping clients.  Talked about your relationships with your partners and your colleagues; just general advice.
Story_ID: 612114
Speaker 1: And over the years there was a series of events that happened in Washington [D.C.] that were somewhat controversial.  We had the Clarence Thomas/Anita Hill situation.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in that in any way?
Speaker 2: No.  I went to, I went to some of the hearings.  You know, I have known you know Justice Thomas since 1979 when he was a staffer at, on Senator Danforth's [John Danforth] staff.  So, you know, I watched with, you know, with great interest.
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about Justice Clarence Thomas?
Speaker 2: Well, Justice Clarence Thomas, we got to know him, you know, as staffers.  We recognized that he was, you know, he had some views that were different than ours.  But at the time, you remember, there were very few African Americans on the [U.S.] Senate side.  So, we all got together to meet.  And, and again, even when we differed from each other, we were, we were civil and we talked through issues.  I thought that, you know, Justice Thomas cared a lot about his son [Jamal Adeen Thomas] and his family and his education.  We would talk about that a lot in terms of the education that he was getting.  And he eventually ended up, you know, his son ended up going to a Catholic school, because Justice Thomas had gone to a Catholic school.
Speaker 1: Did he talk a lot about his opinions?
Speaker 2: Yes, some, some, some he did.  But, you know, we didn't talk about them in the sense that he was about to be a Supreme Court, a [U.S.] Supreme Court justice.  A lot of things we talked about back then had to do with just common things--about your family, your ability, trying to make it, education, you know, going to church, just basic kinds of things.  We weren't talking about them in the sense that he was about to rule on different things.
Speaker 1: Did he have the strong sense of independence that that he really didn't get there through the help of affirmative action, et cetera?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember whether or not we had conversations like that about affirmative action.  Because remember, when he worked--if I recall correctly, he had worked for Senator Danforth at the attorney general's office, and--or either at Monsanto [Monsanto Company]; I can't remember which one.  And then he was asked to come, you know, to Washington to work with him on his, on his Washington staff.  I knew that he did not like the fact that people would think that he went to Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] on--just because he was, he was black.  But we didn't really have a long conversations about that.  That would be unfair for me to characterize those kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  And so the hearings, Clarence Thomas/Anita Hill, were you siding with, you know, one person or the other?  Or did you see--
Speaker 2: I watched the hearings with, you know, with great interest.  And you know, I didn't--I wasn't on either body--any, either person's team.  So I watched and went to a couple of hearing.
Story_ID: 612115
Speaker 1: So, throughout the '90s [1990s] were you negotiating these two sort of career paths, with the law firm and then your interest as well in politics?
Speaker 2: Well, the political--I mean I've always been involved in politics.  And, but the political thing was just a temporary diversion.  I mean I think I worked probably six months, you know, between the convention [1992 Democratic National Convention, New York, New York] and the Clinton campaign [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], either on my vacation time or other time that I took.  I think it's always extremely important for anyone to be involved in the process.  And I could just get involved in the process at a little different level.  And I'm always going to be very active in the process.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, again, you left the law firm [Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker LLC; Paul Hastings LLC]?
Speaker 2: I didn't leave the law firm until 2006, December of 2006, after being there almost eighteen years as a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What other pivotal events would you like to point to in those years?
Speaker 2: Well, I, when I was at--during the time I was at the law firm?  Or--?  Yeah, I, I became the managing partner of the Washington [D.C.] office of the law firm where I ran the Washington office for about four and a half years.  Then I rotated off and I became a member of the policy committee of the firm, which is the thirteen or fourteen member governing body of the overall firm.  We had experienced tremendous growth from the time I came there, when there were 450 lawyers, to the time I left when there were about 1,250.  We had expanded internationally.  We were in, you know, Europe and Asia and a lot of different cities.  We had expanded our domestic offices, and we had moved up on the American Lawyer list in terms of firms in, in the country.  So, and we had increased the number of African American, you know, partners in the firm.  But I had worked with a lot of good clients, good issues, and decided to leave in December of 2006 when this opportunity at the Joint Center [Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C.] became available.
Story_ID: 612116
Speaker 1: So in 2000, 2001, 2002, were you active politically?
Speaker 2: Yes, always, you know, supporting different, you know, different, different candidates, being involved in the overall, you know, process.
Speaker 1: Were you involved at all in the Clinton administration [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] in any capacity?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was involved in the Clinton administration in 1998, when I served as an ambassador to the Plenipotentiary Conference, which was held for the first time in the United States in forty-something years in Minneapolis [Minnesota].  Prior to doing that, I led the United States delegation to the World Devel- Telecommunications Development Conference [World Telecommunication Development Conference] on the island of Malta [Valletta, Malta].  We stayed there for about five weeks, and this was a lot of the less developed countries talking about how we can bring more telecommunications to their countries.  And there were about eighty people on the U.S. delegation that was operating out of state department [U.S. Department of State], and I was the head of that particular delegation.  That led me later on going to Johannesburg [South Africa] at the invitation of the Mandela government [Nelson Mandela] to talk to African nations about cross border issues in terms of telemedicine.  And I actually did that with a fellow from the World Health Organization called Dr. Mandel [ph.] because--who worked with telemedicine issues and knew a lot more about it than me.  But we talked about it at the time, we talked about the legal implications of cross--you know, doing operations in one country and having somebody else on a, on a screen doing that.
Story_ID: 612117
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have an opportunity to meet Nelson Mandela?
Speaker 2: I did have an opportunity to meet Nelson Mandela on two occasions.  He spoke at this world development--I'm sorry, at the conference in Johannesburg [South Africa], had an opportunity to shake his hand.  And then I had an opportunity when he came to the White House [Washington, D.C.] with, to meet with President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and to speak at an event.  I had an opportunity to speak to him at that event and take a picture, which I'm still trying to get (laughter).
Speaker 1: Share your impressions.
Speaker 2: Again, like being with walking history.  Just the kindest person that you could meet.  And you wonder how someone who had been treated like he had, in terms of being locked up for those years, could have the same feeling of, of love and understanding that came across in the gracious way in which he spoke.  It, it, it was just like--you often wonder, you put yourself in others' shoes and say, if that I were me, could I show the same kind of love after that many years of my life have been taken away?  So, just an amazing, amazing man.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what he said to you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Other than, "Good to meet you," and--mostly, mostly small talk.  Because his speech was a speech that was done when President Clinton was at a kind of low mark, in terms of the scandal that was at the White House, and he came to support President Clinton--I'm sorry, I'm not saying that's the reason he came, but in his remarks in the East Room [White House, Washington, D.C.], that is what he talked about, and how good President Clinton had been to Africa, to him and, you know, and about how much he loved him.
Speaker 1: Did you play any role in that whole--in the Clinton situation, the Monica Lewinsky situation?
Speaker 2: No.  That was one I was definitely just reading about in the newspaper.
Story_ID: 612118
Speaker 1: So you said you made a move then in 2007?
Speaker 2: In, in 2007, January 1, 2007, I became the presidency of the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies [Washington, D.C.].  So I left, and my last day at my law firm [Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker LLC; Paul Hastings LLC] was December 31, 2006.
Speaker 1: And you had mentioned that before you made that move in 2007 that you had done some work in telecommunications, and you had a leadership role in that, in those years.  Did you know [HistoryMaker] Deborah Lathen of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know Deborah Lathen, I know Deborah Lathen very well, and had a lot of interaction with her when she was head of the cable bureau at the FCC.  I still talk to her from time to time now that she is now on the board of the British company [BT Group plc].
Speaker 1: Can you share any stories about your interaction over the years?  She's a HistoryMaker as well.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Well, Deborah was very much at the top of her game at the FCC in the cable bureau, dealing with a lot of powerful industries where you have to have a certain type of personality to do that.  And she, she had the good fortune of having someone that she knew fairly well as the chairman of the FCC, Bill Kennard [William E. Kennard].  And she did an outstanding job, you know, at the commission.  I, at the time, did not have any cable clients, so I didn't really have a lot of dealings with her at the cable bureau.  We would just meet on a friendly basis over the years.
Speaker 1: What about [HistoryMaker] Michael Powell?
Speaker 2: Michael Powell, I did have dealings with him during--I knew him before he became chair of the FCC.  Had a number of client meetings with him over the years, and we would get together on a, on a personal basis.
Speaker 1: Can you tell any, share any stories about Michael Powell?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know any stories in terms of just--
Speaker 1: Just the kind of person he is--that would demonstrate the type of leader--
Speaker 2: Michael was very deliberate and very thoughtful in his process.  He didn't like meetings that much.  He preferred to--he liked to read a lot, and do his little, you know, exercise to help with his back problems.  But, but, but, but he was, he was a good, he was a good FCC chairman.  He had his fair share of battles with different, different, different industries.
Speaker 1: Did you have a chance to meet and develop a friendship with Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]?
Speaker 2: Oh, only have met his father, but I don't have a relationship with him.  I see him at different social events.  He's friends with a friend of mine, so I see him there, and, but I don't know him personally.
Story_ID: 612119
Speaker 1: So talk about your experience with the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies [Washington, D.C.], African American.
Speaker 2: Yes, the Joint Center has been a, it's been a great experience for me.  It was Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] who called me in late 2006 to say that the Joint Center was going to be changing leaders, and he thought that that was something that I may want to consider doing.  I had a--I knew a lot about the Joint Center because my father [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.] was the first African American elected to the county council of Orangeburg's county [Orangeburg County Council] in 1976.  And when the Joint Center was first started in 1970 through a grant through the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], one of the primary things they were doing was training newly elected African American offic- officials on how to do budgets, how to legislate, how to get along, and things of that nature.  And so I knew what great history the Joint Center had, from my father and everyone else, and I'll stop there.
Story_ID: 612120
Speaker 1: --Speaking about your father [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.] and his role with the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yes.  As I said earlier, my father was one of the first, one of the first three African Americans elected to the Orangeburg County Council in 1976.  So, we knew well about the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies which had been set up in 1970 to really help newly elected African American officials, teach them how to do budgets, teach them how to legislate, and other different, different activities.  And at the time, in 1970 when the Joint Center was first established, there were less than fifteen hundred African Americans elected to office.  Today, there are more than ten thousand.  So, the Joint Center has a great legacy.  After having worked on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] for a number of years, I worked in the law firm [Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker LLC; Paul Hastings LLC].  Both of my parents died within the last two years.  They both were, you know, public servants in terms of my father, you know, being an educator, you know, a minister, a politician, my mother [Alethia Hilton Everett] being a social worker in the community and a schoolteacher.  And I thought it was time that I give something back, and what better place to do it than at the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, which has a, such a great legacy.  It's the only think tank that deals with public policy issues that impact--with a focus on African Americans and people of color.  It's also the only free standing think tank that does that.  We're not associated with a university, you know; we're independent.  So, I just thought it was a great opportunity to leave the law firm and to come here.  And if my parents were alive, they would be proud that I had come full circle and was doing this.
Story_ID: 612121
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your work here.
Speaker 2: Yes.  We (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Key issues?
Speaker 2: Key issues, we, we are a--we have the Health Policy Institute here [Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C.], where we're involved in a number of health issues impacting the African American community.  We had a Dellums Commission that was chaired by Congressman Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums] that looked at life choices for African American males and different things that we can do to help African American males.  Dr. Lou Sullivan [HistoryMaker Dr. Louis Sullivan], the former head of health and health services [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] is heading up a project for us called the Sullivan Alliance.  And the Sullivan Alliance is going to bring more African Americans into the field of doctors and nurses, health administrators.  Because we figured if we do that, there would be better service in our communities for people who are ill.  We're getting, getting ready to undertake a new project dealing with climate change.  It's an issue that African Americans have not had a seat at the table, and we have not been involved in that.  And we were fortunate to get a grant from the Bipartisan Policy Center [Washington, D.C.], which is a coalition that's chaired by the four former [U.S.] Senate majority leaders: Baker [Howard Baker], Mitchell [George J. Mitchell], Dole [Bob Dole], and Daschle [Tom Daschle].  And they gave us an initial grant of five hundred thousand dollars to set up a climate change program here at the Joint Center.  So, we're just in the initial stages of doing that.  And then we are going to create three additional institutes here at the Joint Center.  We currently have the Health Policy Institute.  We're going to create a civic engagement and political participation institute [Civic Engagement and Governance Institute] that deals with a lot of the civic engagement and issues that we already deal with here at the Joint Center, but put it in the form of an institute.  We're also going to create a new media and community institute [Media and Technology Institute], where we're having discussions on that within the next couple of weeks.  Hope to roll that out by spring, looking at how minorities are portrayed in the community, trying to help out the National Policy Alliance.  The National Policy Alliance is a group of nine African American organizations that represent the ten thousand elected officials.  We are the--we at the Joint Center are the convener of that group; they all meet here at the Joint Center on a quarterly basis, the heads of these organizations.  And that includes the Congressional Black Caucus, the national caucus of state legislators [National Black Caucus of State Legislators], the county officials, the local officials, the school boards, the judicial council, and two others.  And so, we're trying to figure out in these institutes how to involve them.  And probably in the next year or so, we'll be rolling out an education and workforce opportunity institute [Education Policy and Opportunity Institute].  That is the fourth one that we have on our list, to continue to do all the things and work with all the groups and partnerships that we work with.  We're doing projects now with, you know, AARP [American Association of Retired Persons], the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and others that we are seeking partnerships with.  So, it's a very exciting time for us here at the Joint Center, and particularly with what's happening, you know, in the political world now on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.].  The Congressional Black Caucus got its start here, when there were less than, less than ten members.  And now they have four members who are chairs of major committees.  You have, you know, an African American running for, you know, for president.  You have an African American governor.  And we hope to have an impact, or at least provide the research for different policy things that are going on in this country.  So, I'm excited to be here at the Joint Center.
Story_ID: 612122
Speaker 1: Now the person who was the prior CEO--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --President Togo West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --did you have a relationship with him?  Are you carrying on some of his ideals?  Or are you creating your own agenda?
Speaker 2: We, some of the issues that Secretary West had when he--he had the Health Policy Institute.  And a lot of those issues--the Dellums Commission worked with African American youth, and they're still carrying on those.  Those were kind of done on his watch.  We are also trying at the same time to go in a direction where we can create additional institutes; I think that model will work better for us here.  We can focus on certain issues and create the environment that we need to impact on policy.  So, you know, [HistoryMaker] Eddie Williams was the head of the Joint Center [Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C.] for thirty-two years, and then Togo West for a short period of time, about eighteen months, and then, and then me.  So the Joint Center has had--and then Frank Reeves was the first director of the Joint Center from 1970 to 1972 when it was located on the campus of Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And then they moved in '72 [1972] and became independent of Howard.  So there's just a lot of work to do in the community.  And you--here you can see your, your impact, and your, you know, and one's involvement.  So, I'm just, I'm delighted to be here.  My son [Jason Everett] and my family and my daughter-in-law [Heidi Jackson Everett] and everybody is excited about me taking on this, this challenge.  Because they know that I'm doing it not for, not for the money, but because, you know, I have a connection to these issues.  I have a relationship to, you know, what's happening in our community and, you know, I want to have some positive impact.  And it's exciting to, you know, interact with the black elected officials around the country.
Speaker 1: Will you play a role in this next presidential election?
Speaker 2: Well, the role that we play, you know, we are nonpartisan.  We provide information to any candidate that asks us in different areas, whether it's social security, Medicaid, healthcare.  We have sponsored a number of polls during the presidential debate.  We did a poll in South Carolina talking about the attitudes of African American voters and the issues that they were concerned about.  We released a nationwide poll at the National Press Club [Washington, D.C.] in late November I believe it was, talking again about the issues which African American voters were concerned about.  And they, at the time before the economy started doing what it's doing now, the issues were African Americans were most concerned about the war in Iraq [Iraq War] and about the economy and jobs and healthcare.  And those were the three issues of both polls that we did, that they were most concerned about.  And, you know, we asked them--and they were most--the issue that came up most in the poll was not the one of experience in terms of what they wanted in a candidate, but they wanted mostly change.  And that one got a much higher percentage in our poll than otherwise.  So, we will be involved from a policy standpoint, and we will be presenting to the next presidential candidate the issues which African Americans are most concerned about.  We'll be getting-- putting--we will be preparing an issue book to present to the next president (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you have a relationship with the candidates, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], along with the Republican candidates?
Speaker 2: Of the candidates that are running, I have a personal relationship with John McCain, who I've known since the '80s [1980s]; I can't remember exactly what date in the '80s [1908s].  And I have a personal relationship with Senator Obama, and I, and I know Senator Clinton.  I think I know President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] a little better, but I know Senator Clinton.  So those are the ones that I--and I've met others, but those three I know reasonably well.  I mean at least they know my name (laughter).
Story_ID: 612123
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're excited about the future?
Speaker 2: I'm excited about the future.  The future is going to be tough, but the future is going to be good.  And we just want to be sure that we pave a way for people who are much younger than me to have a better life.  Because when I was growing up my parents [Alethia Hilton Everett and Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.] and others of their generation always knew that regardless of what happened, my life was going to be better than their lives.  I think that we are at a point in history right now where we can't be sure that the next generation's life is going to be better.  So, we at the Joint Center [Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C.] are going to start working on that, to be sure that we can create better life options through research for the generation that comes behind us.  Because again, it's sad to look at what's happening in the country today and to look at our young people and not to know that their lives are going to be better than what me and you are fortunate enough to have.
Speaker 1: From this position in your life today, what message would you like to send young people, future generations of young people?
Speaker 2: First of all, I would like to tell them to get a good education.  Learn as much as you can when you are given the opportunity.  Act like you are a sponge, and just soak everything up.  You may not use all of it, but just soak everything up.  And as my father used to tell me, "Son, always say please and thank you because please and thank you will get you where education will not."  So I, and I would also want to tell young people: don't just be mediocre.  Try to be the best that you can be, and try to do whatever you do so that no one else, living or dead, or yet to be born, can do it better than you.  And if you do that, even if you don't reach your goal, you will be doing fairly well.  And always seek opportunities to help others.  You know, show your love to others.  And there's room for everyone.  So, just try to help your fellow man.
Story_ID: 612124
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you have a son.
Speaker 2: I have a son that I'm very proud of.
Speaker 1: Is he carrying on your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, he's probably doing better than my legacy.  My son is thirty years old now.  He's a graduate of Duke University [Durham, North Carolina].  Met his wife at Duke University, got married about four years ago.  He worked in the Clinton administration [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] for a brief period over at the minority business development administration [Minority Business Development Agency] for a year before going to law school at William and Mary [William and Mary Law School, Williamsburg, Virginia].  Worked at a firm in Virginia, a small firm in Virginia for a short period of time, then went to Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] to work for Senator Barbara Boxer of California.  And then later on he had the opportunity to work for Mel Watt as his judiciary committee [U.S. House Committee on the Judiciary] legislative assistant, and that is what he's doing now.  He always remembered--as a young boy, I talked about the fun that I was having on Capitol Hill.  And he thought that while his wife was still gainfully employed that he would go work on--because Hill salaries are not that high--that he would go work on, on the Hill, gain that experience.  And about four months ago they had their first son, who of course is my first grandchild.  And so, there's a lot of excitement in the Everett family.
Speaker 1: And we were talking a little bit about how this position with Congressman Watt came about.  And I mentioned the name Joyce Brayboy--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who was his chief of staff--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for a number of years.  How did your son--
Speaker 2: Well, there was, there was a party being held in my honor sponsored by the Congressional Black Caucus, where the chairwoman, Congresswoman Kil- Congresswoman Kilpatrick [Carolyn Cheeks Kilpatrick] and Jim Clyburn [HistoryMaker James Clyburn] were the speakers.  And Congressman Watt and many other members of the Black Caucus attended, along with Joyce Brayboy.  And just during the course of the conversation she met my son, and recognized and realized that he worked for congressman--for Senator Boxer and asked would he be interested in interviewing for a job that Congressman Watt had.  Thought about it overnight, and he was very interested in the judiciary committee issues.  And called her back and said he would be--would like to interview.  She did an initial interview and several days later brought him back to meet with Congressman Watt, and the rest is history.  And he loves working with him, and the opportunities and the issues which they have an opportunity to confront before the judiciary committee.
Speaker 1: And again, spell out the names: your son, your daughter-in-law, and your grandson (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My son--my son's name is Jason, J-A-S-O-N, Gordon, G-O-R-D-O-N, Everett, E-V-E-R-E-T-T [Jason Everett].  And my daughter-in-law's name is Heidi, H-E-I-D-I, Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N, Everett, E-V-E-R-E-T-T [Heidi Jackson Everett].  And their son's name is Alan, A-L-A-N, middle name Ralph, R-A-L-P-H, last name Everett, E-V-E-R-E-T-T [Alan Everett], born on September 22, 2006.
Story_ID: 612125
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As you look back on your life, what are you proudest of?
Speaker 2: I'm proudest of my, of my family.  Not my accomplishments, but of my, of my family and the background and love that my family gave me in order to do what I'm doing.  The encouragement, the idea that even though I started my life growing up with segregation, there was no fence too high, no mountain too high that you could not do.  And that was further inspired by my going to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and them kind of putting that in your head too.  And I'm proud of my, you know, my wife [Gwendolyn Harris Everett], who is an art historian and author of many children's books, currently the chair of the art department at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And she really got me through some of these things when I was practicing law and we would go to very wealthy people's house, and I wouldn't have the foggiest notion what a particular piece of art was.  But she would know, and she could kind of go in the, you know, follow up with the conversation.  And I'm also proud of both my son [Jason Everett] and my daughter-in-law [Heidi Jackson Everett] and what they do, and the grandson [Alan Everett] and my sister [Brenda Everett Mitchell] who is a professor at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill [Chapel Hill, North Carolina] in speech pathology, and her family and my two nephews. And, so, so--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's all about family.
Speaker 2: It's all about family, it's all about love.  Because at the end of the day, you know, after you do whatever you do, it's your family and the people that love you that count the most.  You can't take any of these possessions with you when you die.  Or when you're having problems, you want to be able to pick up the phone and talk to someone and have them, you know, talk back to you.  So, these other things are things--and they, you know, and they are good.  And I'm, you know, I'm happy, you know, with the things that I have done so far, and I hope that I can make a mark here at the Joint Center [Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C.] to improve (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What would you like your legacy to--oh--
Speaker 2: --to improve the lives of African Americans and people of color.
Story_ID: 612126
Speaker 1: So perhaps that's the answer to my next question: what would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: That Ralph Everett [HistoryMaker Ralph Bernard Everett] worked hard during his career for others.  He--Ralph worked to improve the lives of African Americans and people of color.  Ralph helped others to understand African Americans regardless of, of, of their race, and that I had an impact on people coming behind me.  I spent a lot of my time talking to young people, talking to people about what my experiences have been, so that they don't make the same mistakes, or that they understand that it is possible to do certain things.  I almost never turn down any person who is a young people who kind of calls and say they want to sit--.  I mean there are people here on the staff that have kids who they just want to bring by to see that a black person, even though I'm at a predominantly black think tank, but that a black person--particularly when I was at the law firm [Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker LLC; Paul Hastings LLC], or sitting on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]--that they can occupy these offices, so that they can aspire to be like that.  So, that's all.  I'm just a little country lawyer from South Carolina who has been blessed to do well by the things that my parents [Alethia Hilton Everett and Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.] and others around me instilled to me.
Speaker 1: Well, Ralph Everett, you should be very proud of your accomplishments in your lifetime so far.  And I wish you the very best in the future.  Thank you so much for participating in this HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, thank you very much for being kind enough to interview me (laughter).  Thank you.
Story_ID: 612127
Speaker 1: This is my mother, father and my sister Brenda [Brenda Everett Mitchell] on the occasion of my fiftieth birthday party, June 23, 2001.
Speaker 2: Is that your sister on the far right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1: Brenda.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is Ralph Everett and his lovely bride (laughter), Gwen Harris Everett [Gwendolyn Harris Everett], on the day of our marriage, June 22, 1974.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is Ralph, my son Jason, my wife Gwen and Senator Hollings [Ernest Hollings] at my going away party from Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] when I left to join the law firm.  And this was in October of 1989.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: And start from the left.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Ralph Everett, Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], and my wife Gwen at a celebration party for Ron Brown in October or November of 1989.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is a picture at my son's wedding.  Starting from the left, Ralph Everett; my mother, Alethia Everett; my daughter-in-law, Heidi Everett [Heidi Jackson Everett]; my son Jason Everett; my mother-in-law, Dorothy Harris [Dorothy Thompson Harris]; and my wife, Gwen Everett.  And the date was June 12, 2004.
Speaker 2: And the occasion?
Speaker 1: The wedding of Heidi and Jason Everett at Alfred Street Baptist Church in Alexandria, Virginia.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a picture at my mother and father's wedding on August 12, 1950.  Starting from the left is my father's brother and my uncle, T.O. Everett; my father, F.G.S Everett, Jr. [Francis G.S. Everett, Jr.]; my mother, Alethia Hilton Everett; and my aunt, Martha Sizemore, S-I-Z-E-M-O-R-E, Everett [ph.].
Speaker 2: That's a weird picture, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in October of 1989 in the Russell Senate Office Building on Capitol Hill on the occasion of my leaving Capitol Hill to join the law firm of Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker [Paul, Hastings, Janofsky and Walker LLC; Paul Hastings LLC].  Starting from left is Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina; my son, Jason Everett; my wife, Gwen Everett; me, Ralph Everett.  At the mic [microphone] is Senator Hollings of South Carolina, and standing next to him is Senator John Danforth of Missouri.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now I'm trying to think.  This is a picture of my law school graduation.  These are nine of the ten African Americans who were in my class.  And this picture was taken in May of 1976.  Starting from the back row on the left is Kenneth Marshall [ph.].  Next to him, Yvonne Mims [Yvonne Mims Evans]; Glenn Embree, E-M-B-R-E-E; Martina Bradford, B-R-A-D-F-O-R-D [Martina Lewis Bradford]; Johnnie Mask, J-O-H-N-N-I-E, M-A-S-K.  On the front row, starting from the left is Wayne Crumwell, C-R-U-M-W-E-L-L; Allard Allston, A-L-L-A-R-D, A-L-L-S-T-O-N; and me, Ralph Everett.  And the last person on the front row on the right is Marion Jervay, and she spells that M-A-R-I-O-N, J-E-R-V-A-Y.  And missing from this photo, who would have made the tenth black person at Duke law school [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] in 1976, is Barbara Arnwine, A-R-N-W-I-N-E [Barbara R. Arnwine].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This beautiful baby is [HistoryMaker] Ralph Bernard Everett, B-E-R-N-A-R-D, at two months old.  So this was taken in August of 1951.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is Ralph Everett on the date of his high school graduation from Wilkinson High School [Orangeburg-Wilkinson High School] in Orangeburg, South Carolina.  And this picture was taken in June of 1969.  And the little gold bar meant I was smart (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my family.  Starting on the back row is me, Ralph Everett.  Next to me is my sister, Brenda.  On the front row starting left is my father, F.G.S. Everett, Jr., and my mother, Alethia Everett.  And this was taken around 1970.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Ralph Everett and President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] in 1998; I don't know when it was.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Maynard Jackson and Ralph Everett, Maynard Jackson, the mayor of Atlanta [Georgia].  And this was taken around 1981, but I could be way off.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, ready?
Speaker 1: Yes.  This is a picture of Ron Brown, the chair of the Democratic National Committee, and Ralph Everett in October of 1989 at my going away party.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is Ralph Everett and General, General Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] in his office at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] during the last week of his service as head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Doesn't matter where they go.  This is Dr. Benjamin E. Mays, mentor of Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and Ralph Everett in 1982.  I don't know the month.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is Senator John McCain and Ralph Everett in October, 1989.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is in the Senate commerce committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation] hearing room when Senator Kennedy was speaking to constituents from South Carolina.  On the left is Senator Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy].  The woman next to him is Wendy Carson [ph.].  Next to her is Milton Greene, G-R-E-E-N-E [ph.].  Next to him is Laurie Thompson, L-A-U-R-I-E, T-H-O-M-P-S-O-N.  The gentleman with his hands clapping is Andy Chisholm, A-N-D-Y, C-H-I-S-H-O-L-M [Andrew Chisholm] who was the first black U.S. Marshal from the State of South Carolina.  The fellow in the light suit and the big hair is Ralph Everett.  And right in front of Ralph Everett is--last name, Bowers [Karl S. Bowers], B-O-W-E-R-S, and I forget his first name, but he was the federal highway administrator, or deputy highway administrator.  And next to him in the corner is I. DeQuincey Newman, who was the head of the South Carolina NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a picture taken at the Ritz Carlton in Tysons Corner, Virginia on June 23, 2001 on the occasion of my fiftieth birthday party.  Starting from the left is Ronald Johnson [ph.] of Alexandria, Virginia; Riley Temple [HistoryMaker Riley K. Temple] of Washington, D.C.; Ralph Everett; William "Bill" Kennard [William E. Kennard], former chairman of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission]; and Thurgood Marshall [Thurgood Marshall, Jr.], son of [U.S.] Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  This is a picture of President George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], Barbara Bush, and Ralph Everett in 1991.  I don't remember the month.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my son, Jason Everett, Johnnie Cochran and myself in the summer of 2005.
Speaker 1: Or might be 2004.
