Story_ID: 668963
Speaker 1: Great (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 1: It's [HistoryMaker] Matrice Ellis-Kirk, M-A-T-R-I-C-E, Ellis, E-L-L-I-S, Kirk, K-I-R-K.
Speaker 2: And ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: March 9, 1961, Cleveland, Ohio, Cuyahoga County.
Speaker 2: Okay and what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: I'm an executive search consultant with RSR Partners.
Speaker 2: Okay. And what is--you were the former first lady in the City of Cleveland--
Speaker 1: I was--
Speaker 2: --as well.
Speaker 1: City of Dallas.
Speaker 2: Dallas, I'm sorry, I'm get- I'm get--that's right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) The former first lady of Dallas.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we can't get them mixed up so--
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: All right and--
Speaker 1: Texas.
Speaker 2: --what is today's date?
Speaker 1: I think today is March 16, nine- 2017.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We are in Dallas, Texas at the offices of RSR partners
Speaker 2: And you know this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 2911 Turtle Creek Boulevard.
Speaker 2: Okay, the reason why I'm asking these, these kinds of questions is this is--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --oral history so we have to--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --sort of slate it like that.
Speaker 1: Suite 925 (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 668964
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that we kind of ask as a warm up and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I do have a favorite food. Collard greens (laughter), yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is, wow I guess black, yeah black.
Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I love summer.
Speaker 1: Okay. Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Life is choices; you have a choice every day.
Story_ID: 668965
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history.  Your mother's side and your father's [Frank Ellis (ph.)] side but we'll start with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, sure.
Speaker 1: Can you name your--can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Saralynn--or is Saralynn Patricia Grant Ellis [Saralynn Grant Ellis]. S-A-R-A-L-Y-N-N, Patricia, P-A-T-R-I-C-I-A, Grant, G-R-A-N-T, Ellis, E-L-L-I-S.
Speaker 1: All right and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born August 28, 1940 in Butler County, Georgia--Butler, Georgia, Taylor County.
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace them and what are the stories on that side?
Speaker 2: My mother's great-grandmother was from the Roquemore family in Taylor County.  They were a very large plantation family and the Roquemore compound actually was adjacent to the old plantation that they all worked on coming out of slavery.  Her mot- her great-grandmother or grandmother, my great-grandmother and we called her Grandma Ditty [ph.] left the Roquemore compound when she had my, when she had my grandmother.  Lore, and we don't know if it's true or not, we don't know for a fact, but lore is that the Roquemore family shunned my great-grandmother when she chose to keep my grandmother.  She was the product of a white father and we don't know if it was consensual or not whether that my grandmother coming to be--whether my great-grandmother had a consensual or nonconsensual relationship with the man.  We came to learn that he was a prominent member in the--later in life he was a prominent person but my family never talked about it.  It was part of that--I was a part of that generation where there were aspects that you just didn't talk about.
Speaker 1: Was he a Roquemore?
Speaker 2: He was not, he was a--we don't know.  He was either a principal or a mayor or somebody along those lines in the city.  So when my grandmother--my great-grandmother had a very small plot of land and raised my grandmother in Butler, Georgia. And my grandfather we don't know where he came from.  We believe he had family in Florida, but we know that he spent some time in Louisiana and we also know that he spent some time in North Carolina.  His name was Milton Grant and he married my grandmother Renell [Renell Roquemore Grant] and we don't know much about him at all.  He was a deacon in Butler and a mason.  So he built a lot of the homes that were built in Butler and our house sat on a corner in Butler and it was one of the more prominent houses and he was definitely one of the more prominent men of color in the, in the community.
Story_ID: 668966
Speaker 1: My mother [Saralynn Grant Ellis] was the middle child.  She had three older siblings and two younger siblings and she was a very smart woman but very precocious growing up from what I, what I heard--stories.  She and my uncle who--my uncle is alive and he actually lives here in Lewisville, Texas and when they come together they talk about their father [Milton Grant] and mother [Renell Roquemore Grant] with great pride.  They, they remained married as a couple and were very active in their, in their church--in their neighborhood church.  They tell stories about the segregation times there.  The Ku Klux Klan [KKK] marching through and how everyone still left my grandfather alone and how his kids were some of the most precocious but for whatever reason our family was not ever touched.  And they attribute some of it to the fact of who my grandmother's Roquemore father likely was. This gentleman that we all don't know who he is but we know he was involved somehow or another because some of the stories that they tell, my mother's oldest brother should have been hung, some of the things he did (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So are there stories where he actually interacts with the family from even--
Speaker 1: My grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yeah the one that--the politician, the white politician.
Speaker 1: We don't know anything about--no I don't--they've never talked about it as much I tried to learn about it. So I--
Speaker 2: But you say there are stories where family members got in trouble but they got off (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There are stories. Somehow or another we always managed--the kids somehow another managed to not be touched.
Speaker 2: That's interesting 'cause I've heard other stories about the community as a whole knows--
Speaker 1: Oh they all knew (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) even though they don't speak of it.
Speaker 1: They didn't talk about it at all.
Speaker 2: But they know. And--
Speaker 1: My aunts--everyone knew something but no one--and I would always ask my mother and my uncle who was it and they were like, "We--they never told us and we never asked and we knew better not to."
Speaker 2: These relations are complex and there are consequences for them.
Speaker 1: Absolutely so, but just--
Speaker 2: So what's the story--the relative who was almost hung what was he accused of?
Speaker 1: So that was my Uncle Otis [Otis Grant (ph.)], and my Uncle Otis was, as my mother says he was mean (laughter).  But what that translates into today was that he suffered no fools and he took very little from anyone.  Back then that was--you just didn't do that and apparently a white man apparently said something or did something to him and he shot him with his BB gun.  Did not kill him but shot that man--white man and he survived.
Speaker 2: Was he a youth at the time?
Speaker 1: He was, he was young and he did not move out of his house, he survived and everyone knew about it and honestly that's the only person I've ever (laughter) heard of during that time that something like that occurred and there were no ramifications.  So. And that's why they, they believe that whoever it was that was white that my great-grandmother had my grandmother with had to be prominent for that to have been the case.
Story_ID: 668967
Speaker 1: Did your mother go to school in Butler [Georgia] and grow up in Butler (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother went to school in Butler, was valedictorian of her class and then went on to Fort Valley State [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  After she finished her freshman year, she went to live with her cousin Jackie [ph.] in Cleveland, Ohio where she met my father and, and she became pregnant that summer and she and my father married in November and I was born in March.
Speaker 1: Okay now, all right. Let me go to your father's side then I'll put them together, all right?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father's name is Frank Leondas Ellis [Frank Ellis (ph.)].  He was born May 25, 1940.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell Leondas?
Speaker 2: L-E-O-N-D-A-S, which is the name of my brother [Leondas Ellis].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was May 25, 1940, he died November 1986.
Speaker 1: Okay. He was young, he was forty-six years old.
Speaker 2: He was forty-six years old when he died of cancer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Edwight, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Edwight.
Speaker 2: Yes, it is a town that no longer exists.
Speaker 1: Is it one word or two words?
Speaker 2: E-D-W-I-G-H-T
Speaker 1: Okay, Edwight, West Virginia
Speaker 2: It was close to Beckley, West Virginia is the way I remember them talking about it.  It is a town that no longer exists.  It was a railroad depot city and the pictures that you see its coalmining and it had a railroad that took the coal out.  And my, my great-grandmother, Bertha Mae Miller [Bertha Miller], had my grandmother, Lillian Mae Miller [Lillian Miller Bowden (ph.)] who then became an Ellis and then became a Bowden.  My grandmother--my great-grandmother married at age fourteen to Lindsey Miller [ph.], had my grandmother, and my grandmother had two siblings.  My grandma Lilly was the middle of her two siblings.  She was the matriarch of our family and really the mainstay in Cleveland, Ohio.  She married at age fourteen as well in West Virginia to my grandfather Sonny Ellis, his name was William Ellis [ph.] but they called him Sonny, and he was coalmining as well.  And they left Cleveland--or left West Virginia for Cleveland in the early '50s [1950s] moving to Cleveland from West Virginia. My grandmother ran a dry cleaning business in Cleveland.  My father was one of, if I recall, she had eighteen children.  My father was one of eighteen.  Not all of her kids survived.
Speaker 1: That's more than most large families, eighteen is a lot.
Speaker 2: She procreated (laughter) yes. But I believe--and I think it's eighteen because not all of them were biologically hers.  I think she had two that came into it from my grandfather.  So she had sixteen--she did have sixteen.
Speaker 1: That's still--
Speaker 2: Yeah that's still a lot.
Speaker 1: Were most of them born in West Virginia?
Speaker 2: All of them were born in West Virginia and when they moved to Cleveland all of her children had been born.  So she came to Cleveland like the Beverly Hillbillies literally with everyone in tow.  When she moved there we lived in a home with four stories, three stories and a basement and everybody lived in the house, so--for, for a period of time until they ar- all started moving out.
Story_ID: 668968
Speaker 1: Did your father [Frank Ellis (ph.)]--now he was born in 1940, did he finish school in West Virginia (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father did not. I don't--my father did not finish high school.  My father was a compulsive gambler and a habitual drug user.
Speaker 1: So was he around much when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: He was around enough that I mean I knew him.  My grandmother and great-grandmother--when my mother [Saralynn Grant Ellis] had me, my mother and father obviously, my mother was very young 'cause she was a freshman in college so by the time she had me she was twenty-one years old.  So they were working and my great-grandmother and grandmother took me and raised me.  So I grew up in the home of my great-grandmother and grandmother.
Speaker 1: The maternal side.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh--no my father's side my paternal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your father's side? Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --my father's side.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause you described their home.
Speaker 2: They were in Cleveland, Ohio so I lived with my great-grandmother, Bertha [Bertha Miller] and my grandmother, Lilly [Lillian Miller Bowden (ph.)].  So they raised me and I would see my mom and dad from time to time but he moved to Detroit [Michigan] for a job in the car factories where my uncle had moved and so my father and mother moved from Cleveland to Detroit depending on their lifestyle.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they stayed together.
Speaker 2: They stayed together until 1978 or thereabouts, '76 [1976] actually, 1976, yes.
Speaker 1: That's interesting (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So she supported him, but my grandmother and great-grandmother wanted me to have stability so they took me in and thank god they took me in so.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: But my mother--then I have a brother [Leondas Ellis] that's a year--
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about them in a minute but let me ask you is there--we know your mother left Fort Valley State [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] and over the summer she went to Cleveland and there she meets your father.  Is there a story about how they met or how they fell in love?
Speaker 2: They (laughter), they met--my mother was there visiting my cousin Jackie [ph.] and my mother is from small town Georgia and my father is a very handsome man, has the gift of gab and is the guy that every girl wanted and grew up rather spoiled and entitled with my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Was he the youngest of the--
Speaker 2: No he wasn't but he was, he was an influencer.  He knew how to make you feel very good about yourself.  He had a great game (laughter) he really did and so he knew how to pull you in.  So he was quite cunning the way I describe my father.  I don't know if [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson knew him though, but when he wrote 'Papa Was a Rolling Stone' I'm convinced he knew my father (laughter).
Speaker 1: So they get together and--
Speaker 2: They got together and had a deep courtship and then when she was pregnant there was no way my [maternal] grandfather [Milton Grant] would--that she was not going to marry the man that she was pregnant by.  So while they definitely had a deep attraction for one another, I think there was some aspect of the wedding that was also a shotgun wedding, so, yes.
Speaker 1: So they get married (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think my father was ready to settle down. I know my father wasn't ready to settle down.  I'm convinced that's why--there was no question that he knew what drugs and alcohol was before they got married but I think that probably contributed some to him--
Speaker 1: Okay so at a certain point but your grandmother intercedes and really takes--
Speaker 2: My grandmother just took over.  My grandmother basically took over.  She--my mother worked in the dry cleaner--my mother and my grandmother's dry cleaning and my grandmother took care of everything. But she took care of everything for everyone that was the type of woman she was.
Speaker 1: She seems like quite a person to have sixteen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was the matriarch, she took care of every--she took care of everything.  We--in Cleveland there was an area where you saw black owned businesses all up and down 105th Street.  And I was too young to really know what was going on but I remember when the dry cleaning caught fire in the race riots and what I remember is everyone coming to the house crying.  I remember my grandmother holding me really tight and my great-grandmother taking me upstairs and basically separating from everyone to just go upstairs and to take me away.  I just remember asking is everything okay.
Speaker 1: So, so is this--are these the '68 [1968] riots (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These are '68 [1968]--yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're eight years old?
Speaker 2: About seven, yeah yeah.
Speaker 1: Seven okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The riots of '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Yeah '65 [1965], '68 [1968].
Story_ID: 668969
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me ask you this, we always ask this question.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Considering all the influences in your life here, your mother [Saralynn Grant Ellis], your father [Frank Ellis (ph.)], [paternal] grandmother [Lillian Miller Bowden (ph.)], when you consider your personality, your sense of humor, what you look like, what you walk and talk like, you know, your talents who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: You know I think both my grandmother and my [paternal] great-grandmother [Bertha Miller] are in me right now.  I mean I cook, I love to cook and I'm in the kitchen and my great-grandmother was the person that took care of everything in the house.  She cooked, she cleaned, she made sure everyone had clean clothes and she was the person that every- that babysat and took care of everyone's children and made sure that they did their homework.  You know just was responsible.  And then my grandmother was the--she was the income earner though my grandfather [William Ellis (ph.)] worked at a--he was on a Budweiser beer truck.  My grandmother ran the family dry cleaning business and took me to work with her and I started working.  I remember at six years old my first job was picking up the pins off of the floor in the dry cleaners and then it was graduated to putting all of the hangers in an area and then it was, okay you need to go to Ms. Amanda's [ph.] sewing school to learn how to sew so that you can put the buttons on the shirts.  So that business acumen and finding a way to make sure everybody was working so that you're not the only one working, I've got a little bit of my grandmother in me in that regard as well.  So I think they are both--I think I've got both of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. But my grandmother and my great-grandmother were my--was the deepest influence and they were--my grandmother was very confrontational, strong willed but empathetic and then my great-grandmother was a force to be reckoned with.  So--and she said what was on her mind so I think I've learned how to temper just because I was with her all the time (laughter) so I temper what I say though I say what I mean, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, a good trait.
Story_ID: 668970
Speaker 1: You were starting to mention your siblings.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You--did you have like one brother or--
Speaker 2: Yes. I actually have three siblings.
Speaker 1: Three, okay.  Can you name them in their order and tell us a little bit about them?
Speaker 2: Yes. So Leondas Maurice Ellis [Leondas Ellis] is my brother that's one year younger than me.  He is--he lives in Cleveland [Ohio] as well.  He suffered a stroke, so he's been on disability ever since then but he's one year younger.  He was born in 1962 and he was my, my baby brother that I had to defend on the school playground when someone took his Hot Wheels and things of that nature, but he was my baby brother.  And then the twins, they were born in 1971, December 26th and my brother Darryl [Darryl Ellis (ph.)].  He lives in Pensacola, Florida; he just left the [U.S.] Navy and then my sister Darlette [Darlette Ellis (ph.)] his twin. She's still in Cleveland, and she's in financial services.
Story_ID: 668971
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in the same neighborhood the whole time or--
Speaker 2: We grew up--so my [paternal] grandmother [Lillian Miller Bowden (ph.)] and [paternal] great-grandmother [Bertha Miller] took me until I was twelve years old and then when I was twelve years old they told me it was time for me to go live with my mother [Saralynn Grant Ellis], and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: We moved to Detroit yes, and that did not--that lasted all of nine months and I called my grandmother and told her that it was not a good way to be living.  It was--my mother had just had my brother [Darryl Ellis (ph.)] and sister [Darlette Ellis (ph.)] so she was going through some post par- what I would tell you today is postpartum depression.  Back then we don't know what we called it; we just knew she wasn't right.  And so we were taking--I was taking care of my brother and sister with her and spending more of my time doing that than anything else.  I went to school every day and my teachers were great in Detroit.  They would let me do my homework and turn it in.  I got straight A's, I had always gotten straight A's so it wasn't that I wasn't doing the work but the level of responsibility at twelve years old was very different than the level of responsibility I had with my grandmother and great-grandmother.  And my grandmother came one night after our lights were turned off and I told her that we were stringing lights from--when she called and she says, "What are you doing?" "I'm stringing lights from our next neighbor so that we can have some lights."  And I don't think it was four hours later that my grandmother was there and she had my aunt's station wagon, she packed us all up, took us back to Cleveland [Ohio] and I enrolled in high school in the seventh grade.  So I had all of, I think all of five month, four months in school in Detroit but my grandmother took us and brought us all into the house.  So my brother [Leondas Ellis], my great-grandmother and my grandmother you know my great-grandmother was at that point saying, "I'm too old to have these babies in my house," but we got my mother into a good place--
Speaker 1: So did your mother come back too from--
Speaker 2: The people that were in the car that night was my brother--my two brothers, my sister, the twins, my brother that's one year younger, myself and my mom.  So she took us all in and we stayed with her until my mother was able to get right and then she about--this was probably about two years later we moved in a house two blocks down from my m- from my grandmother's house.
Story_ID: 668972
Speaker 1: And your father [Frank Ellis (ph.)] had, had he disappeared or what was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had dis- my father was in and out constantly.  So by the time we moved into the house he had come back.  So he was in rehab and he would go in and out of rehab centers, in and out of jobs.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did he normally do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father was not educated as well so he went to truck driving school and then he was lifting in plants and doing different things but it was--he really--he was not a stable job holder.  So he did various things.
Speaker 1: So you said he gambled a lot too.
Speaker 2: He gambled a lot, I'm sure he dealt drugs as well; I can't imagine that he didn't.  He led a very hard life.  And so what, what occurred was basically during that time he was in and out.  Some days he was in our lives but when he was in he was there and my mother [Saralynn Grant Ellis] would tell us we had to respect him.  My [paternal] grandmother [Lillian Miller Bowden (ph.)] would always say, "He's still your father so you have to honor the man that brought you into this earth--on this earth."  I didn't quite understand it so of course as I was growing up and coming into my own, growing up in the house that I grew up in, I had an opinion and a point of view (laughter) so it wasn't always welcomed and sometimes I needed to be put in my place (laughter).  But yeah I had a point of view and I didn't think he belonged, so.  We had a real, we had a tumultuous relationship.  It took me becoming an adult to have an adult conversation with him.
Speaker 1: And he passed when you were twenty-six?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, he did.
Speaker 1: Twenty-six years old.
Speaker 2: He did, he had cancer.  And you know, it was interesting, I remember as a kid, I must have, I had to be in middle school [Lulu Diehl Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio] so seventh or eighth grade, I remember him having a physical and my mother screaming at him saying, "Your internal organs are that of an eighty year old because you've always been abusing your body."  I was like how can a person have--you know as a kid I just remember how can a person have an internal body of an eighty year old, and I remember asking my mother because when I did have a conversation with her when she was able to be with us and be cogent and engaging, I always took those as times to learn as much as I could about why does she make the choices that she's made and what was going on.  And I always, and I do remember her saying to me that he has abused his body for so long that he's basically fried all of his internal organs.  So that stuck with me forever in terms of just you've got to take care of your body.  And, and so that was one of those mindful moments when you say to yourself I, I've got to do better.
Story_ID: 668973
Speaker 1: Well I always ask about all the schools that you attended so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and what--what neighborhood did you live in Cleveland [Ohio] were you on the east (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I lived in east Cleveland. I lived on East 85th Street when I was in Cleveland.  I went to John Raper Elementary School [John W. Raper Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio]--John W. Raper.  I remember my principal's name was Alfred Ialo [ph.] (laughter). Mr. Ialo.
Speaker 1: Okay. So this is the east side of Cleveland and I guess it's the one that most people associate with the black community in Cleveland.
Speaker 2: Oh it was definitely the black community.  On our school we had--I was on East 85th and on the mound behind my elementary school was Hough [Cleveland, Ohio] and Hough was really the area that burned down.  Then you had 105th Street and Hough [Avenue] is where the riots actually begin and then they worked their way down.  So I remember as a kid in those neighborhoods and I remember the emergence of the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and the black nationalists.  Free lunch was in our school.  We had, you know--but it was a vibrant black community.  I remember walking to school and everyone either on their front porches--front porches being swept down, watered down, you know, the neighborhood streets being watered in the morning.  I remember Mrs. Cotton [ph.], Mrs. B [ph.], all the people that I had to walk by.  So I couldn't take my hair down, I couldn't do anything wrong or else my [paternal] grandmother [Lilian Miller Bowden (ph.)] would know about it--my [paternal] great-grandmother [Bertha Miller] would know about it before I got home, so.  But I went to school; I was a really smart kid.  I skipped the third grade so I went from second to fourth and was a, was a very smart kid and know it all.  So I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So was, was that your personality really?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Totally. I was so, I was such a know it all and such a--all my friends called me--my best friend even to this day, Theresa Robinson [ph.], they used to call me a L7, I was the square 'cause I was a little nerdy (laughter).  But I was the kid that raised my hand, I wanted to answer everything and, and I had something to say about everything.  I read a lot.  My grandmother and great-grandmother for Christmas bought me a set of encyclopedias.  It was the old World Book Encyclopedias and I read those every day.  When I came home from school my grandmother would be cooking and I would have to do my homework and then after I finished my homework I would have to read one of my encyclopedias.  I could watch the news but my television was limited. I had to--and if I was watching television, I had to have a book with me and pretend that I was reading when I was in fact trying to watch 'Gunsmoke' (laughter) with my grandmother.  So, but yeah I was, I was a little smarty.
Story_ID: 668974
Speaker 1: And then I graduated sixth grade in 1972.  But during that time my [paternal] grandmother [Lillian Miller Bowden (ph.)] was involved, again owning a dry cleaning had come out of the race riots that were going on and the revitalization that was occurring in the city and Carl Stokes was running and my grandmother was very engaged.  I remember her saying you have to have a point of view on things. And as a kid I was the one that was always upset that as a girl in school all of the guys in the wintertime could wear pants but girls were not allowed to wear pants.  So we had these cable knits or our socks and we had to walk in Cleveland [Ohio] winter to school [John W. Raper Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] and be freezing.
Speaker 2: This is public school, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But they wouldn't let you wear pants.
Speaker 1: No girls didn't wear pants to school back then, no.  Unh-uh. I actually was a part of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would think they--
Speaker 1: --I was a part of changing that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay well what happened, tell us that story?
Speaker 1: When Carl Stokes was running, he had a group of young people that--
Speaker 2: This was like '67 [1967], right or '68 [1968]?
Speaker 1: This was '68 [1968], '68 [1968] timeframe.  He had a group--this was '68 [1968], six- it was actually a little later than that.  It was probably like '69 [1969], '70 [1970].  We, we were a part of young--it was called Young Leaders [ph.] or something along those lines, I don't remember what it was called exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it was sponsored by the Carl Stokes campaign.
Speaker 1: Yeah it was definitely--
Speaker 2: Young Leaders.
Speaker 1: --you know getting young people involved.  I wasn't a part of PAL. I couldn't, 'cause I didn't play sports.  Like I said I was more interested in my books, I wasn't the kid that was able to run out of the neighborhood or, or those other things.
Speaker 2: Now what did you call it PAL?
Speaker 1: P-A-L, Police Athletic League [Cleveland Police Athletic League].
Speaker 2: Oh PAL, oh yeah okay.
Speaker 1: I wasn't a part of the PAL group or any of those other communities of athletically inclined kids.  Again I was the smart know it all and I remember saying that girls should not have to in the wintertime we should be able to wear pants.  It didn't make any sense. And so I went on, back then  channel 5 news [WEWS-TV, Cleveland, Ohio], I was a part of a view point and had a few minutes to make my case.  My case was that we were biologically the same from body temperature standpoint.  So if boys can be warm in the winter, I did not understand why girls couldn't be warm in the winter and that we had the right to wear--to be warm and comfortable.  And in schools the boys were mannish and they would go underneath the chairs and look under skirts and really how did that help you learn in school.  If you're there to learn then you need to be comfortable and when you think about how we learn and I remember coming up with this argument that when I'm at home and I'm reading, I don't sit with my legs crossed it's not comfortable so what makes you think that I should be able to do that in school.  So it was the beginning of a conversation.  So they changed the dress code for winter months that you could actually wear pants and then it became all year round after that.
Speaker 2: So based on your comments basically, right?
Speaker 1: It was a group, yeah it wasn't just me--
Speaker 2: But it was something you articulated (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but it was something that I started, so yeah.
Speaker 2: Now the term, you used mannish is a term--it's a southern term but you don't hear much of that in the North.  But I just want to make sure that anybody like transcribing this M-A-N-N-I-S-H.
Speaker 1: Precocious.
Speaker 2: Yeah it means a young guy acting more like a grown man than he should, again, interested in females in a man like way.
Speaker 1: Definitely.
Speaker 2: Yeah a lot of those grade school guys would put mirrors on their shoes and try to look up--yeah because the girls were wearing dresses.
Speaker 1: Exactly so those were things that were just like not acceptable.  But my grandmother used that term mannish, so stop being mannish.
Speaker 2: That's something, that's good.
Story_ID: 668975
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I went to Raper [John W. Raper Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] and graduated there and, and I you know, received a lot of awards and things like that you know graduating.  Then seventh grade I went to an all-girl's school, Lulu Diehl [Lulu Diehl Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio] which was public school.
Speaker 2: What was the name of it?
Speaker 1: Lulu Diehn, L-U-L-U, D-I-E-H-L, two different names, Lulu Diehl and it was, it was a public school but it was an all-girl school from seventh to eighth in our neighborhood.  I had a little time in Detroit [Michigan] like I said that I went to school there, but I came back and transferred into Lulu Diehl.
Speaker 2: Where did you go in Detroit?
Speaker 1: Foch [Foch Junior High School; Foch Middle School, Detroit, Michigan], F-O-C-H.
Speaker 2: Okay, and then came back to Lulu Diehl?
Speaker 1: Did--and was there seventh and eighth and graduated eighth grade from there and then went to East High School [Cleveland, Ohio].  While at East High School learned about a program called A Better Chance.  And A Better Chance is a program that takes inner city kids and puts them higher--high performing inner city kids into private and large public schools.
Speaker 2: Okay, or prep schools.
Speaker 1: Yes prep schools.  So I became a A Better Chance kid after finishing tenth grade and went to Mount Greylock Regional High School in Williamstown, Massachusetts in the eleventh and twelfth.
Speaker 2: So Mount Greylock (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: G-R-E-Y-L-O-C-K.
Speaker 1: Okay. I would have got the greys wrong if I hadn't asked (laughter).  Mount Greylock--
Speaker 2: Regional High School.
Speaker 1: --Regional High School.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In Massachusetts (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's in Williamstown, Massachusetts and when you look at the population of people in Williamstown it was the professors of, of Williams College [Williamstown, Massachusetts] kids basically (laughter). Well it was--and people that worked in those communities (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 668976
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is your first time in an integrated setting I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Completely.
Speaker 1: School setting.
Speaker 2: I remember as a kid they had this thing called Friendly Town and I was probably in the fourth grade [at John W. Raper Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] and they would--it was a little program in inner city Cleveland [Ohio] where they would then take you and it was actually a program that [HistoryMaker] George Forbes started and Carl Stokes.  Where they took inner city kids and exposed them to other neighborhoods and communities.  So you would go and stay with a family for a day.  So they would take you and they would--you'd go to the Memorial Stadium [sic. Cleveland Stadium, Cleveland, Ohio], which is where the Cleveland Browns played, and you'd be out in the parking lot and there would be these busses.  There would be all of these white families after they had all the kids bussed.  It was almost like you were getting picked, but they had already preselected your family and you would literally go and stay with a family for a day that had kids your age and there would be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Would their kids stay with your family?
Speaker 2: No it was, it was, it was an assimilation of us to their culture not them to our culture.
Speaker 1: Did you ever think about well why don't they do it the other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know why they didn't want to come to our neighborhood.  Our neighborhood was not safe.  It was not, it was not something--I mean why would anybody subject their kids to our neighborhood (laughter)?
Speaker 1: It certainly would have made an impact on them.
Speaker 2: It would have made an impact on them.  But, you know, at that age you went wow.  I certainly don't think they would not be getting the better end of it.  Yeah as an adult you think about it and say well they need to learn, you know, the other side but as a kid I just remember thinking, ooh I don't want them to deal with that so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know even Cleveland was featured in a movie. The first of a series of black movies about life in the hood called 'Uptight'.
Speaker 2: 'Uptight,' I remember 'Uptight'.
Speaker 1: It came out in '68 [1968] when you were--
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967] or '67 [1967] or thereabouts (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) around that time of the riots yeah and it starred--[HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee was in it.
Story_ID: 668977
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee and [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis had a theater called Karamu House in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yeah they--yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that's where all of us as kids, we all went to Karamu House and I remember Ruby--
Speaker 2: 'Cause Ruby Dee is from Cleveland, yeah.
Speaker 1: I remember Ruby Dee evaluating our play.  I mean I remember as a kid her looking at us and our performance.  I remember I wrote, I wrote a play, my play was not selected.  My best friend's play was selected and I was her star in her play and it was about an L7 girl learning how to become hip and it was basically her--my best friend wrote a story about how she really wanted me to be hip basically and I was not (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now was that actually the term then, L7 when you were growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes ,it was it was called a L7 and it was the L and the letter seven, so--
Speaker 2: And it makes a square.
Speaker 1: --a square, yeah you were a square.
Speaker 2: Now this is a term made popular by Rick James.
Speaker 1: Well actually it was made popular well before Rick James. Rick James he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but he made it popular to everybody else. So now we know the Cleveland--
Speaker 1: In our generation it was
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Cleveland roots to that term, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah this was the '60s [1960s] term.  It was actually--it wasn't just Cleveland actually, it was a term--I mean the Panthers [Black Panther Party] used it lot (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But in Cleveland, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Now see we never used it in Dayton [Ohio], never heard it in Dayton, never heard it in Chicago [Illinois] until Rick James came out then everybody started to talk about L7.  Of course it was applied to me.  But, it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: But it's (laughter)--you know, that's when people started--
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Yes.
Story_ID: 668978
Speaker 1: But I remember [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee and the whole--I remember 'Uptight' as well, so.
Speaker 2: Julian Mayfield.
Speaker 1: It was a very rough neighborhood.  So, you know, so I had had some exposure to whites and of course on the mayor's--that little taskforce I had some exposure to white girls as well and certainly higher echelon blacks as well. So when I went away to this school [Mount Greylock Regional High School, Williamstown, Massachusetts], it was my--not everybody in my family was supportive.  My aunt convinced my family that I should be able to go and do this.  And I remember my argument was if I stay here I'm going to end up pregnant and working in the post office.
Speaker 2: Did you actually--that was your--
Speaker 1: I did.  I had always--my [paternal] grandmother [Lillian Miller Bowden (ph.)] was such an influence at age eight, I travelled with her out of the country so I had exposure.
Speaker 2: Oh where did you go?
Speaker 1: My first trip was to Hawaii, she took me to Hawaii with her.
Speaker 2: With your grandmother?
Speaker 1: Yes, she went every summer on a trip. She and her husband and I were her travel companion from time to time on those trips.  So you know, I had already--I had seen enough to know that what I had in front of me was not going to be enough. The question was how was I going to get it and I knew that education was freedom.  My grandmother always said that.  I knew life was about choices, you wake happy, you wake up sad.  You can go to school or you can not go to school.  You see the consequences of not going to school that's when you see all the people on drugs, alcohol.  They don't have any other avenues.  So you have an opportunity to create something is what she would always tell me.  And so I knew that there was more for me out there.   I didn't know what it looked like, how to get there and I had applied to the Better Chance [A Better Chance] scholarship maybe twice.  So I knew there was something bigger and that if I could get out that I could experience something different and make my family proud of me but not repeat what my other aunts had.  No one had really thought about college or even finished.  'Cause I--my cousins from my father's [Frank Ellis (ph.)] eldest brother, one of them had gone to college didn't finish but had gone.  And then so we had some people that had gone to community college from time to time.
Speaker 2: And your mother [Saralynn Grant Ellis] went to Fort Valley State [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] for a year (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For a year exactly so people talked about it to me that you should really think about it and think about going to school and again you saw the possibilities.  I was reading James Baldwin, I was reading Langston Hughes, I knew about Ruby Dee and [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis was my hero.  Anything Angela Davis wrote I was reading.  I was reading her manifesto and learning about black consciousness.
Speaker 2: Now the Davis' was--they had a sort of a history in the Cleveland [Ohio] area.  I know that Ben Davis her brother played for the Browns [Cleveland Browns], her sister Fania Davis [Fania Davis Jordan] used to lecture on Angela Davis' behalf in Ohio.  I heard her up at Defiance College [Defiance, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Exactly. And you know we had Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio]; we had, in Xenia, Ohio and Central [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  So I had some exposure to all of those and I knew that that's something I wanted and I wanted to do well.
Story_ID: 668979
Speaker 1: And my dream was, when I was eight years old I wanted to be an investment banker.  So my [paternal] grandmother [Lillian Miller Bowden (ph.)] had talked about it.  I first thought I wanted to be a nurse and then I saw blood and I passed--almost passed out so that, that went by the wayside before I was even eight years old.
Speaker 2: Now there aren't many youth that come up with the idea that they want to be an investment banker.  So how did you--did you ha- did you know somebody who was an investment banker (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So grandmother ran the dry cleaning business.  So she got The Wall Street Journal and the newspaper, I later learned that she had it and was looking at the stock market because that's how they figured out what the numbers were.  But she would help me look at the names of companies and we would look at the New York Stock Exchange [New York, New York] and I would learn what the tickers were of those companies.  So then I started reading and started asking questions what's capital, what's equity and so she would have me pull up my World Book Encyclopedia and we would talk about it and I started reading it and just would read about an investment banker.  I said, "That's what I want to be--that's what I want to be."  So I was reading The Wall Street Journal and that's how I made that decision.  Her belief was that, well if they're in The Wall Street Journal they are doing something right.  Their names are on buildings. And so it was Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management] and places like that, Manufacturers Hanover [Manufacturers Hanover Corporation] you know, all of the names of the banks from way back when, National City Bank [First National City Bank; Citibank, N.A.].  So in the summer I would go and do summer internships through the city 'cause they had these little paid internships for inner city kids and you could work at the banks.  So I would work at the bank and clip coupons, J and L Steel [Jones and Laughlin Steel Company] coupons.  But I just knew that I wanted to be an investment banker.  I wasn't really sure exactly what it was but then over time--by the time I was in the seventh grade I knew what an investment banker was so and that's really what I wanted to do.
Speaker 2: You knew they were around a lot of money and had money.
Speaker 1: I knew they made money yeah exactly. And you know, I didn't--I was good in school so when I was good in math and science and everything I read said that's what you could do with math and science so that was what was interesting.  Then when I went off to high school [Mount Greylock Regional high School, Williamstown, Massachusetts], you know I had teacher who I would tell him I really wanted to go to a school that was good in math and science.  He says, "Well you want to go to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that's where, that's where really--people that are good in math and science that's where they go."
Story_ID: 668980
Speaker 1: So how did you--I mean, what was, what was it like in this school [Mount Greylock Regional High School, Williamstown, Massachusetts] in Massachusetts?  What did you learn there, that--?
Speaker 2: So you know, I learned a lot, I really did.  I learned a lot about me especially.  But we lived in a house with six others that were on scholarship and then we had house parents.
Speaker 1: Were they all black?
Speaker 2: Yes, we were all black except for one guy that was Chicano, but we all came from impoverished neighborhoods and the like.  We were from everywhere Boston [Massachusetts], Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], inner city New York [New York], Minnesota--St. Paul, Minnesota and the Bronx [New York].  I'm just thinking about the neighborhoods that people were, were from.  So here we all are in this house and we're all going to a predominantly white school where the only black people are us in the school.  And so you have every experience that one would expect you to have in an environment where there are very few black people and very few that actually lived there.  So you can either find a way to be successful in that environment and take every experience as just that, an experience, a learning experience, or you can have a chip on your shoulder.  All of us I think did a very good job of understanding that we could go back to the neighborhoods that we came from, we would talk about this or we could figure out how to make this work.  None of us wanted to not be successful.  I think that was the common denominator amongst us all is that we all wanted to be more successful than our parents.  Some of us came from broken homes, some of us had no homes, some of us had mother and father both but what was common was that we all wanted to do better.  So the dynamic living amongst a group of people who were homesick but at the same time wanting to do better was--sometimes we were prickly, sometimes we were very collaborative.  We all laughed together, we understood each other's homesickness but we all knew we were there to get something done.  And so you know that was our focus and, and that's what we did.
Story_ID: 668981
Speaker 1: Well, well was there any, there any particular teachers or--
Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or advisers there that [Mount Greylock Regional High School in Williamstown, Massachusetts], that really, you really--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Steve Rogers [Steven Rogers] and Michele [Michele Johnson Rogers], who--Michele and Steve Rogers now they got married shortly thereafter.  Steve Rogers was at Williams College [Williamstown, Massachusetts].  He had also been an ABC [A Better Chance] kid and he was our house adult if you will.
Speaker 1: So he's an African American?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. He is Steve Rogers in Chicago, Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  He started his own business, sold it to Johnson--sold it and went off to--he's now a professor at Northwestern in the grad school.  He was a deep influence at that time because he and Michele, who is now his wife, I don't remember Michele's maiden name but they helped us--we were very strong and I was very strong on the IQ side.  It was the EQ side that I needed help on, I was extremely immature but very--immature dealing with very adult situations.  So learning that EQ part was really what I would say was the biggest experience that I had there.  To understand that what I was deal- understand what I was dealing in the context and how to deal with it so it was learning.  Real good street sense, I had real good street smarts (laughter) but some of the social cues I really didn't understand when you're in a competitive situation how to manage yourself and things of that nature, so.  It was a learning experience; it was assimilation is really what I call it.
Speaker 1: Well give us an example of that--of I guess the--
Speaker 2: So you know, an example was Michele would say when I was in school and somebody was asking me a question that I found stupid, she was like, "You don't have to decimate them, you don't have to say that's the stupidest thing you've ever heard" (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's east Cleveland [Ohio] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Pretty much yeah, she was just like, "You could tem- you could learn how to temper some of those" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Don't preface it with fool or anything like that, right?
Speaker 2: You know think of it as a business situation.  You don't have to lead with everything you know.  You can bring people along with you and sometimes in this environment learn to step back, listen a little more intently.  You don't have to demonstrate that you're the smartest kid in the room 'cause you're no longer the smartest kid in the room.  But at the same time when you're not the smartest kid, you don't have to always just sit back.  So it was that temperament that she was teaching me that it's important to share that you know what you're--what's going on but you don't always have to own the room.  Then when you may not be the smartest person in the room, you still have something to contribute so you still have to give something.  So it was that balance of the two that I probably learned the most in that environment because you can't be the smartest person all the time and you always have something that you can learn.  But when you are in a learning situation you still have the responsibility to ask questions so that you can learn more.  Because all of those experiences are not just an experience for the sake of it but it's an experience for you to learn something, to grow and to develop so you know take all of that and take it to the next level.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was, that was the experience.
Story_ID: 668982
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating--so you were there like how many years?
Speaker 2: I was there for two years.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was there for eleventh and twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay. Oh how did--I should have asked this question.  How did Cleveland [Ohio] look after the end of your first year, between the first year and the second year, how did the old neighborhood look?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And how did people respond to you?  We've interviewed others who've been through Better Chance [A Better Chance] and them coming back.  In fact one brother--
Speaker 2: I didn't go back really to speak of (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You didn't? Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I went home because I had to, but I never really--you know, it's interesting I always knew growing up there was something more just based on my [paternal] grandmother [Lillian Miller Bowden (ph.)]--traveling with my grandmother and my aunts and my mom [Saralynn Grant Ellis] telling the stories.  I always knew there was something more.  And coming back I looked at my cousins that--all the cousins that I looked up to because they were just beautiful, just gorgeous people and I started asking what's the substance.  You know, it's more than just looks but its substance.  I started looking at cousins that were just happy as a butcher when I knew that they could be so much more but they were not willing to invest.  The shortcuts that people took when they didn't have to take shortcuts and then choices that were made that they ultimately had to deal with the consequences.  So, you know, there was a stage that I went through not understanding that some of the circumstances were out of people's control so you can't control everything.  So there was the naive part of me and then there was the part of me that said, okay this person's got that circumstance what are they doing to help lift themselves out of it and not having the confidence to do that.  There was an empathetic part where I just--I felt for everyone and wanted to help everyone but then figured out that I couldn't help everyone 'cause I still had to help myself too.  But there was a part of it that was just sad. Sad. Sadness because I couldn't do it all and I wanted to.  But then there was a part that just said there is nothing here that's going to keep me here.  That, that I, that will take me to that next place.  Friends who thought I was now--I thought I was too good for them which I hadn't.  My best friend [Theresa Robinson (ph.)] was still my best friend; she still is my best friend.  She would always say, "I'm so proud of you, go do this," and I was very proud of her and what she was doing.  So you know we revered in each other's successes.  But then I had other friends that just were not willing to accept me trying to change and so I didn't want to be Al Capone or Al Pacino and you know his character in 'The Godfather' when he says, "Just when you think you're getting out they suck you back in." I didn't want to be that person.  I had received all these things and now I was not going to be able to enjoy the fruits of those things.  So it was--there was a little bit of you've got to get out.  But also my family they would say things like, "You've done really well now you need to go and do better."  So they were very supportive, especially my aunts, by this time my family when they left West Virginia and this was primarily my father's [Frank Ellis (ph.)] side 'cause my mother's side was still pretty much in Georgia.  But my father's side of the family, a very large side of the family obviously, they were between Cleveland, Detroit [Michigan] and Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and everyone was saying there is nothing in these three cities for you.  These are dying cities; you need to go find something else.  So the expectation was that I would go and do something else.  My aunt--my two aunts had by this time moved to California so they were talking about life in California and the promise that they had received out there as well and the opportunities that they were experiencing.  So it was, it was hard coming home and then of course you go through different stages in school.  I had a stage where I had become a--I had always gone to church with my grandmother and my [paternal] great-grandmother [Bertha Miller] but in college--in high school [Mount Greylock Regional High School, Williamstown, Massachusetts] I accepted Christ into my life at that stage.  So there was a period where I was all about the Bible and would come home and my mother was smoking and "How--you're killing your body, this is sin."  So you go through those different stages where as my mother was saying it I was praying every--before I even went to the bathroom I was saying a prayer (laughter).  I mean they saw me go through all of my stages and phases of, of, you know, learning who I was and what was important to me and how to temper all of that so.
Story_ID: 668983
Speaker 1: University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So one of your professors said that was a good place for you to go, right?
Speaker 2: One of my high school [Mount Greylock Regional High School, Williamstown, Massachusetts] teachers yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or your high school teachers.
Speaker 2: It was my SAT prep teacher and he says you know as we were looking--'cause that was back in the day when you had the Lovejoy book [Lovejoy's College Guide] and all the books of different colleges. And I was looking at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], University of Pennsylvania, Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], I think Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania], Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California].  So I made application into all of the schools that I was interested in, and Ohio State rejected me and it just, my heart dropped 'cause I was like maybe I'm not going to go to school.  But then of course all of them; Stanford, Penn (laughter), Swarthmore, Har- I get accepted into all the other schools.
Speaker 1: I mean it is one of the mysteries of--
Speaker 2: Ohio State rejected me.  Of course as--oh and then Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York], I got accepted into Barnard as well.  And I just remember sending them my acceptance.  I sent in my notice from the University of Pennsylvania, I sent that to Ohio State University.  I don't know why I did that but I did do it.  So, and maybe it was that they--I don't know what was going on but--I don't, I--
Speaker 1: So did you want to go to Ohio State really?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be accepted into Ohio State.  I don't know that I really--I don't know.  My [paternal] grandmother [Lillian Miller Bowden (ph.)] always--we went to the Ohio State, Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] games.  We were a big football family.  So yeah part of me wanted to just be accepted, I wasn't sure but I think I would have seriously looked at that to be closer to home.  It was a godsend that it didn't happen 'cause I went to Penn and that was the best thing that's ever happened from an education standpoint (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Penn is a--has the Wharton school of business [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and all that.
Speaker 2: It does. Um-hm, school of business and economics, I was an economics major and, and it was a very difficult school.  I remember that it was a lot of work and so I went to school there pledged Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Incorporated and also was involved in some of the clubs.  And I was a Friars Society [Friars Senior Society] member, I was accepted as a friar in my senior year.
Story_ID: 668984
Speaker 1: You came out of high school [Mount Greylock Regional High School, Williamstown, Massachusetts] in what, what year was it?
Speaker 2: I came out in 1978, graduated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy-eight [1978], okay.
Speaker 2: --from Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in May of '82 [1982]. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay that gives me some sense and this was the golden age of Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] football with Archie Griffin and Woody Hayes and all of that.
Speaker 2: Oh yes. Yes it was, it was the party school too (laughter).  I remember all my friends telling about the parties that they were going to. They'd never heard about a party at Penn.
Speaker 1: Had you heard of Penn before, 'cause most people think of Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] and not Penn (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Other than my, other than my--I had heard of Penn State obviously and Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I had heard about Pitt as well.  So those schools were what we were hearing about.  I ran--in high school I did, I was on the track team so I heard about Renaldo Nehemiah, he was going to go to Morgan State [sic. University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland].  That was the extent of what I had heard, but Archie and all those guys at Ohio State that was what I knew about from a football standpoint.
Speaker 1: Penn was, they have the Penn Relays [Penn Relay Carnival] every year.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was the Penn relays absolutely.
Speaker 1: Right there in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and the 'Wide World of Sports' would always do a broadcast.
Speaker 2: It was the last week of April, Penn Relays.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Still is.
Speaker 1: So what was your track event in high school?
Speaker 2: I was a two mile.
Speaker 1: Two mile okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a mile and the two mile.
Speaker 1: You have to have a lot of discipline to do that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, that was what I did.
Speaker 1: Did you run at Penn at all?
Speaker 2: I tore my cartilage my freshman year so I played basketball in high school and ran track and did the same at Penn and was with the team for the first quarter--first half of the--first quarter of the first semester.
Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause you're fairly tall.  You're what, five--
Speaker 2: I'm 5'9.
Speaker 1: You're 5'9, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah, so all the above. No scholarship, I mean those were all walk ons nothing--it wasn't for a scholarship.
Speaker 1: I didn't ask about that in high school 'cause you said you were such a L7 you didn't play sports when you were growing up.
Speaker 2: I didn't and when you go to an all-white school you can do both (laughter).
Speaker 1: Terrible (unclear).
Speaker 2: Gave me some credibility when I came home.  Everyone else in the neighborhood knew how bad their sports team was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You think that's a common, it's a common thing for black folks that are not athletic when you go to a white school to assume that they can outrun everybody and outperform everybody.  Not that we can but there's a, there's an ego boost and we say like I'm black, I can come in here and--
Speaker 2: I could play but I wasn't the best but I wasn't the worst either.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's a common misperception because we're black we can come in and take over.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly my roommate was a hoop star in high school, she could, she could shoot, not me, I could block.
Speaker 1: There you go.
Speaker 2: That's it.
Story_ID: 668985
Speaker 1: So who were some of your professors at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and who was there and were you involved in the black student union or did they have one (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, I was a little bit but I wasn't much involved in that.  I was really--I was just trying to get through, it was hard.  I spent a lot of time in the library and in my room studying.  So I really didn't--I wasn't--I really wasn't involved on campus life very much in, in school but, but we were marching before we wanted--we had a 104 black people.  So I remember the march from the Du Bois house [W.E.B. Du Bois College House, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was Low Rise North, which was where the blacks lived.  And Harold Haskins [Harold J. Haskins] was our head of our black student life.  We did a march, we marched and took over from Sheldon Hackney's office who was then the president.  And our march was we want more than a 104.  So I was a part of that movement and really engaged in that.  I did a lot of the interviewing for other black students as well.  So I did some of that.  I was a work study kid because I had a scholarship.  So I spent--I had two to three jobs (laughter) while I was in college throughout.  I worked work study forty hours and then I worked in the ba- in our Smokey Joe's [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was the, the pub.  I worked there and then I worked for a professor.  So I was working a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So were you involved in arts at all?  I know that you've been a board member with a lot of arts groups.
Speaker 2: I was not, I was more--once I became a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], it was a commu- we did a lot of community service hours.  So I did a lot with the neighborhood elementary schools, tutoring and teaching and things of that nature.  So I spent a lot of time on social--I've evolved into the arts.  I started off mostly on social issues and social injustice was really the area that I spent most of my time around women and girls.
Story_ID: 668986
Speaker 1: So you know, early you'll see once I left college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and, and came to Dallas [Texas], my involvement was with the women's center with Girls Incorporated [Girls Inc.] with the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association].  The African American Museum [Dallas, Texas] and other ways in which we--Thelma Boston Home [Dallas, Texas]--ways in which we were really trying to educate and bring up the next generation of young people or at least to give them a fighting chance.  That's probably where I spent the lion's share of my time.
Speaker 2: Okay
Speaker 1: Arts and education became a passion later.  I shouldn't say later, but it became a passion that I could put attention to.  You know, my [paternal] grandmother [Lillian Miller Bowden (ph.)] and [paternal] great-grandmother [Bertha Miller] growing up always exposed me to the arts and our public school system we were exposed to the arts.  You went to the Cleveland Museum [Cleveland Museum of Art, Cleveland, Ohio] every year.  You went to a symphony even though it was a rehearsal every year.  You went to a third arts venue whether it was the Museum of Natural History [Cleveland Museum of Natural History, Cleveland, Ohio], the automobile museum [Crawford Auto Aviation Museum, Cleveland, Ohio] or whatever, you went to another one.  So we always had some form of art in my background.  I remember in elementary school [John W. Raper Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio], I knew what a Rodin [Auguste Rodin] was from a sculpture standpoint.  I remember knowing the difference between Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven] and Tchaikovsky [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky] in elementary school.  So you know, that was a part of our lives. And then the supplementary center was another program that we had in the Cleveland schools [Cleveland Municipal School District; Cleveland Metropolitan School District].  I remember going to that and learning the clarinet in the fourth grade.  So I played the clarinet from fourth all the way through twelfth.  So we always had some type of music and music reading as well.  I was in All-City Choir, you know things of that nature.  So it was always there but my sense of urgency to help young people was, was that first element and then after I had kids I really did begin to focus a little bit more on arts as well.
Story_ID: 668987
Speaker 1: Now you were there--correct me if I'm wrong, but I think you were there during the Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.] campaign. Was that true? 'Cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So Wilson Goode's daughter [Muriel Goode-Trufant] was, was in my class at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] so I left right when he was coming into office.  So that whole MOVE thing that occurred was right after I left.  So there wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now let me just--so people don't run over this and not understand what you're saying.  You're saying--you're talking about MOVE, the organization MOVE.
Speaker 2: The organization MOVE
Speaker 1: That got in trouble in a neighborhood during Wilson Goode's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and Wilson Goode and they, they wouldn't come out so they ultimately bombed the row houses to get them out and it caught fire.  So that was--
Speaker 1: We've interviewed several people who were involved in that at one level or another.  Even a general who was the former African American general, who was the person supposedly who gave the order to do it.  We got him right up to that point in the interview when we ran out of time so we never got his story.
Speaker 2: Oh wow.
Speaker 1: But we interviewed Wilson Goode--
Speaker 2: Wilson, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and he said that was not his idea.  I mean there were a lot of people that we interviewed--a woman in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] whose cousin was the caretaker of that house that MOVE moved into and she told that story from the family perspective. And--
Speaker 2: They wanted them out and they couldn't get them out of the house. And I remember in Philadelphia, in the neighborhood and especially when we were doing--'cause we were doing some tutoring of some kids in that neighborhood as a part of our service project for our sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].  And you know, people--they were not friendly, they kept to themselves--
Speaker 1: These were the MOVE members?
Speaker 2: Yeah and they were a bit intimidating even for us.  And now here are--some of the kids that I went to school with clearly were privileged but then there were a lot of us that were not who were not intimidated when we went into these transitional neighborhoods.  And even I was afraid sometimes because of the way in which they, they dealt with people.
Speaker 1: Yeah there--neighbors were--when you said they wanted to get them out, let's be clear that the neighbors wanted them to go because of certain things that were going on around the house.  I mean I think that's consistent in all the research and--
Speaker 2: Definitely. They were disruptive. They were disruptive (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The other neighbors--the black neighbors in the neighborhood were concerned about but the way they eventually were expelled from the neighborhood burned up half the neighborhood--
Speaker 2: It was so unnecessary.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was so unnecessary. And the thing is that those were all--row houses are connected and they'd been there forever so you know they don't have the right infrastructure to be doing something like that.  So it was a little--but that was right after I left.  It was the summer that I left.
Speaker 1: So you weren't surprised necessarily that that happened (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wasn't surprised at all by, by any of that happening.  We--I was surprised that it took as long as it did quite frankly (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 668988
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I think what's interesting here is that you come along in, in Cleveland [Ohio] where Carl Stokes is the first African American mayor in a major American city.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Your [paternal] grandmother [Lillian Miller Bowden (ph.)] helped with the campaign. You see that--you're a kid but you're seeing this.  Then you're in college when Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.] becomes the first African American mayor of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: And then you're here when [HistoryMaker] Ron Kirk--you're married to Ron Kirk when he becomes the mayor of Dallas [Texas]. So I mean these are--
Speaker 1: And then if you add in there, so when I was in school, Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial] was a classmate.  Well he was in school with us, but he was two years younger (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --and he leaves school to go and work on Dutch's [Ernest Morial] last cam- one of his last campaigns--his father's campaign.  So yeah I've been around and you get a chance to--we would all tell stories and talk amongst ourselves and so you got a chance to hear some--you got a chance to see and hear some greatness occur.
Speaker 2: Did you, even though you were a kid when Carl Stokes was elected, was it--do you see a difference in the way his ascension of power and Wilson Goode's?  Is there similarities or differences?
Speaker 1: Oh there were--well I think when you're the first there's a lot of similarities because you spend a lot of your time educating people to--and you spend a lot of time listening. And so you have to demonstrate that you have credibility but then you have to demonstrate that you have the capability.  And so in doing that there's a lot of similarities between all of the firsts that I've seen in any capacity even our former president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] as a first.  The discipline that they have is pretty extraordinary.  Some things that most people would not tolerate, they not only have to tolerate it but it's a part of what they have to deal with on a daily basis.  So you do see that similarity across the board even with Ron.  What was fascinating as a kid growing up with Carl Stokes, Carl Stokes--Mayor Stokes he influenced with his charisma and got things done through what I would call influencing and doing it with others that, that otherwise you would never have seen him create or seen an alliance created.   I think he did a very good job of creating alliances and getting things done just through charisma because he did not have--I mean they did not, he did not have a lot to work with.  I think Wilson Goode was using his--leaning more on his intellect and my sense was that it was insulting to some people that he would think that he was as smart if not smarter than them.  And, and that, that was an interesting process to watch.
Speaker 2: What's the fellow Frank Rizzo or something who became mayor (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah the police chief?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Nobody would, I think, confuse him with an intellectual.
Speaker 1: Not at all.  Not at all. No he was scary and that was why most black people didn't go into South Philly [South Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] so yeah, definitely.
Story_ID: 668989
Speaker 1: Four years now you majored in economics [at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and, and--now did you have plans to go to graduate school, or?
Speaker 2: No I didn't--I knew that--so as a first generation educated person without a lot of means, I knew that I needed to find a job and make money.  So you know, unlike where I tell my children [Elizabeth Alexandra Kirk and Catherine Ellis Kirk] to follow their dreams and their passion, I was looking for what I could translate into, into something to take care of me.  So I was looking for a living.  So I moved--after I left there I came to Dallas [Texas] and--
Speaker 1: Was there an offer already on the table here?
Speaker 2: No I decided--I had an offer in New York [New York] and I didn't want to be in New York.  So I left New York and came here without an offer and went around and traded on the offer I had in New York and was able to get with the bank here, Mercantile National Bank [MBank Dallas].
Speaker 1: Now was there someone here that you knew or did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah I mean we had a family friend that was here, but no not really.  So I was literally just getting out there and--
Speaker 1: And why Dallas instead of Los Angeles [California] or some other place?
Speaker 2: So The Wall Street Journal had a story on Dallas as the next financial mecca and that was the article and it attracted me to Dallas.
Speaker 1: The next financial mecca, now that is--you're right, now there was a move during the '70s [1970s] and the '80s [1980s] to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was heavily, heavily--in early '80s [1980s] it was heavy banking here and so it was a lot of money to be had in this market.
Speaker 1: And well 'Dallas' was also the name of the most popular TV show--
Speaker 2: Most popular television show as well--
Speaker 1: --about rich people (laughter).
Speaker 2: About rich people exactly.  I was at that point, I was truly motivated by finding a way to--to make income, I mean I really was.  I was singularly focused in that, in that regard.  I was not looking for love, I was not looking for anything I just wanted to find a way to make a good living and then I could think about all those other things.
Story_ID: 668990
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you moved here and how long did it take you to get a position?
Speaker 2: I came on the first week of July and by July 12th I was employed at the Mercantile National Bank [MBank Dallas].
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was your position there?
Speaker 2: I started off in--as an account manager there and working in--which department did I--I think it was corporate--it was trust was the first department that I worked in the bank.  An increase in the position over there over time became an officer in the bank.  There were maybe four people of color that were in the professional ranks and not in the secretarial ranks at that time.
Speaker 1: How many were there when you were hired?
Speaker 2: About four--maybe four African American or thereabouts and so we would get together and talk about our experiences and what all we were dealing with.  It was a good community of people.  It was three, four guys and me, I was the only female in that bank.  All of the banks seemed to have had one or two females and then we had another female join and then we had--I think by my second year there were three women of color in the bank.  So, and so we all just get together and share our experiences and stories with one another.  It was very positive.
Speaker 1: Typically what kind of story--was there a typical story for--
Speaker 2: Of course. Of course, I mean it was the same story that everyone tells.  It was people learning to deal with blacks.  I mean I remember going out on a call and the woman telling me the backdoor was over there for the service section.  I was like, "No, I'm your banker," (laughter) and it was a whole different game at that point.  It was really being seen through the, the viewpoint adding value as a person of color in the banking industry and here in Texas.  I'm surprised that I didn't get the old country backdoor, "You're a colored person," or any of those things.  The racism here was not as intense as it was in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and in New York [New York] when I was doing my summer internships.  There it was so undercut that you were just--you didn't even realize you were being cut while you were in the midst of it all.  Here you were either on an account or you won't and if you weren't on an account you weren't on that account because of the color of your skin or because you were a woman.  It was one or the other if you had the skill set. And it was clear.  So you knew what you could and could not do.  In New York and Philly you had that same racism but it was so undercurrent that they did it so slick, they were a little more slick about it.  So that's when I kind of knew I liked this place because at least you knew where you stood and you can work with what you know. And I knew that I could do really well in the areas that I was in.  That was the conversation that we actually had.  It was how do you take what you know and take that to the next level?  So if they weren't going to have us on the account that was Joe oil and gas guy because he couldn't take me out to his wildcatters in West Texas.  That's fine, I don't want to go over there, so let me figure out how to work on this account that's here in Dallas [Texas] with the retailer that's going to allow me to work on that account and make it ten times better.  And that was kind of what we dealt with so it worked out.
Speaker 1: Now did black people bank at Mercantile?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, absolutely and they banked at the other places at that time.  So Comer Cottrell [HistoryMaker Comer Joseph Cottrell] had just moved Pro-Line [Pro-Line Corporation] to Dallas and everybody that was black and all of the banks were trying to get his business.  He ultimately went to my competitor across the street.  They pulled out all the stops and wined and dined and took him out.  But everyone wanted that account and it was very funny because all of us that were in banking, we all talked about how the presidents of our various banks or divisions, all came to us and was like, "Can you go with us on this call."  It was like can you imagine and we would all laugh and talk about how we were all in that position where they were trying to get us to help them to acquire that account.  So, that was the largest because Pro-Line at that time was one of the largest black owned businesses in North America.
Story_ID: 668991
Speaker 1: You know on the other, on the other front a lot of the, the law firms and other small black owned businesses and, and Latino owned businesses, you know we [Mercantile National Bank; MBank Dallas] banked them and so there was value in all of us.  So we had--it was a good group of individuals in the community and we were kind of the young professionals that were coming up.  So it was the lawyers and the bankers that were really doing a lot.  But what we found was that it wasn't good enough for us just to make money that we had to be a part of this city changing because we had our own race problems here.  We had a police chief just not nearly as bad as the one in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but close to that was doing some things that we all were concerned about.  We had a shift in government, we had African Americans.  We were changing our form of government in the city and so you started having seats, districts if you will.  So in all those changing elements of the city all of the young people--all of us young professionals were deeply involved, so. And sitting at the table helping campaigns and people run.
Speaker 2: A lot of young black professionals are moving to Dallas [Texas] during the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s].  It's like the Sun Belt--I mean on the cover of Black Collegian [The Black Collegian], Black Enterprise people were talking about moving to someplace where the sun--they were going to Atlanta [Georgia] or Houston [Texas]--
Speaker 1: Atlanta and Dallas yep.
Speaker 2: It was an exciting time.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: About how much, how--what percentage of the population was black then?  I've heard it was about a quarter of the city, 25 percent?
Speaker 1: Unh-uh, never, no we were--if we were 18 percent of the city we were, we were large--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that was a large number.  It was not, it was probably twe- it was 18 percent thereabouts but not, not 25 percent.
Story_ID: 668992
Speaker 1: At some point now you moved to--in '87 [1987] I have here that you go to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I was, yeah, I was there and then--at the bank [Mercantile National Bank; MBank Dallas], and that was when I met Ron [HistoryMaker Ron Kirk], I met Ron while I was at the bank.
Speaker 1: Okay, now there's a story that you all met at-
Speaker 2: So we were at a banquet, Symphony in Black.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: For the Junior Black Academy.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, for the Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters [The Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Inc., Dallas, Texas] and our dates were mistress and masters of ceremonies and they did not have a place for--because they were both single they were assuming that they were not bringing anyone with them.  So they both came, both of them had dates.  Me and Ron were the dates and that was right when Vanessa Williams--her crown had been taken from her, but the pictures hadn't come out in Penthouse yet.  So we sat at a table together.  They sat us at another person's table that wasn't full and they sat us together and we were having a conversation at the table and I brought up--I said, "So what does everyone think about Vanessa Williams," and so to start conversation and we were on opposite sides of the argument.  We became fast friends after that.  He says it was love at first sight, it wasn't love at first sight for me but we, we became really good friends after that and started hanging out.  Then he told me that he was interested and wanted to take it to the next level and that was like--so that happened in June.  So probably about January or thereabouts is when we started dating or thereabouts.  But I set him up on a date with a friend and we were just friends afterwards--at least in my mind we were just friends, but he wanted more.  And I was smitten after he said that (laughter).
Speaker 1: So this is 1984?
Speaker 2: That was 1984. June of 1984 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was when Vanessa--I remember that summer with the Vanessa Williams controversy--
Speaker 2: Yeah exactly.
Speaker 1: What sides did you all take, what side did you take?
Speaker 2: I didn't think she should have to relinquish her crown. And his was if there a set of rules you have to abide by them.  I was like well but that's not--these was art, she didn't know what was going on so you can't hold her accountable for something that she wasn't completely complicit with. She didn't know he was taking pictures.  If somebody goes in and takes a shower are you going--and somebody posts those pictures are you going to suggest that they're not being exploited.  So of course I was just--I still believe it.
Story_ID: 668993
Speaker 1: Okay 1984 was also the year of, "Run, Jesse, run."
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That summer--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --was big. That's what people were caught up in the Vanessa Williams' thing and, "Run, Jesse, run."
Speaker 2: That's right
Speaker 1: So were you involved at all in that or was Ron [Ellis-Kirk's husband, HistoryMaker Ron Ellis]?
Speaker 2: Ron was involved, I wasn't.  I was at that time focused on--there was an organization here, the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] that I was doing some work with them in the community.  So I was a little more focused on that. But like everyone else that was a year that you get a chance like so many others to take pride in, in what we're doing as a group of people.  And you know I remember at the bank [Mercantile National Bank; MBank Dallas] especially you didn't think he was going to win but the fact that you were able to have a conversation or begin having a conversation about being black in America at a corporate level it definitely helped from a work standpoint, from an employment standpoint because you were able to say to people we're not here just because we're black, we have something else to offer.  This is not--don't think that you're doing us favors by employing us.  We have something to contribute and we add value and we can't do this without a diverse community of people.  I think that you began to see a shift at least here, a shift of the people my age starting to be very proud but also taking real ownership of what they were doing and not just asking permission.  I mean it was really--for me it was a shift in moving more from asking forgiveness--or moving to asking forgiveness versus asking permission.  I felt it gave me a little more empowerment it really did and I was pretty young in my career.  So I was moving to that next stage of not just managing but leading. And--and he was inspirational in that despite who he is all of his flaws, all of all the candidates' flaws over the years.  It really was a place where I began moving really from management to leadership.
Speaker 1: Yeah I remember there, there are some goofs in that campaign.
Speaker 2: Lots. Lots (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some misstatements that got out of the press but Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]--when he was on stage he clearly seemed to have the most grasp and the most command over the issues than anybody else running.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. That was one of those where no matter how many commands he had, he didn't have enough money (laughter).
Speaker 1: He clearly was the sharpest person on the stage when he was up there.
Speaker 2: Absolutely. Absolutely. He did his homework.
Speaker 1: So all his oratorical skills and his command of information and track record of actually having worked on--
Speaker 2: Um-hm. You know it was really good because again I was really like I said very young in my career and that was my major focus at that point but I was also involved in the National Bankers Association and other organizations.  We really did leverage what he was doing to really help us further articulate a need for diversity in the workplace and recognizing that we're not just here for you to count your numbers but here to add value.  So it really did, it, it really did help to dimensionalize that conversation--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in, in the corporate space.
Story_ID: 668994
Speaker 1: When you were at the bank--
Speaker 2: Um-hm?
Speaker 1: --were you ever called upon to recruit other African Americans?
Speaker 2: Oh yes absolutely. Absolutely. We all were.  Like I said it was only--it was too few of us to not.  So you know, we did, we did recruit others.  We--by 1985 the recruiting started to go down because of the downturn in the financial markets in the Texas area started going down.  So I really saw more of the recruitment in the first two to three years.  We were downsizing the rest of the time so we weren't actively recruiting off campus because by 1985 you started to have the downturn in the economy.  Oil was supposed to go to sixty-two dollars a barrel, it never went.  You had all of the real estate lending and the Colorado markets, which we spent a lot of our money on here in this market, were foreclosing so we started to see a lot of those go down.  So by 1986 you really started to see the banks go down.  I was with what was Mercantile [Mercantile National Bank] then it became MBank [MBank Dallas].  M Bank went into receivership, was taken over by Bank One [Bank One Corporation; JPMorgan Chase and Co.].  And right before it went into receivership that's when I left in '87 [1987] and went to join Dallas Area Rapid Transit.  I was an economics major and had done a lot of forecasting and modeling and college was much more on the people side than the banking side because I was client facing.  There was an opportunity to join Dallas Area Rapid Transit.  They were building the first transportation system here.  They had failed their vote and they did not have a financial plan--a system plan--a financial plan that was long term.  The then CFO John McCracken went to Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and worked with one of my professors at Penn and got a reference on me from an econometrics modeling standpoint.  So I went over to then Dallas Area Rapid Transit and was head of financial planning and analysis at the PNA [physical needs assessments] and built out their first econometric model, long term model for the system plan that was--and the timing that we were looking at was beginning construction in '95 [1995] or '92 [1992]--'93 [1993] or '95 [1995] I can't remember the exact year.  But the plan went through 2020 in terms of the whole plan being built out.
Speaker 1: What does econometrics mean to those of us who are not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was building an economic model; it was showing all of the economic impact.  The analysis of how many jobs it would bring into the community, what it would do to build and then what the costs were, what variables could impact that cost, interest rate and hitting some price sensitivities and if interest rates go up, interest go down.  Kind of what your de- service structures are going to be.  How much you'll have to pay back.  It's taking in consideration the entire cost and then the impact that that cost would have environmentally.  So it was all of those things.
Story_ID: 668995
Speaker 1: So you were director of the--I guess at some point you become director of the Dallas Area Rapid Transit Office of Management and Budget, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Yep and then that was when I had both capital and operating.  So I started off with just building the plan and then I went and started to build out--and then I was in charge of all of the capital budgeting for the whole project.  Then I had the operating and that was when I was of O and B, Office of Management and Budget when I had both capital and operating budgeting responsibilities.  I did that and when I got there, I took the role probably around September I'm sorry in June or thereabouts.  May, actually I took the role in May.  The only reason why I remember it was around May, I was engaged in March of that year Ron [HistoryMaker Ron Kirk] asked me to marry him.
Speaker 1: Which was '87 [1987] right?
Speaker 2: Yes and we set the date for December and I remember telling the woman when I took the job, "If I get the job I'm going to be taking off 'cause I'm going to take a week for a honeymoon," (laughter) and she says, "Well if you're in here and you're doing a good job we'll give you that week."  So I married that December so we married December 5th of that year and then the next year I was pregnant, so.
Speaker 1: Your daughter [Elizabeth Alexandra Kirk] was born, right?
Speaker 2: So I was pregnant the next year.  Ron went off to Russia with the American council of international leaders for three weeks and shortly thereafter when he came home I think I got pregnant shortly thereafter.  Then our daughter was born that May so I was just doing the math going backwards and so she was born in May of '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well I'll ask you more about her later, but--
Speaker 2: And then the second one [Catherine Ellis Kirk] was born in January of '92 [1992] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 668996
Speaker 1: Now in ninety--well shall we jump ahead--so we--okay. Well tell us, you served with the transit authority until (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. That's, that's Dallas Area Rapid Transit.
Speaker 1: --until '93 [1993] right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And in '93 [1993] you moved to Apex Securities [Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yes definitely. So I had been doing the role there and there was still upward movement opportunities, but I had always since I was eight years old wanted to be in investment banking.  So in order to get it I knew I needed to do--I felt like I needed the skill set of having the commercial side of dealing with people.  Then the back office understanding the financials behind the financials.  So when I was offered the opportunity to join an investment banking firm it was great because I really--it was what I always wanted to do.  So I took all of the tests and was--and passed them.  Series 6, Series 7, Series 63, 64 and went into investment banking and you know, built--we did primarily debt structuring on that side.  So working on not equities but the debts; debt structures of organizations. And it was a dream job.  So I ran the office--I ran the Dallas [Texas] office and I had a baby--two babies [Elizabeth Alexandra Kirk and Catherine Ellis Kirk] at that time and doing all that and travelling to New York [New York] and to other markets when we were doing closings.  But it was absolutely fantastic, it was the, it was my favorite job ever up until that point because it really was doing what I had always thought I wanted to do as a kid and it lived up to everything that I thought and more quite frankly.  So I was very excited about, about my life in investment banking and the possibilities (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay now--Rodney Ellis was the owner, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was Rodney Ellis.
Speaker 1: And the question everybody had in the office is Rodney Ellis related to you.
Speaker 2: Rodney was not related to me at all.  We were not related.
Speaker 1: And this is an African American business.
Speaker 2: It's an African American--it was a black owned business.  So it was a, it was a lot of fun to have that and to, to have him as a part of, of that business.
Story_ID: 668997
Speaker 1: So that--that was for two years.  But what--did the company [Apex Securities, Dallas, Texas] do--(unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The company was doing great.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was doing everything that I wanted to do and then my husband [HistoryMaker Ron Kirk] came home and told me he wanted to run for mayor.  And, and so I just started crying (laughter) because first anybody in politics that we knew, they had a dysfunctional family.  So I was like ugh, I've got two kids [Elizabeth Alexandra Kirk and Catherine Ellis Kirk], we were happy, it's a great family situation, I loved my husband, we have fun together.  You know, but everything you've read in politics either the husband was cheating or it was dysfunctional; I was like oh my Lord look at what I've gotten myself into on one aspect of it.  And on the other side of it was I'm finally doing everything that I want to do from a career standpoint.  I've dreamed since I was eight years old and if you become mayor and you win this thing, I'm going to have to quit because the business did business with entities around or affiliated with the city.  It's not just the city, but then the city had a piece of the ownership of DFW Airports [Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, Texas], so you can't do work there.  The city had pieces to do with water utilities and other markets, you can't do anything.  So my company was going to basically have to say I love you but I'm going to miss you because otherwise they could not participate in all those types of revenue opportunities.  And that just, that was not good business and it didn't make business sense.  So he runs--
Speaker 1: And now, did you see this coming at all that he might--was he that kind of--was he popular like that then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, a little bit. So I kind of knew what I was getting. I kind of knew what I was getting.  I can't fain complete ignorance as much as I would like to.  When we were in our session with our minister when we were getting married in '86 [1986] he says, "One of the things one should do is talk about yourself aspirationally so that you can see if you can even grow together."  Mine was I wanted to be a billionaire philanthropic donor to the arts and education.  I wanted to be Alice Walton redux and he wanted to be mayor.  So yes I kind of knew what I was getting.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, so you quit your job--this is your favorite job and you quit it basically to help your husband run (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that he could, so that he could--yeah absolutely. And it was the right thing to do because he was the right person.  I mean, you know, one of the things my [paternal] grandmother [Lilian Miller Bowden (ph.)] always said when we were young was that if you have--that you have to give back and you have to find a way to do it in a way that's going to bring people along with you.  So you can't, you you can't--my grandmother was completely against people who wanted to be the only ones.  It was if you get something you have to bring people along with you.  You cannot do this by yourself.  And him being mayor--I too would have the highest impact by him being in that role.  It would long term serve everyone well because you would be able to use that bully pulpit to further all of the things that you're talking about.  And you know we had conversations in our house always about what can we do to bring along the next generation.  What can you do to create wealth in these various communities so that they can have the resources to accomplish their goals and what can you do to impact education.  The city, the city here--government does not impact the school district.  There's two different elections but you have a bully pulpit by which you can talk about the importance of education, the importance of investing in ensuring kids not to drop out, the importance of nutrition and getting a meal, the importance of early childhood education, the importance of families being together at mealtime, the importance of kids having afterschool study and tutoring and the importance of their ability to serve others so that they understand what service looks like.  So you have the pulpit to do all of those things that here you are as one person trying to impact in a community.  So it was the right thing to do and I had to give up my job for it.  I could always go back after he was done was the way I looked at it.  But I was too young to have a mindset that I couldn't.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Plus the fact you, in my house you can't say you can't do anything. That's just, that's blasphemy if you say, "I can't," that, that--you get excommunicated (laughter).
Story_ID: 668998
Speaker 1: What role did you play in the campaign? I mean, did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not much, I didn't do much on the campaign 'cause we had two small girls at that time.  Alex--when he announced my oldest [Elizabeth Alexandra Kirk] was in kindergarten, my youngest [Catherine Ellis Kirk] was three years old.  So in addition to working and making sure my girls were okay, in addition to chairing--being the chair of the Girls, Incorporated [Girls, Inc.] annual dinner, just having finished the Family of the Year Luncheon at the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], in addition to being involved with the women's center, in addition to volunteering at the Y at adult literacy program, Junior Achievement, I didn't have any more room to--so it was his job to do that.  What I committed to was that I would go with him to events and to leverage my network.  I was involved then at the Junior Leagues [Junior League of Dallas, Dallas, Texas].  The group of women that I was doing a lot of the volunteer work were high impact people.  So making sure that he knew those networks so I committed to going out with him three times a week.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I did not do any speaking on his behalf.
Speaker 1: Okay, no? Okay, that's surprising.
Speaker 2: No, I did not intentionally.  As the first person of color--first African American male, I wanted him--I didn't want anybody to think that he was standing on anyone's back but his own and the people that brought him.  I was concerned because we had had a female mayor in the past--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was Annette (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Annette Strauss.
Speaker 1: Annette Strauss, right.
Speaker 2: We had had a female and I didn't--and people knew me because of all of my community involvement.  I wanted them to know that this was him that they were getting and, and, and we had a lot of opinions that aligned but some of them always didn't so he needed to have his own, but I didn't do any public speaking for him.  And historically here you don't typically see the wife doing that or the spouse--the husband.
Speaker 1: Were there any highlights to the--I mean, what's the thing, I guess, that stands out the most about the campaign to you?  First he won a primary, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah--no it wasn't, it was supposed to be.  He ran against six people so it was supposed to be a run off.  He won by sixty-two, with 62 percent without a run-off.  That was the highlight if you really reflect on all that.  What was fascinating to me was watching him ascend.  And it was not--he was not the candidate of choice; he became the candidate of choice.  There were two people who had far more political engagement than he, but his message resonated and it was, it was a real, it was a very strong message at the time.  He was going to put the big back in the D [Dallas, Texas].  It was during a time where everyone was beating us because there was so much infighting and he was all about--we don't need to do the infighting thing, so. And he brought together a very diverse coalition of people that was very promising.  So it wasn't just the white community or the black community or the brown community or the yellow however you want to characterize all of the various races and ethnicities.  It was green, whatever color, purple he had everybody on his bandwagon.
Speaker 1: He had to, I think he made a statement during the campaign that blacks were less than 25 percent of the city and you couldn't elected if you were going to be the black mayor (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct.  That's correct you could not, you had to be the mayor for everyone.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he did embrace--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the fact that he was a black mayor.
Speaker 2: Absolutely didn't run away from it, just kind of hard to. Yeah exactly.
Story_ID: 668999
Speaker 1: He wins in ni- well tell us about the night he [Ellis-Kirk's husband, HistoryMaker Ron Kirk] won.  Did you--did you really--
Speaker 2: The '95 [1995] election?
Speaker 1: No, yeah the night he won the first, for the first--do you remember where you were when you found out he won?
Speaker 2: In 19--so his first race was 1995.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah and that was May of 1995.  We had the worst rain storm we had ever had here.  I mean, people died that day unfortunately it was horrible, horrible. We had flooding.  So we were at home getting dressed to go to what was then called Plaza of the Americas [Dallas, Texas] 'cause that's where he had his--that's where we had the victory party--our party that we were going to have and we were going to call it a victory party whether he won or he lost.  It was a victory that we had gotten this far.  When we got there the early vote was coming in and he was not winning on the first call but then by the third call he was up by an astronomical number and it just never went down.  That was when I was like okay this is real this is about to really happen.  This is going to be life and, and, and it was scary but then it was really invigorating because you, you got a chance to think about what you can do to, to have an impact, so.
Story_ID: 669000
Speaker 1: Of all of his [Ellis-Kirk's husband, HistoryMaker Ron Kirk] initiatives I guess during the first term what, what, what did you appreciate the most I guess?
Speaker 2: The mayor's reading program [Mayor's Summer Reading program] was most important to me.  It was, it was the teaching--letting kids read, it was getting a hundred hours in during the summer, it was making sure that they had access to the books and making sure that you had all of the best books and all of the regional libraries.  So all of the Caldecott [Randolph Caldecott Medal] books were the award winning children's books all of them in the libraries that was the most important thing.  Then being able to celebrate the kids at the end of the summer with backpacks and putting not just--don't just give them a backpack and put a little bit of stuff in there but put enough in there that's going to get them through the first year.  Don't put two pencils in every backpack; give them a pack of pencils.  So things like that that was important--that was the most important thing I thought of the initiatives.  I'm sure he would tell you a lot of other things in terms of the capital and infrastructure that he put in place that has created legacy, jobs and capital but my, my interests at that time were much more tactile in terms of helping kids.
Story_ID: 669001
Speaker 1: Just to put it into perspective during that year, George W. Bush [George Walker Bush] was elected governor of Texas.
Speaker 2: Yes he was. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And did--well I know you didn't support George W. Bush being a democrat and Bush being a republican, I guess, but who did Mayor Kirk [HistoryMaker Ron Kirk] support?
Speaker 2: So we were both Ann Richards--so Ann Richards was who brought him along and Ann Richards was who actually brought me along.  I was on the Insurance Purchasing Alliance [Texas Insurance Purchasing Alliance] board and I had been on the Growth Fund board [Texas Growth Fund].  So she had appointed me to two--I was a governmental appointee twice on boards and really helping to create new structures, new governance structures for those entities.  So from a business standpoint, I was very much in favor of what she had done.  So I was a very big supporter of Ann's and what she was trying to do both from being a woman as well as bringing along other women to participate. But she was getting stuff done.  The boards that we were on and what we were doing from an impact standpoint was very significant.  So I was very much an Ann Richards supporter and she also aligned quite nicely with my personal beliefs as well.  She was less government as it relates to a woman's body and those things were--are very important to me.  I was almost single issue oriented when it came to a woman's choice and, and she aligned with that as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't realize that she would, that she had run again or whether she had been the governor (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah she was--it was her second term and George Bush beat her out.
Story_ID: 669002
Speaker 1: Now what's going on in Texas?  I've asked this question of [HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson and other people but all of a sudden, I think what they call the republican revolution--
Speaker 2: The Tea Party (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Newt Gingrich and Tea Party activities starts up and you get Tom DeLay down here and Dick Armey, a whole bunch of people (unclear) .
Speaker 2: Dick Armey is--is progressive in comparison to the people out there now.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I mean it was, it seems like a sharp turn to the right for Texas especially (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It became more--when you look at the way our, our districts have been drawn here, East and West Texas pretty much are in control.  And so when you start doing that and the suburban communities--your urban communities have been for the most part they've been relegated to second class citizens.  If you look at the way our cou- our state is run, it's run by east and west Texas and our suburban communities. Our urban communities have very small voices and don't carry much weight at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is unfortunate but that's also where you have your largest diverse population.
Story_ID: 669003
Speaker 1: You were saying the important thing about Texas in terms of its political (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah the important thing that people need to understand about--it's a populist state.  I mean so the populist vote is what gets you here.  So, you know, we--people still call people carpetbaggers here, things of that nature, so.
Speaker 1: So if you appeal to the lowest denominator you--
Speaker 2: Fear. Appeal to fear, which is the populist, yeah exactly.
Speaker 1: Wow. To make you rise off. So you can't underestimate the voters.
Speaker 2: No you can't. You can't. But it's a place where people who are elected are typically the people who are not in my backyard--the nimbys as we call them.
Speaker 1: So, so Dallas [Texas], Houston [Texas], San Antonio [Texas], Austin [Texas]--
Speaker 2: Those are all the metropolitan areas where you have progressives and then everywhere else you have outliers and that's pretty much what controls.
Speaker 1: And those are the people that are appealed to in these elections.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: To some extent I read that there is a certain amount of gerrymandering or--
Speaker 2: That was done with Tom DeLay when he was in the redistricting, yes.
Speaker 1: To make sure that there is always a--you know.
Speaker 2: Absolutely so until the browning occurs in this, which we call the brown of the Latino population emerges, I think you'll pretty much have this for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we're stuck.
Story_ID: 669004
Speaker 1: Now in '95 [1995] you started working--well, well let me ask this question before we get to that.  What was the Kirk [Ellis-Kirk's husband, HistoryMaker Ron Kirk] administration's relationship to George W. Bush [George Walker Bush] as governor and Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] as president? (Unclear).
Speaker 2: So his administration--he did a very good job of working with both.  He was very effective.  Ron during his term as of- in office, he understand economic development, he understands it probably better than most.  So he, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he developed the American Airline arena [American Airlines Center, Dallas, Texas], right?
Speaker 2: The American Airlines, he did the Trinity [Trinity River Corridor Project] vote, a lot of the major projects occurred during his tenure.  So he really understands economic development.  He worked with the Clinton administration on the Brownfield projects [Dallas Brownfield Program] to basically clean up some spaces that otherwise, you know, had not.  So he did a really good job of understanding the importance of economic development.  The fact that you increase your, your pie when you bring more people in as opposed to trying to restrict and to only have a few win.  So it was a different movement if you will when he came in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he le- he worked in--he came in '95 [1995] and then I worked--I had a small consulting group with two other friends with GLK and we did some strategic consulting during that time as I was trying to figure out what's next for me.  My girls [Elizabeth Alexandra Kirk and Catherine Ellis Kirk] were--I wasn't quite sure how this was going to impact them so that was a really good thing to do was to have a consulting deal where I consulted on a couple of projects.  Then in 1996, I was actually recruited to go into executive search and that's where I started with Spencer Stuart.  And, and so I've been in the same industry since then with another company.  So I started off in executive search in '96 [1996] at Spencer Stuart and stayed there through 1999 and that was really where I was learning the industry quite frankly and building my client base. And then joined Heidrick and Struggles [Heidrick and Struggles International Inc.] in 1999 and further expanded my base and began taking on leadership roles.  So inside that company I ran a practice--I ran our diversity practice.  Then I ran the internal organization--the client service organization--which basically managed all of the internal infrastructure to create efficiencies and we took some cost out of the model and really grew the business.  Then I took on additional--and then as I said I was running diversity after I took on that role and then in '13 [2013], December '13 [2013] left there, so that come January '14 [2014] I was here at RSR Partners, which is a regional--it's a boutique firm as opposed to one of the global. Spencer Stuart and Heidrick and Struggles were both considered large global organizations.  Heidrick is the second largest in the industry, Spencer Stuart is the third largest in the industry.
Story_ID: 669005
Speaker 1: RSR [RSR Partners] takes place in 2014--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but in the meantime though you're--you spent--I have to ask you about your time as first lady of the City of Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What were the duties like and how much time did they consume?
Speaker 2: So being the first lady of Dallas there is no office here, no budget, no anything in Dallas. So the first lady responsibilities, there are none in the city here.  What you have is an opportunity to leverage who you are for the benefit of other organizations.  So I spent quite a bit of time working on issues around women and girls; everything from teenage pregnancy to literacy and education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was involved in the Junior League [Junior League of Dallas, Dallas, Texas] and the Crystal Charity Ball [Dallas, Texas], which were large fundraising organizations for social services and the arts.  I spent a lot of time doing that raising money and leveraging my name for the benefit of those types of organizations.  If there was money to be made from a, from a company to help better the lives of others that's where I spent all of my time outside of raising my, my two girls [Elizabeth Alexandra Kirk and Catherine Ellis Kirk].
Story_ID: 669006
Speaker 1: Now in 2002, Ron [Ellis-Kirk's husband, HistoryMaker Ron Kirk] decided to run for the [U.S.] Senate.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: And so he--his second term was cut short by a Senate run.
Speaker 2: He--he resigned early to, to actually take a bid for the Senate and it was, it was during a very difficult time in our country.  September 11th [September 11, 2001] occurs, we're going to war and its turmoil.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So he runs and he loses by well over twelve points or thereabouts to John Cornyn.
Speaker 1: Okay and he was--he had been attorney general or judge, or--
Speaker 2: No he had been--Ron had been secretary of state. So if you go back to while Ann Richards was in office, Ron ran the General Services Commission which is the purchasing agency for all of the state of Texas. So he ran that and then after he ran that, she appointed him as her secretary of state.  So he was in control of the vote in the state of Texas.  So he managed the vote process to her loss with George Bush [President George Walker Bush] so he was actually in during that time and she--
Speaker 1: Yeah I was talking about Cornyn really (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh Cornyn, yes he was a federal judge--he had been a federal judge yes that's correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's why--I said wait a minute, okay all right it was Cornyn.  So he wasn't a lightweight but--
Speaker 2: No he wasn't. No he wasn't and Bush campaigned for him vigorously.  He campaigned more for Cornyn I think than himself during that time.  I think he came down even in the last two months--he campaigned for him over twelve times--over a dozen times just in that last month.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Last two months.  Ron was formidable at the onset but with the war going on the sentiment, positive sentiment for then President Bush and President Bush specifically calling Ron an obstructionist.  That was the word used, I'll never forget it.  It was not going to happen on his dime and he made certain of that.  They even you know, they went so far as to go to our friends, people that we--that had been a part of our inner circle and let them know that they shouldn't do anything outwardly to support his candidacy.
Story_ID: 669007
Speaker 1: Meanwhile you, you served on the board of the Dallas Center for the Performing Arts now the AT&T center [AT&T Performing Arts Center, Dallas, Texas] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what I do now, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you started in 2000 is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or thereabouts.
Speaker 1: Texas Business Hall of Fame [Houston, Texas] (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes I was chairman of the bus- Texas Business Hall of Fame during that time.
Speaker 1: Were there any African Americans involved in that--I mean inducted?
Speaker 2: During our time Comer Cottrell [HistoryMaker Comer Joseph Cottrell] had been inducted as a business leader for certain.  He was very excited about that.
Speaker 1: Okay and let's see. Now this one I didn't understand, you were on the board of directors of Ace Cash Express [Ace Cash Express Inc.] which is--usually these are the--
Speaker 2: That was a public company.  I was on the board of Chancellor [Chancellor Media Corporation] and Ace Cash Express.
Speaker 1: Yeah this is a check cashing--
Speaker 2: It is. It is.
Speaker 1: Do they give advance--give you a check in advance or are they just--
Speaker 2: It's almost that payday lending component (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Payday lending.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: So how did that--I mean--
Speaker 2: How did I decide to do that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what were the dynamics of that 'cause those companies are usually reviled now by people.
Speaker 2: They are still reviled.
Speaker 1: But they're not--they are still in everywhere.
Speaker 2: You have no choice.  You have a population of people that is their only form of banking. And, and when I was asked to join that corporate board, it was like every other sin stock when you are asked to be on the board of a Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.] and things like that.  You have to look at what is it, why are you joining.
Speaker 1: You call it a sin stock.
Speaker 2: I call those sin stocks yes, um-hm.  But when that opportunity was there I said well let me see if there is something I can do from the inside.  I didn't make significant money 'cause I knew I was--it was a short tenure on that board but you know, what I found was that they really weren't spending any money on education--financial education.  So during my time on the board we increased that spend for financial education in the minority communities.  So we were able to partner with a number of organizations that really went into the communities and taught financial literacy, financial education both in English and in Spanish.  And if I could do something to help people understand that this should be their last resort and that they've got to start learning how to save even if seventy-five cents at a time, then I have done something positive and that was really what I decided to do and why I decided to join that board.
Story_ID: 669008
Speaker 1: During the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] campaign were you, were you involved? Or--
Speaker 2: You know, so, you could probably see the running common denominator is that I'm not terribly involved in politics the way my husband [HistoryMaker Ron Kirk] is.  You've got one person in politics and you've got the other person trying to make some money to pay bills; that was me, that was me.  But I was involved in his campaign. We brought then the candidate's wife Michelle Obama to Dallas [Texas] to speak.  We raised money and you know we--Ron--we raised money all the way through for political candidates.  I remember back when Bradley--Bill Bradley ran for president, we raised money for him as a senator, we raised money for him as a candidate--as a presidential candidate.   We raised a lot of money for Ann Richards during her candidacy, [HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson and then the president.  So my, my engagement in politics is typically a lot more personal and in this instance, I, I just, I believed in him from the day I saw him out speaking and I just said we've got to get this guy in as president. So Ron was doing, Ron was representing the state on his campaign or one of the state leaders during this campaign so I was just raising money on the side to make certain that, that people knew.  My role is fascinating because in executive search, you're meeting all of the leaders in your particular community and in a particular industry.  You're also getting to know who is moving to this market.  So I kind of had a first glimpse of where you could go and raise money.  So I spent a lot of time making sure that Ron knew certain people that I had dealt with.  We don't talk politics clearly when you're interviewing a candidate but you get a sense of what a person's thinking is, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There was--I understand in Dallas [Texas] a lot of people move, come in laterally into top positions, Africans Americans and they don't necessarily know each other or know the lay of the land--
Speaker 2: Don't.
Speaker 1: And so you're somebody who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had a chance, I had a chance to see a lot of people and connect a lot of dots. And that's what I do for a living and so I love it from that vantage point.
Speaker 1: You're strategically placed in a lot of ways to benefit a community knitting together I guess in a sense.
Speaker 2: Matchmaking (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) -making.
Speaker 2: Yeah exactly, matchmaking and money making, yep (laughter).
Story_ID: 669009
Speaker 1: Now you worked with North Texas Tollway Authority--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for a while too, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was appointed by County Judge Clay Jenkins to be one of the two appointees for the Dallas County [Texas] to that authority.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I left that authority last year and just this year--last month I was placed on the DFW Airport [Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, Texas] board.
Speaker 1: So the way they had it, it was almost like a job but it was not a job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No it was an appointee--it was a political appointment.
Speaker 1: You also were appointed to the President's Commission [President's Commission on White House Fellowships]--
Speaker 2: The White House Fellows?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the White House Fellows (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] appointed me to the commission, yes.
Speaker 1: We've interviewed a lot of White House Fellows.  People that got their start as a White House Fellow.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: It wasn't their start but that's a great position to come into.
Speaker 2: It's a fabulous program.  Fabulous program.  I had been a regional judge since then President Bush [President George Walker Bush].  So when President Bush was in his last year of office, one of the appointees asked me to participate on the panel here in Dallas [Texas] and I did that as a regional panel and then when President Obama came into office I continued on the regional panel and then prior to the second term, was appointed to the commission at the national level.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Almost everybody I've interviewed that's been a White House Fellow has been a male.  Did you increase the number of females?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. Absolutely, yeah that's always been a goal absolutely.
Speaker 1: Of course these are old people now that we're talking about but things have changed now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Fig [Lloyd W. Newton] and all those guys that were all part of it in the past. Yes correct.
Speaker 1: Okay. And have you been pleasantly--
Speaker 2: They have a lot of good women. A lot of good women.
Speaker 1: --pleasantly pleased with their rise and their matriculation elsewhere?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, absolutely. When you interview these, these potential candidates and ultimately the White House Fellows, you learn just how unworthy you are.  I mean they are amazing, they are skilled, they are strong, they are so capable.  It's like when I go back to my--to Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I was on the board of visitors there and I would listen to the students and I go, oh my god if I were competing with them there's no way I would have gotten in (laughter).  And you know when you're with the Whitehouse fellows you go thank God I'm on this side of the table 'cause there's no way I could compete with these brilliant superstars.  What it does though is it leaves you knowing that there is hope for tomorrow because if I'm left in their hands, I'm good.  If this is the caliber of people that will be taking over this country, we're going to be just fine.
Speaker 1: We've got to get past (laughter)--
Speaker 2: We've got to get pass some of the crazies, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some of the old ones first I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Definitely.
Story_ID: 669010
Speaker 1: Tell us about RSR [RSR Partners].
Speaker 2: So RSR is a firm founded by the man Russell Reynolds not the fir- he--the man Russell Reynolds first founded the firm Russell Reynolds Associates, which still has his name on it today.  He left there over twenty years ago and started a boutique and it's a, it's small in size by intent.  It is made up of executives that have been in executive search for a very long period of time.  All of us have been in for some time so we are steeped in the craft of doing the business but unlike a large firm where they have to be transactional by nature just because they are large, we really are relationship oriented.  So we work fewer clients but we work deep with those clients. And, and having been in the industry now twenty years, for me it was something that worked beautifully with my clients because I get a chance to stay with them and, and really be of service to them and not just work on it by transaction.  It's a wonderful place.  I do corporate board works so I work with companies to help them identify their corporate board members.  So we work with the Fortune 1,000, we work with small cap companies but it's really corporate governance and that's really what I'm most interested in and going back to the day where I was on the board of Chancellor [Chancellor Media Corporation], Ace Cash Express [Ace Cash Express Inc.] and even all of the not for profits the governance structure is really what's important to me and how we are able to further the cause of whatever it is that we're working on.  You've got to have a structure in place that, that allows you to do that.  I believe every organization starts at the top.
Speaker 1: Okay all right. Yeah there's an interesting, I guess, I guess spiel that the organization uses about the flying v formation.  Can you tell us about that, I read about it, it's really interesting?
Speaker 2: Oh the ducks--you see our little ducks in the conference room and in the (unclear).  It's something our CEO talked about, but it's the power of an organization and the fact that you never--you're only as strong as your weakest link for the most part.  So you have to keep everyone strong and you know when someone--it's like the ducks you know when one duck is flying not as strong you have another duck that moves up in front, takes its place and--you never let your partners fall or fail.  That's what we're about, we don't let each other fail because if we let each other fail then we are failing our clients.  So you have to be client centric to be in that v formation and that's what we're about, it's all about the client.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And we keep each other strong so that we can be up great service to our clients.
Speaker 1: Formation itself makes it easier for everybody else to fly (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, yeah exactly yep
Speaker 1: That's an interesting concept.  So you started here in 2014.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you are a managing director.
Speaker 2: Yes, I run our Dallas [Texas] office.
Speaker 1: Yes this Dallas office and there are like what six other offices?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yes, definitely.  And because we all travel, there's never anybody in any of the offices 'cause we all travel so much.
Speaker 1: We're in an office today, and it's--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 669011
Speaker 1: Now you became the chairman of the board of the AT&T--
Speaker 2: Performing Arts Center [AT&T Performing Arts Center, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: --Performing Arts Center, right in 2015.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And yeah, so, yeah you succeeded Roger Nanney [D. Roger Nanney].
Speaker 2: Roger Nanney. Um-hm, exactly
Speaker 1: Well tell us a little bit about it.
Speaker 2: So the Dallas performing arts center is in the heart of our Arts District [Dallas, Texas].  It is actually the management of our opera house [Margot and Bill Winspear Opera House] and our theater center [Dee and Charles Wyly Theatre].  We have five resident companies, the opera [Dallas Opera], Dallas Theater Center, Dallas Black Dance Theatre, Ballet Folklorico [Anita N. Martinez Ballet Folklorico] and Texas Ballet Theater.  They're all housed in those two buildings and then we also in addition to that we put on Broadway performances in our venues.  It's, it's one of the larger performing arts organizations and we are part of the consortium of performing arts theaters across North America.  And we actually built those two building primarily with private money.  We had a large capital campaign of which we raised over $300 million to actually construct those facilities and our city contributed easements and things and some land.  For the most part we did the construction and development of those there.  Pritzker [Pritzker Architecture Prize] winning, award winning building built by Norman Foster and Rem Koolhaas, two critically acclaimed architects and just some of the best venues for performing arts.  When you look at Dallas [Texas] we are--this past year we received Michelin star as a visitor location and in part that was won because of what we offer in, in the arts district.  It's a wonderful facility, come visit.
Story_ID: 669012
Speaker 1: Now are you still--now you and your husband [HistoryMaker Ron Kirk] met at the Junior Black Academy of Arts and Letters (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Arts and Letters, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and it's now The Black Academy of Arts and Letters [The Black Academy of Arts and Letters, Inc., Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: TBALL.
Speaker 2: Curtis--uh-huh, TBALL. [HistoryMaker] Curtis King (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are you still associated with that?
Speaker 2: We still contribute to it but I'm not as involved in it, though collaboration is something that we'll see more of in the performing arts area. But not as involved as we have been in the past.  I rotate, go to different things, I'm like a little bee (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So as a, as a recruiter for talent--corporate talent do you--can you recommend that, that people serve on the board of these arts organizations and these other social justice organizations and other not for profits and that sort of thing?  Or do you try to tighten that network up with talent?
Speaker 2: I don't do as much--I do more work in the com- in corporate environments so what I do--the way I tie this in is I think there's--when we talk about corporate social responsibility it's not just resources. It's time and resources.  So being able to give back to your community--your community is only as good as the people that give back. And so it's incumbent upon people to do that so I use what I do as a role model for others and for my clients.  I really push the importance of it.  I have an opportunity to influence and, and that's how I do that is to ensure that they understand that they should be participating and being engaged is really the only way the city is ever going to be as good if not better than most.
Speaker 1: Okay. So it is not a good idea for corporations to try to focus their employees' attention on the corporation only.
Speaker 2: Yeah I mean, so the beauty of people who have choices in their work environment, you get the best the war on talent is won when you're able to give them a quality of life and that quality is not just sitting behind a desk or whatever it is that you do.  But it's how else can you be fulfilled.  And, and those that are considered domain experts, you will see that almost a 100 percent of them have something else going on outside of their work and their families.  They typically have other, other activities and it's because fulfillment comes in so many different ways and it comes oftentimes when you're able to give back unselfishly to someone else so that they can benefit.  So you know, it's not something that you typically have to push uphill to people who are domain experts they get it.  They're experts in their world because they understand that, that it's multidimensional.  You cannot succeed in a singular focus dimension unless you have your hands on other things that can help you to forge through.
Speaker 1: Okay. And from what I understand about RSR [RSR Partners] is that its, I mean, its profile as a company they can spend more time developing relationships with people so they're more affective in choosing who they--or recruiting--
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. If you read our chairman's book, I mean what's fascinating about him and one of the things that I really appreciate about him is that he lives with his clients.  I mean his clients are his friends, his colleagues, his partners--his business partners, his club partners, the people he boats with.  He's created almost a symbiotic world of all of his interests by engaging with them socially, culturally, philanthropy as well as professionally and that's something that we all believe in.  If you look at all of us--my colleagues we engage in so many different ways that, that really allows you to, to, to be a trusted confidant.
Story_ID: 669013
Speaker 1: Now you're on the board of the--advisory board for the Booker T. Washington high school for the performing arts [Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, Dallas, Texas] as well?
Speaker 2: Yes, so we haven't talked about my two girls and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Alex is my oldest, her name is Elizabeth Alexandra [Elizabeth Alexandra Kirk].  She went to undergrad at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], worked for a couple of years and is now a law student at Fordham [Fordham University School of Law, New York, New York].  Her passion has always been art history and art and she is in law school working on intellectual property and focused around provenance, so she's all about restitution and art and finding its original ownership.  So that's what she'd like to practice in law.  So if you've seen the movie 'Woman in Gold' or any of these movies where they've sued for the origination of art that's Alex--that's what she wants to do.  We call her Alex, her name is Elizabeth Alexandria.  She goes by E. Alexander--Alexandra Kirk.  So she has--she's my very studious child.  She was always my A student.  She was me, she was a little smarty pants in more ways than just being intellectually smart.  She's got a little smart mouth too.  But just an endearing human being and just smart and capable and loving just a good girl all the way around.  And then my youngest is Catherine [Catherine Ellis Kirk].  She's a professional dancer.  She went to Booker T. Washington High School and then went to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and now is a professional dancer in New York [New York] with a company, Abraham.In.Motion.  And while she was at Booker T. it was fascinating to me that it is a public school in the district that has every walk of life in it.  Every income range, yet these kids in her class did not bully, they celebrated each other.  When they would compete against one another they clapped for one another not just publicly for us but for everyone.  And it was just a culture that I was so enamored with that I stuck with it.  So after she left, I didn't do it while she was there, (laughter) I stayed out. After she left, about three years after she left the school, I went on to volunteer there a little bit more and ultimately became president of the board and now I'm just a member of the advisory board.  But it was important to see them really get the kind of revenue and recognition that they should.  People who went to that school names that you might know include Edie Brickell, Erykah Badu, Roy Hargrove people like that that went to the school that are pretty fascinating and have gone on to have great things in their careers. So, Norah Jones and other names.
Speaker 1: That's an impressive group.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I stayed involved in her school just from the arts side and it's also adjacent to the performing arts center [AT&T Performing Arts Center, Dallas, Texas].  So when we bring in artists to perform there they go over to the performing arts high school and get master classes early on.  So it's another way of giving back to the school and giving back to the young artist community here.
Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Ron Kirk is doing well, his law practice is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's doing great, he's at a law firm, he's with Gibson Dunn [Gibson, Dunn and Crutcher LLP] and then he's on a couple of boards and, and doing some public speaking here and there as well.
Story_ID: 669014
Speaker 1: All right now when you look back at everything you've done to this point--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) is there anything major you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't do anything differently but I would do more.  If I could give to, if I could give to another kid, I'd find a way to do it.  You know I have you know always taken in people in my home and given them a place to stay, food to eat, I'd continue to do that but I'd do more.  I enjoy, like I said, giving to the arts, I would do more if I had it to do over again and my goal is to try and give more than I take from this earth.  And I, again, I would try to do more.
Story_ID: 669015
Speaker 1: What today would you consider to be your legacy I guess?
Speaker 2: My girls [Elizabeth Alexandra Kirk and Catherine Ellis Kirk] are my legacy.  Their kind, giving hearts, their willingness to help others and, and give back but yet their inner strength and wisdom is the one thing that, that I was fortunate to have in my life is the wisdom of my [paternal] grandmother [Lillian Miller Bowden (ph.)] and my [paternal] great-grandmother [Bertha Miller].  And I think that that's something that, that's not--there's not enough of it and, and, and I think that we could stand to have a little bit more of that.  I think that's my legacy are my girls.
Story_ID: 669016
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Education is freedom and we do not put the value on education that I would want us to.  We don't support our historically black colleges [HBCUs] to the extent that we should and if we don't support them they are not going to be there.  But you know you can also support your own colleges that you've gone to and higher education.  But even beyond that I go back to the early education.  We've got to do something about early education and make sure that people understand that when your kids are in elementary school it's not play time, it's time that you have to give them so that they can understand the basics, the fundamentals.  I'm still stunned at the number of kids that don't get the, the time for homework that they should where parents don't necessarily value that.  And that's really--kids learn more from learning at home than they do in the classroom.  So having that time--quiet time not taking care of your brother or your sister but your quiet time to study is important. So education all the way around.  Everything I've ever received in my life is a function of me being educated--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and blessed and fortunate (laughter) but educated.
Story_ID: 669017
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't discussed that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No I think we hit ev- I think we've hit on everything.  My girls [Elizabeth Alexandra Kirk and Catherine Ellis Kirk] were the only ones, was the one that I wanted to make sure of my pride and my joy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. The last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Ma'am how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered for--wow a lot of different things I think but the most important is, is the fact that I was loving that I was interested in what others had to say and what others had to give and believed quite frankly that everyone has something to offer and the genius of each person here is something that we should all respect.
Speaker 1: Okay well thank you so much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
