Story_ID: 296860
Speaker 1: This [The] HistoryMakers interview is being conducted with the [HistoryMaker] Reverend Joseph Evans at his summer home, long time summer home at 16 Nantucket Avenue, Oak Bluffs on the island of Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  He and his wife, Harriette [Clark] Evans spend their winters in Sarasota, Florida.  The date is August 10, 2002.  The interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Matthew Hickey.
Speaker 2: It's 2005
Speaker 1: What did I say '02 [2002], 2005 thank you.  Reverend HistoryMaker would you give me your full name and would you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: Joseph H. Evans, E-V-A-N-S
Speaker 1: And Reverend what year were you born and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born August 15, 1915 in Kalamazoo, Michigan.
Story_ID: 296861
Speaker 1: For these interviews we have a few what we call warm up questions, People magazine type questions which will give the viewers of your HistoryMaker interview another different dimension of your personality.  So I want to start by asking you what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh my heavens, no longer because I can't eat it but I guess my favorite food was chili 'cause I made it.
Speaker 1: Okay your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring yes, nature's coming back into its own, rebirth, newness of life, right yeah, springtime.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: As I said earlier you spend the fall, winter and spring in Sarasota, Florida and you're here during the summer but over your lifetime have you had another favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No not really as you know I'm a minister and generally ministers have August for their vacation that's one of the reasons why we're here on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  Years ago my wife's [Harriette Clark Evans] mother said to us knowing that as a poor preacher I didn't have any money would you like to come up to the island and spend your vacation?  So as a family we started in 1950, fifty-five years ago this is our fifty-fifth year and it was a wonderful blessing to be able to get out of first Cleveland [Ohio].  I was in Cleveland first and then moved to Chicago [Illinois] to get out of the big city and to come here.  So our girls, we have three daughters and for them to come up and have the freedom and as you know this address is on a park and they could just go out and run and we're four houses from the water.  They could go swimming when they were old enough by themselves.  So that most of my memory takes me back fifty years, this is where I spent my vacations and then after my mother-in-law died this house--she had two houses, one across the park and this one and this one came to us.  So it's been in our hands for quite a number of years.
Speaker 1: And your mother in law's name, your wife's mother (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sally Fisher Clark, Washington D.C., she taught teachers at Miners Teachers College [Miner Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia] in Washington, D.C.  She was a teacher of teachers and was quite a lady.
Speaker 1: Last-- Interestingly enough her husband, my wife's father [Charles Fisher, Sr.], died when my wife was six months old so she never knew him.  So she only knew her mother but there was the other family.  There was Sally's mother Cora Fisher and her son Dr. Charles Fisher [Jr.] who was a physician in Washington, D.C. and she grew up in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: One last warm up question do you have a favorite saying or phrase that you use from time to time, something philosophical that you like to share with people?
Speaker 1: I have one but I can't remember it (laughter).  Oh dear not off the top of my head.
Speaker 2: It will probably come out as we continue to have our conversation.
Speaker 1: As I say my memory is giving me some trouble.
Story_ID: 296862
Speaker 1: Reverend, we know you're a minister but how would you elaborate or describe your profession?  You're now retired, but how would you describe generally your profession and what you did professionally before you retired?
Speaker 2: Well initially I was in the parish ministry that is I was a pastor of a local church.  When I finally made the decision to go into the ministry and into seminary then I had to make a decision was I going to be a teacher, was I going to be a pastor of a church?  And I had a leaning toward the pastorate.  I'd come up in a church in Church of the Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ] in Chicago [Illinois] and I liked what I saw and I liked what I felt more than anything else.  It was an opportunity to be with people, to be a part of their lives in a very unusual and distinctive manner and so when I finally got back--I was out of school for two years.  I fooled around in Chicago for two years but finally I got back into college and went to Western Michigan University [Western State Teachers College; Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan] and after I graduated from there in 1939, I applied to several seminaries and got accepted at Yale University [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] and I said oh my God I'm going.  For this guy out of the ghetto, I lived in the ghetto in Chicago, to get accepted to Yale University just was beyond my comprehension and I went there with fear and trembling because I knew my educational background was not good.  My educational background as an elementary school person even though my mother [Etta Hill Evans] was a school teacher, I didn't have the drive that's necessary.  I was not a learner; I was not a born student.  My undergraduate grades were not good but when I got to seminary I had to work, I learned how to study.  So I'm proud to say that my grades were A's and Bs all through seminary, and I--even though it was the hardest time of my life to study under sort of what we call the greats in the Protestant profession--in the Protestant ministry.  I can think of Bainton, Roland [H.] Bainton in church history and Douglas Clyde Macintosh in systematic theology which to this day I do not understand.  Biblical theology, social ethics, Christian ethics, I was totally unprepared for those subjects, those were beyond me but those were a necessary part of my training to be a pastor.  Then I was fortunate that we had a church the Dixwell Avenue [Congregational] Church [Dixwell Avenue Congregational United Church of Christ] in New Haven [Connecticut] which was made up of black folk pastored by a marvelous sainted old man and me as a student you have to accept the job in your field as field work.  I was assigned to the Dixwell Avenue Church and as luck would have it or fate or you call it whatever you will, I was trying to think of his name and it comes to me now Dr. [Reverend] Edward Goin, G-O-I-N had been there forty years.  One church, he served one church in his lifetime.  He was not a great preacher but he was a saintly gentleman, fine person.  But shortly after I went to that church as a student assistant he became ill and almost vanished from the picture.  You can see what I'm going to say, a lot was just dumped on me, it fell in my lap, I was there not that I knew what I was doing, not that I knew how but the result of it was I learned the--there was a lawyer in the church, George [W.] Crawford, who could have been a judge if he'd come along earlier, he graduated from Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] and what not.  But he said I was not ordained and he wouldn't allow me in the pulpit if you can believe that but that's the way things were done at that church.  But I was director of Christian education, I was Sunday school superintendent and worked with children and young people and had a marvelous introduction to that element in the life of the church.  I'll never forget it and forever be grateful for it.  Didn't plan for it, didn't know it was going to happen to me, it just happened and thank God I was able to respond to it positively.
Speaker 1: As we discuss briefly on the porch some of the materials that I read about your career in the ministry you moved progressively up in the church hierarchy and so as we move on we'll talk about some of these additional high positions that you moved from the local pastor to them.
Story_ID: 296863
Speaker 1: Before we do that let's go back if we can to your family history, your family history.  Would you give me your mother's name and where she was born and when she was born if you recall the year?
Speaker 2: Can't give you a when I can only guess my mother was Etta Hill [Evans] and she married Charles Alfred Evans [Sr.].  How my father made it from the Washington, D.C. area to the little town of Kalamazoo, Michigan is a mystery, you know as much as I do which is nothing but somewhere--let's see my mother went to Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio], graduate from Wilberforce.  I think she graduated in 1911.  Well if you subtract twenty-three, twenty-two years or so from that it would put you somewhere in the 1880s.  I do not know exactly I'm sorry and I said when this was all set up all my records are in Sarasota [Florida].
Speaker 1: But the arithmetic gives us a good approximate date.
Speaker 2: Approximate date, I cannot give you my father's date I just do not know it.  He was not a person who talked to himself; I just don't know.
Speaker 1: Your mother grew up in Kalamazoo?
Speaker 2: Yes as a child.
Speaker 1: What do you know about her childhood years?  Did she ever share stories and background about her growing up years with you?
Speaker 2: As I recall not too much.  She was part of a large family.  She was the youngest of six children I believe.  I remember my Uncle George [Hill] who was the oldest, Uncle Jay [James Hill], Aunt Edith [Hill], and Aunt Mabel [Hill].  I think she was the sixth child and a younger sister had died early but it was a fairly normal lower middle class.  My grandfather was a grading contractor; he drove teams of horses.  When I used to visit him on Sunday I had a wonderful time of driving a team of horses.
Speaker 1: This was Forrest?
Speaker 2: Forrest Hill yeah in Kalamazoo.  I used to love to go and visit them but then he died, I cannot remember when he died but I remember him thoroughly yes.
Speaker 1: Your mother went to Wilberforce.  Did she have an occupation or career?
Speaker 2: Teacher, she's a public school teacher and she taught earlier than when she moved to Chicago [Illinois].  She taught school all the years that I knew of her which meant that my father was a mail carrier and she was a public school teacher in the [Great] Depression.  I remember the banks were failing in Chicago in the '30s [1930s].  Do you remember-well you weren't--do you remember any of that?
Speaker 1: I heard about it.
Speaker 2: Were you old enough--banks failed but my parents both had incomes, we never really suffered.  It was always enough for, I had two brothers [Charles Evans, Jr. and Bruce Evans], for we three boys and so we got along alright.
Speaker 1: How do you remember your mother in terms of her personality?  What was she like as a person, how do you remember her?
Speaker 2: Well you read about what I said about my grandmother [Flora Hill].  She had some of her attributes but a little more what I would call maturity and strength because she was a public school teacher and therefore she had to know how to control--back then you had thirty and forty children in a class on the South Side of Chicago.  She had that kind of strength but I remember she was not a particularly outgoing person but a quiet, calm teacher and constantly encouraging us boys.  Being as I think about it the anchor in our home 'cause the time came because of some difficulties when my father left and he looked up one day and he had three teenage boys looking at him and he decided that he'd better get out of there. They weren't going to stand it.  My father was a hard man.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: Charles A. Evans.
Speaker 1: You're giving us a little glimpse of him as quote a hard man.
Speaker 2: He was unsparing in using the strap.  When I had daughters later on I vowed in life that I would never strike them and I never did, I just never would hit my children. We would just never--there are other ways of disciplining, I don't believe in that 'cause I'd had it and it was rough.
Story_ID: 296864
Speaker 1: I found interesting reading the transcript of an earlier interview that you had done in the early '90s [1990s] about your mother's mother, your maternal grandmother.
Speaker 2: Flora, yes.
Speaker 1: Flora Hill, tell us a little bit about Flora Hill and what you know about her background and where she was from.
Speaker 2: I don't know too much about her background because as I understand it she was a slave in Virginia and came from Virginia to Michigan by covered wagon and there met my grandfather and if you know Michigan, Cassopolis [Michigan] was one of the Underground Railroad stops and they evidently, I say evidently because I cannot document it met, married and moved to Kalamazoo [Michigan] where they made their home all of their lives, reared their children and that was where they spent their life.  Well, as I said she was a small person, probably four feet ten.  My grandfather was a big man so this big man with this little wife but she had six children and lost one.  She was a gracious soul, quiet, never lifted her voice, gentle.
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk to you about enslavement or her escape from slave--?
Speaker 2: No, no no no. you have to remember as I think about it and as I have talked with other people there was a period of life among our people when the folks did not want to talk about it and my grandparents were in that category.  They did not want to talk about slavery, they wanted to forget it and move on into the new life and their new world.  No she never talked about it, she never talked about herself, she was a quiet homemaker, marvelous cook.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite of her dishes? What did you like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Apple pie to this day (laughter).
Speaker 1: Forrest Hill her husband.
Speaker 2: Yeah my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather, your maternal grandfather.  What was his occupation, his livelihood when he met your grandmother?  What did he do?
Speaker 2: I don't know what his livelihood was when he met her.  As I told you, as I knew him he was grading contractor.  Back then in the '20s [1920s] and the '30s [1930s] you were still making gravel roads and he had teams of horses.  We lived at 728 Parker Street in Kalamazoo, Michigan and before automobiles there were horses, horses.  That's where I learned to drive a team of horses but then the time came when horses went out and my grandfather had a Willys-Knight.  Did you ever know the Willys-Knight?
Speaker 1: I've heard of it.
Speaker 2: Heard of it, the Chicago Police Department [Chicago, Illinois] used their open cars for their police department for a while.  I can remember that Willys-Knight he used to drive and open-it was an open four door car, not closed with windows and whatnot.
Story_ID: 296865
Speaker 1: You mentioned earlier that you had two brothers, two siblings.  Would you give me your brothers' names and when they were born?
Speaker 2: Charles A. Evans [Jr.] after his father [Charles Evans, Sr.], he's a junior and Bruce Hill Evans they stuck the Hill in after their [maternal] grandfather [Forrest Hill].  They were twins; they were born on October 27, 1916 fourteen months after I was born.
Speaker 1: And Charles' occupation? What did he (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a teacher and he died several years ago in Atlanta [Georgia] living with his daughter, my one niece brought him to live with her and he didn't live very long, he was a sick man then.  I think he's been gone about six years if I remember right.  My brother Bruce is still living has outlived two wives and some children.  I'm hoping, I haven't heard, I'm waiting, I'm just hoping he'll come to my party on Saturday.  I haven't seen him twenty years.
Story_ID: 296866
Speaker 1: I went back to Chicago [Illinois] to do an interim at--do you know what an interim is?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: A minister between ministers at a church.  I went back to Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd; Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois], unusual where I'd served to be an interim in 1984 and '85 [1985].  So I left Chicago in '85 [1985] after serving as the interim of the Church of the Good Shepherd, had a wonderful time and made them very mad, because I wouldn't stay but interim does not stay.  I'd given them a contract, one year and you hold them to that if you don't people will fall in love with you and then you compound the felony but at the end of my year I said, "I'm sorry I have to go."  Well I had another job to go to because I did five interims after I retired from my national job.  I wanted to go back to the local church that was my first love so I did five of them and then I retired but Bruce [Evans' brother, Bruce Evans] is still living in Chicago.  He lives at the senior citizen's suites [Senior Suites of South Shore, Chicago, Illinois] on east 67th Street an institution I do not know it, came into being since I was there out in an area of the town which was a no man's land for us, we didn't go over that far east.
Speaker 2: What was it like for you, Charles [Evans, Jr.] and Bruce growing up together in Kalamazoo [Michigan]?  What were those early growing up years like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I can't remember we were just babies in Kalamazoo 'cause then we went to Fort Wayne [Indiana] then to Chicago in '22 [1922], I was seven years old.
Speaker 2: When you went to Chicago?
Speaker 1: And they were six so we were little boys.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 296867
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory as a child how far back can you remember?
Speaker 2: I can remember being chased by the little white boy next door to me and calling me an ugly name.
Speaker 1: In Kalamazoo [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: No, in Fort Wayne [Indiana], I don't remember anything about Kalamazoo because I was too young, I was a baby.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you went to Fort Wayne [Indiana] roughly? Or do you have (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm going to guess about four.  I probably was there between four and five, six 'cause as I said I was seven when we moved to Chicago [Illinois].  So in a couple of years before then maybe five and six--
Speaker 1: You were in Fort Wayne.
Speaker 2: --I was just beginning to go to school.
Speaker 1: Why did your family go to Fort Wayne?
Speaker 2: 'Cause that's where my father [Charles Evans, Sr.] got an assignment, mail carrier.
Speaker 1: I see
Speaker 2: He passed the exam and the only assignment he could get at that moment was to go to Fort Wayne and then in 1922 the assignment to Chicago came and he jumped at it from all that know and we moved to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood and the street that you moved on to in Chicago where did you first live?
Speaker 2: 4812 St. Lawrence [Avenue] I'll never forget it in the heart of the South Side of Chicago.  I had never seen so many of our people in all my life.  We lived on the third floor.  I'd never been so high up of a four story apartment building.  I had never been in a seven room apartment, it was overwhelming.  It was overwhelming in everything.  Then I have to say that very honestly I was the wrong color moving into that neighborhood, it was hard.  It was tough.  Back then if you know this young man (points) knows Chicago there are 31st Street, 35th Street, 39th Street, 43rd [Street] these are the big cross town.  Well the nearest cross town street to us was 47th Street and south of 47th Street there was a gang which I became a member of for protection only.  I wouldn't have been able to move in the community without being known and understood and knowing who I was.  I can't remember anything more than that didn't participate in any of the activities as they generally think of gangs, no.  My reason for being a member of the gang was so I would be able to get from home to school and from school back home and walk around 48th Street, 47th and St. Lawrence and Forrestville [Avenue] and those other streets there on the South Side of Chicago.  But then in successive moves as the black population moved south then the boundary line was 51st Street and Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] then we moved around Washington Park and then it was 63rd Street and then it was 69th Street and then at 71st Street, 75th [Street] and 79th [Street] and so on and so forth and now it's the complete South Side.  But I was there when it was the ghetto from 51st Street, we'd just moved up to 51st Street which was Washington Park.  Washington Park was the barrier, couldn't go around, you had to be careful how far you went into it 'cause of the folks coming in from the other side.  But from 51st back to downtown to 22nd Street was the black community, was the ghetto.  It's where we lived between State Street and Cottage Grove [Avenue], a very definite prescribed neighborhood.
Story_ID: 296868
Speaker 1: What sch- elementary school did you first attend in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Willard, Francis E. Willard [School, Chicago, Illinois], won't never forget it.  I don't remember more than that, I can't even remember who any of my teachers were there.  Now from there to McCosh [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] we (simultaneous) --
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you remember that school, any memories of incidents or ill teachings--?
Speaker 2: No I just knew it was my first school.
Speaker 1: Did you like it? Did you like it there there do you recall?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether I liked it or disliked it.  I don't know that I was happy.  That was my school and I had to go there 'cause my parents [Etta Hill Evans and Charles Evans, Sr.] said I had to go and I went.  I cannot remember a teacher, nobody--then I went to McCosh which was out further south when we moved to 6425 Eberhart [Avenue] then we moved to 6638 Rhodes [Avenue] and went to McCosh.  The reason I remember that school is because the assistant principal and her husband were members of the Church of the Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois] that I later served.  So I remember them.
Speaker 1: McCosh was a middle school for juniors?
Speaker 2: No it was an elementary school; I went to three different elementary schools before I went to high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 296869
Speaker 1: Well tell me about your early church life as a youngster, the church that you attended as a child with your family?
Speaker 2: Well you're going to be interested to know that I was born into the Christian Science church.  My early years I was a Christian Scientist and I went to church to the Eighth Church of Christ, Scientist in Chicago [Illinois] which is located, I think I've got it right, at 42nd [sic. 44th Street] and Michigan Avenue.  Primarily an all-black church and we went and I went to Sunday school there, got into trouble because I asked the wrong questions, you did not question and as I said in my paper in that--in my interview I really didn't understand it until many years later why my discomfort until I took a course [at Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] on small religious sects under Liston Pope, a great teacher; one of my finest teachers, he was a southerner from North Carolina I think.  But in that course I learned what science was all about, Christian Science.
Story_ID: 296870
Speaker 1: You said that early on (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, in Science.
Speaker 1: --in Christian Science you were trying to understand what that--
Speaker 2: Well I went to Science, because my parents [Etta Hill Evans and Charles Evans, Sr.] took me, I was a child you know and we went there and then we moved--when we moved farther south I didn't know why they moved that's an interesting question.  Why did we move from the Eighth Church [Eighth Church of Christ, Scientist, Chicago, Illinois] to the Tenth Church [of Christ, Scientist, Chicago, Illinois] which was over in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] on Blackstone [Avenue] I believe. I can't remember the address but we went there for a while.  But in the meantime we moved to 5711 Michigan Avenue, we moved again.  My father left so my mother needed to get a smaller apartment, she couldn't handle--my mother was the sole breadwinner then.  Half our income was gone with my father gone and we were two blocks from the Church of the Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois].  So I started attending there.  I can't give you the exact date but I found that's where I belonged and I got active in the church school.  I became an usher, became known.
Speaker 1: What was it about that church that gave you that feeling that this is where you belong?  What was that inner feeling that you had?
Speaker 2: How do you describe that? That's hard.  Oh there was an esprit de corps, there was friendliness, there was an acceptance, I guess.  There was an understanding.  It's hard to describe some things of the sense, but some things happen to you and you know whether they're right and you know when they're wrong.
Speaker 1: What was the racial makeup of this church?
Speaker 2: This was an all-black church. [Harold M.] Kingsley had come there from someplace else and I forget now 'cause he had a very interesting history and had been called to be the pastor of that church when it was down at 53rd [Street] and Michigan [Avenue].  No, no, no it was in a church in the 4700 block on Langley [Avenue].  They moved to a building at 53rd and Michigan.  There's a church there now but then a Presbyterian church had this property at 5700 Prairie Avenue and it decided to move farther south and evidently, I do not know the facts of this 'cause I was a child, the Church of the Good Shepherd bought that property with the help of the Community Renewal Society [Chicago, Illinois] and that's where I began to attend church and got involved first in one way and then another.  Then as I said in that interview with Rosen [ph.], Kingsley was a great preacher and that attracted me, powerful preacher.  In the old style, not in the shouting, screaming but in the, oh who shall I describe?  But just a powerful pulpiteer in the language that he used and in what he had to say and that attracted me.  Well he discovered me and began to invite me to things like assisting in the service.  So I had the first inklings that this might something I would like to do and I'd think about, think about it long and hard.
Story_ID: 296871
Speaker 1: In the meantime I'd been out of school for two years.  Frankly I was doing nothing, got back in school, called my [maternal] grandmother [Flora Hill] in Kalamazoo [Michigan].  She worked for a professor of biology and I knew that and I asked, "Can you ask Mrs. Hadley [ph.] if there is any possibility of getting me into Western?"  I'd gone to Lewis Institute in Chicago [Illinois] which is at Damen [Robey Street; Damen Avenue] and Western [sic. Madison Street].  I don't know whether it's operating, I've had various comments about whether it's still in existence, I don't know.  I think I had a year's work behind me so I think I went into Western Michigan University as a sophomore.  Yes Mrs. Hadley got me into Western and that's where I went from '36 [1936] to '39 [1939] three years.  Lived with my grandmother, she had a very small house, I didn't even have a bedroom I slept in the living room on the couch.  She didn't have anything and I got a job waiting tables at a club.  No my first job was cleaning coops owned by university (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chicken coops--
Speaker 1: --by the college rather it was then Western State Teachers College [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan] and I said Lord there must be something else for me to do.  You ever clean a chicken coops?  The worst job in the world and I don't know how I ever met Bob Hackley [ph.].  He was in charge of the dining room somebody must have introduced me to him and I didn't know anything about waiting tables.  A private club for white people that served lobster and steak.  That's where I learned to serve lobster and steak and learned to be a waiter, learned about food and service and whatnot and that's where I earned my extra money and got--helped me to get through school.  Well I graduated in 1939. Well, while in Western I gotten interested and I can't remember how it happened in an interdenominational young people's organization and being one of the very few of us was frequently called on to talk about what it means to be a Negro, all that kind of stuff and I got pushed up front in a way that I'd never had before.  So that gave me the first inkling that this might be something that would interest me.  This as a profession of working with people in this area and then in my second year at--I was registered as in elementary education later elementary education that's eleven, twelve and thirteen-year-olds.  I went into my first practice teaching class and I said this is not for me.  My mother [Etta Hill Evans] had been a teacher and I'd thought about being--well I was at Western State Teachers College and I thought I might be a teacher.  So I was nervous to get back in school, might become a teacher and all the while this other thing is festering around in my mind and in my heart and when I made that decision then I had to make the decision what am I going to do.  I can't remember the succession of events but I got active in that youth group and met a lot of persons like myself, young people who were in Christian youth groups and I finally made the decision I said, "I think I'm going to go to seminary," just like that.  It was a quiet--it wasn't a hit you over the head, go plow or go preach and so I applied to three seminaries.  I applied to Hartford Theological Seminary [Hartford Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut], I applied to Chicago Theological Seminary [Chicago, Illinois] that was right there, I wasn't--I didn't want to stay home and then I applied to Yale University Divinity School [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] and when they accepted me I said that's for me.
Story_ID: 296872
Speaker 1: You had said earlier that the Reverend [Harold M.] Kingsley had impressed you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you kind of jumped over your high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] years but were there any other things besides the influence of Reverend Kingsley or anything else, high school that was moving you towards ministry?  I know this youth experience (unclear) (simultaneous) --?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not toward the ministry.
Speaker 1: So in high school you still didn't have a notion of what you--?
Speaker 2: No in high school, I was to try to get through it (laughter).
Speaker 1: You got through it but then you had two years off, right?
Speaker 2: No I went to Lewis Institute [Chicago, Illinois] for a better part of a year and in the bluntest language possible I cannot escape it I was goofing off.
Speaker 1: What was that training for?
Speaker 2: Lewis Institute?
Speaker 1: Yeah what was it for?
Speaker 2: It was an undergraduate college, small college on the corner of Damen [Robey Street; Damen Avenue] and Madison [Street] on the West Side but there were a number of us who were going over there and we were just having a good time.  Then I got a job, I worked at Walgreen Drug Stores [Walgreen Company], I delivered.  I was a delivery boy, I did the cleaning up, I went through all of the levels.  I became a clerk in Walgreens and then I worked in a private drugstore right around the corner from where we lived, learned that and had a good time and made some money.  But all the while I realized that there was something else for me and I didn't know what it was and one day in the middle of the night when I was working in a hotel I said there must be something more for me than this, just like that it came and I said, "I'm going to call Nana,"--that was what we called my [maternal] grandmother [Flora Hill]--and she immediately responded and said she would speak to Mrs. Hadley [ph.].  She did and I told you what happened and so I was able to enter college [Western State Teachers College; Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan] in June--in the September class, yes the fall class of 1936 and I graduated in June of 1939 with an A.B. degree.  Ordinary student, I was no student, I'll admit that, Lord forgive me.  I became a student in seminary [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] and I'm very proud of the fact that I learned how to study, I learned how to work and I had to work in order to keep up.
Story_ID: 296873
Speaker 1: So you accepted the offer to attend Yale University Divinity [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut], you went there immediately following Western Michigan [Western State Teachers College; Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan].  Tell us about coming to New Haven [Connecticut] and coming to Yale Divinity what was all that like for you when you first got there?  How did you feel?
Speaker 2: Well you've heard the phrase, you go out not knowing whither you go but you go in trust and faith.  Well that's was it.  I got on a train in Chicago [Illinois], I don't think I had fifty dollars in my pocket, I'm sure I didn't 'cause we didn't have it.  That's 1939 that was a tough time and I went out by train on the New York Central Railroad.  I rode that two day train ride to get to New Haven.  Got off and made my way up to 409 Prospect Street.  Divinity School is a separate campus north of the main campus [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] about a mile from the main campus downtown.  When I stood at the entrance to the quadrangle as it's called I thought I had arrived in heaven, gorgeous.  White and red stone brick buildings.  There were four on each side and the entrance here and the chapel down in the middle, the Marquand Chapel [New Haven, Connecticut] (cough).  Well that was a great experience, I registered and had been accepted and so it was a matter of being assigned a room and there I had three wonderful years and a lot happened to me in that.  I think the most important thing to me is for me to say about the three years is that my decision to go was confirmed every step of the way helped by going to the Dixwell Avenue [Congregational] Church [Dixwell Avenue Congregational United Church of Christ, New Haven, Connecticut] by becoming known in the student body.  The third year I was elected president of the student body which was a great honor.  Some students came to me and said they didn't like the nominee for president, would I be willing to run?  And I said, "Well, sure, yeah. I do--what are you talking about? I'll run."  I won.  What does the president of a student body do?  Well you represent the student body at most official functions and the new incoming class, you're there to greet them.  I never will forget we ate our meals in the refectory and we were served and some of the students worked off their scholarship by being waiters, wore white coats.  We were at tables of six and four and I never will forget at my senior year when I president of the student body and we sat down at a table and incoming students and I sat across from the student, I learned his name I never will forget it his name was Schroeder [ph.], I wouldn't know him if he walked through the door but I remember his name.  My roommate, I had a roommate that year Jack Robinson [ph.].  Jack was very dark, he was very visible and finally Schroeder couldn't stand it any longer he leaned across the table at me and said, "Joe we have any black students here?"  And I said, "Yes we've got six."  He turned all kind of colors (laughter); he turned all shades of colors.  But that was a great year, I had a wonderful time and then at graduation I was one of the marshals for my class and whatnot.  That was my introduction to public life really being president of the student body of the--of my class of '42 [1942], sixty-two years ago, '42 [1942].  I graduated in late May of '42 [1942].  The worst year at my seminary was in '41 [1941].  Do you remember what happened in 1941?  Pearl Harbor (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Pearl Harbor.
Speaker 2: In December '41 [1941] the war broke out in Pearl Harbor.  The FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] came on campus and took off the three Japanese students without word and put us in shock, it just stunned the university, stunned our school and we couldn't-we didn't know what to do.  We just went over to the chapel, not to the chapel but to the dining hall area where you meet coming out of the dining hall and we held a prayer session just to be quiet and try to understand what had happened.  Those three disappeared and I've never heard of them since.  I don't know what happened to them, in fact I can't even remember their names 'cause I didn't know them well (cough).  But that was--that's another monumental moment in my life at the divinity school.
Story_ID: 296874
Speaker 1: The other would be I suppose--I had some wonderful professors, great teachers [at Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut].  I had a great professor of preaching who gave me the fundamentals as I understand it.  So I one day became a professor of preaching and as I said Liston Pope who was a southerner and brought a spirit and an attitude and an understanding that others could not have because he came out of the South.  He was a great man, Liston Pope taught social ethics, and he was a wonderful teacher.  As I said I sat under some of the great minds, [H.] Richard Niebuhr in Christian ethics just fantastic.  You might have heard of his brother.  Richard Niebuhr [sic.] taught at Union Theological Seminary [New York, New York], he was the older better known--Reinhold Niebuhr was the older, Richard was the younger more introverted, more quiet.  He was not a public--not demonstrative like his brother was so people didn't know him.  But when he was in the lecture hall he was a master in social ethics, yeah.  How'd I get off on that? Excuse me (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I was going to ask you who the influential professors were and you answered it. That's good.
Speaker 1: Well I've given you them yes, yes.
Story_ID: 296875
Speaker 1: Now, you were just reciting the things that stand out in your mind now about the experience.  So you graduated from Yale Divinity [School, New Haven, Connecticut] 1942 (simultaneous) -
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In 1942.
Speaker 1: --and what came next?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question.  As we came near graduation I had nothing coming.  All around me my fellow students were receiving calls from churches.  In my denomination, you are called to a local church, you're not assigned, you are called.  Receiving calls or receiving assignments those who were Methodists, some were going on to graduate school to get Ph.D.s, I didn't have anything coming.  I really got scared.  A month from graduation I got a call from the New York City Missionary Society [sic. New York City Mission Society, New York, New York], they said, "Mr. Evans [HistoryMaker Reverend Joseph Evans] would you be interested in a mission over on Brooklyn [New York]?" and I said, "Yes."  I was so glad to have something.  All that education and I really had the finest graduate theological education I think anybody could have because I studied under some of the greats and I don't know who the men at Yale are now.  I don't know any of them; I know them not by reputation or who they are or what they've written or anything.  But when I was coming along if you talked about [Roland H.] Bainton and [H.] Reinhold [Neibuhr], Richard Niebuhr and [Robert] Calhoun and some of the others you've really met with some of the greats.  I went over to Brooklyn to a little missionary church that was struggling that had twelve members.  You have no idea how I felt, it was an awful struggle.  Second this is they were all from the island of Barbados, they didn't understand me and I didn't understand them.  I believe this with all my heart, as God would have it and that summer I got a call from our Grace Church [Grace Congregational Church of Harlem; Grace Congregational Church of Harlem United Church of Christ, New York, New York] across the borough in Manhattan [New York], had lost its pastor and they contacted me.  We had a conference which is always the procedure, you discuss it and they issued me a call and I accepted.  So on October 16, I can remember some dates, 1942 I became the minister of the Grace Congregational Church.  I have a picture being at Grace on my wedding anniversary there it is right on the bottom over there.  310 West 139th Street, sat back in the middle of the block and in all those brownstone houses you don't even know it's there until you go through the lot.  It was a typical middle class black church.  So I was back home with people that I knew and understood.  Now they beat me up and down one side of my head and down the other but it was a great learning experience.  From this distance and even a few years after I left there I'm eternally grateful.  First of all, that they gave me the privilege and the opportunity to go there, I was a green horn.  Just because you go to seminary doesn't mean that you know what you're doing, you don't.  Most of these guys go out and I see them now and they don't know what they're doing and they break all the wrong rules.  But I learned.  I learned the hard way.  I remember the end of my first annual meeting and I'll never forget her and I haven't seen her in thirty-five years, Clara Hazel [ph.] was my church clerk.  At the end of my first annual meeting she sat there in tears crying 'cause it was a terrible meeting then.  I don't know what I did but it was bad, folk can tear you apart.
Speaker 1: How large was this congregation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About three hundred members.
Speaker 1: That's pretty sizeable.
Speaker 2: It was fair size. Oh and it kept me busy.
Speaker 1: What about the backgrounds of the people in the neighborhood who were church members?  Who were they, were they recent arrivals to New York [New York], were they second generation?
Speaker 2: Many West Indians some of my dearest friends became people who were West Indian but it was a typical middle class church.  People came from all over New York--all over Manhattan I'll say and the Bronx [New York].  Then we had no black church in the Bronx so they came down to Grace Church.  A number of families that I can remember came some distance by subway and car and rai--
Speaker 1: Well had they originally lived in that neighborhood of Harlem [New York, New York] then moved and came back?
Speaker 2: Well there were many who lived in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: In those brownstone houses.
Speaker 1: But I'm curious about those who came these other distances.
Speaker 2: That's right well they were looking for a Congregational church then, it was then a Congregational church.  It became the United Church of Christ later on.  But it was a typical middle class.  You name it, you know we had some doctors, nurses and teachers and a few people who were in business, a man who decorated our apartment who was a painter and decorator.  He made a good living as a decorating contractor.  But it was a typical middle class church made up of folk that I'd grown up with in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 296876
Speaker 1: Now did something very special happen to you when you became the pastor there initially or during that time?  Did something special happen in your life?
Speaker 2: While I was in Grace [Grace Congregational Church of Harlem; Grace Congregational Church of Harlem United Church of Christ, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: I met my wife (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell us. I kind of led you into it.
Speaker 2: Now how can I tell this so that you will see it right?  A friend of mine from Chicago [Illinois] who I've known and she and Harriet were living at the YWCA, the church was on 139th Street west across 8th Avenue, across 7th [Avenue; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and Lenox [Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard], 136th Street the YW-.  She was there; my wife was attending the Chester Hale School of Ballet [New York, New York].  My wife is a trained ballet person.  What's her name, she was in our wedding, can't remember her name.  She said, "Would you go with me to church?  A young man is the pastor and I want to go hear him."  Well how can I put this as nicely as possible?  They came to church and I saw Harriette Clark and that's was all I needed to see.  Is that enough for me to say (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Fine.
Speaker 2: I contacted her later which I'm not going to go into.  There was an interesting conversation and it took about a year and we were married on October 15, 1944, sixty years ago and nine months.  We celebrated our sixtieth year last October 15th and went back to New York that's where we met, had a wonderful time.  That's when that Grace picture was taken.  My son-in-law was there Ken [HistoryMaker Kenneth Carlton Edelin], you know Ken.  Ken took that picture and we worshipped there that morning and the pastor whom I did not know Reuben Tindye [ph.].  I called him which is the courteous thing always to do.  Don't walk in on a man and he said, "Oh I'll be looking--what do you want?"  And I said, "No, no I do not want to preach, I don't do that anymore."  He said, "Will you just speak to the congregation?"  And I said, "I'll be glad to give a word of greeting."  So my grandchildren, my wife and two of my daughters there were about twelve of us were in church that morning.  It was a nice experience; it was very comforting.  So we went to Chinatown [New York, New York] for dinner where we used to court and went to Harlem [New York, New York] and went to a number of places, went to Sylvia's.  You know Sylvia's Restaurant [New York, New York] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I've been there.
Speaker 2: We've been there.  It was a nice four days that we spent in New York City and we were married in the Fifteenth [Street] Presbyterian Church [Washington, D.C.].  My wife is a Presbyterian and it's the right of the woman always to be married in her church and I had to tell my people that they did not understand it and a few wandered down to the wedding not many from New York and we were married there.  That was the beginning of our life together.
Story_ID: 296877
Speaker 1: Before you left the church, Grace [Grace Congregational Church of Harlem; Grace Congregational Church of Harlem United Church of Christ, New York, New York] you started your family is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah my first daughter came a year after we were married (laughter) right in the first year, Lesley [Evans Christian].  She is now sixty, I can't believe that I have a daughter sixty years old, oh it's terrible (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And where is Lesley today what is she doing?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lesley and John [ph.] Christian her husband live in Brookline [Massachusetts].  Lesley is the executive of the Crispus Attucks Child Care Center [Dorchester, Massachusetts] in--what's the black community (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: --Roxbury.  It's a big operation and she deals with a million dollar budget, a big staff--
Speaker 1: I'm very familiar with it because it's right across the street where my office used to be.
Speaker 2: Well that's Lesley is.
Speaker 1: I know it, know it very well.
Speaker 2: She works hard, I worry about her.
Speaker 1: She's done a great job there.
Speaker 2: I worry about her because of that and you know John is blind and it's not getting better.  He's permanently blind now and she has to do everything.
Speaker 1: I saw him last week.
Speaker 2: Yeah did you go to Montreal [Canada]?
Speaker 1: I went to a funeral up there Boston, Massachusetts and I saw John.
Speaker 2: The guardsmen met in Montreal are you a guardsman?
Speaker 1: Oh no I'm not a guardsman.
Speaker 2: You're not a guardsman nor am I, I resisted.
Speaker 1: You had a second daughter who was born a couple of years later?
Speaker 2: Harriette [Evans Smith]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well that's an interesting story.  Dr. Fred Hoskins was pastor of our Park [Street Congregational] Church in Brooklyn--not Brooklyn, Bridgeport, Connecticut sorry I said places and dates of long ago have gone from me, called me and said, "Joe [HistoryMaker Reverend Joseph Evans], we've got a job on the Connecticut Council of Churches staff, I want to know would you be interested in it?"  Well I wasn't thinking about leaving Grace Church but that's the way jobs come to you in the church.  Somebody hears about you and they come looking for you.  We talked, I decided after four years at Grace it might be time to move on and I did.  I accepted the job to become the associate general secretary of the Connecticut Council of Churches.  The main responsibility was state youth work and a ministry to the tobacco workers.  A lot of people don't know that shade leaf tobacco is grown in Connecticut under white netting and they were bringing up Jamaicans then southern black--black college students to work in these farms and the council of churches had gone into wherever they would be admitted, many workers would not let you in, they didn't want you to see the conditions--the working conditions.  But those that would admit us we tried to conduct a program for the workers, a ministry to these people who were without homes, away from home rather without family and it meant doing any one of a number of things, Bible reading, teaching, just talking to help these men--all men living in an all-male community to live there and to understand where they were.  That was a part of my work and then I did state youth work so it meant I was speaking to youth groups all over the state all the time.
Story_ID: 296878
Speaker 1: You were ministering to the tobacco workers and youth (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was associate general secretary of the Connecticut Council of Churches, member of the staff.  To make a long story short the council ran out of money.  My job was the first to go.  I stayed fourteen months which meant I had to start job hunting.  As God would have it and I believe it with all my heart Mt. Zion [Congregational] Church [Mt. Zion Congregational Church, United Church of Christ] in Cleveland [Ohio] lost its pastor and called me and I went out preached for them.  This almost never happens in our church.  They called a church meeting immediately and called me on the spot.  In the meantime my wife [Harriette Clark Evans] was pregnant with our second child but with my moving around like I did--oh we bought a house in Hartford, Connecticut.  We didn't know it but there was a rheumatic child in the home and the state law is you cannot remove a family if there is a rheumatic child in the home.  We bought a house we never occupied, it was terrible, and that was a terrible year.  My wife went to Washington [D.C.] at home with her mother [Sally Fisher Clark] and that's where Harriette [Evans Smith] was born.  I'm getting--it's a long way around to get you to Harriette.  Harriette was born in Washington, D.C. on June 25th.  She is fifty eight, Lesley [Evans Christian] is sixty--fifty-eight, yes.  And about that time after she had the baby I finally got down there to see my newborn child but I couldn't stay because I had to get back to my job.  But then shortly thereafter we realized that we had to--it was great in one way if you can see it that way.  We were separated, we'd been shopping, living around with people it was unfortunate, one of the hardest years of our life.  But then I had to--about that time our Mount Zion Church in Cleveland heard about me and I went out and preached for them and they called me.  That meant moving to Cleveland that's when my family and I got back together.  The greatest time in my life was when we could be together.  I was in Cleveland for was it six years?
Speaker 1: Forty-seven [1947] to '53 [1953] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Forty-seven [1947] to '53 [1953].
Story_ID: 296879
Speaker 1: Then in 1953 I got a call, I came home one night about ten o'clock, the phone rang and I happened to be right at it and I picked it up this is Samuel Stratton of the Church of the Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ] in Chicago, Illinois and I said, "Yes."  "We have just voted to call you as our pastor."  I said, "What?  Let me sit down, say that again--you don't do that."  That's what he said. I said, "Now wait a minute I think that you should see the real article as it is now and we need to talk about a few things."  Salary, living blah, blah moving expenses all the stuff that goes with it.  So I went over to Chicago, met with the committee and we settled on everything.  Of course that ten room parsonage next door, marvelous building, long story short we moved there in 1953 and that's where my family and I really got back together again.  And I had fourteen wonderful years in my own church pastoring to contemporaries of my parents [Etta Hill Evans and Charles Evans, Sr.] and my contemporaries it was not easy.  "You know who is coming to Good Shepherd?  Joe Evans [HistoryMaker Reverend Joseph Evans]."  "Who?" I had that kind of thing to face.  But I had enough experience and enough training and enough gumption and get up and go and learning in those years from '42 [1942] to that date so that I was able to handle myself without--one thing you don't ever do in the local church is to get angry.  Never lose your temper.
Speaker 2: How had the neighborhood and the church community changed over the years?
Speaker 1: Well then it hadn't changed it was still a fairly new community as far as we were concerned, we were new residents.  It was a substantial community; it's not as it is now.  The 5600 block south of the church on the east side it's not hardly a building standing it's all gone, demolished, rotted, gone.  I understand across the street from the church there was a grocery store, a drugstore and another store, they're all gone, it's terrible.  I haven't seen it but that's what I understand that's happened.
Speaker 2: What I meant how it had changed from your earlier years as a younger person there and going back, going back (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh by then it had not changed that much, it hadn't changed that much.  It was a pretty solid middle class community with pockets of ghetto.  You have some--there are the folks who buy building and make tenements out of them and therefore they become down ridden and break down because of over use.  We had a little girl who would come in with one of my daughters once and she stood in our living room and she said, "How many people live in this house?" and she told her just five of us she couldn't believe it 'cause she lived a couple of doors down.  She and her mother and two other children lived in two rooms.  So you had that kind of thing and in many of those buildings you see. So all right, excuse me.
Story_ID: 296880
Speaker 1: What were the early challenges however, that you faced now coming to Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd; Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois] as you begin that ministry?
Speaker 2: Well first of all you have to be a good preacher and thankfully I had developed enough of a style so that I could successfully follow my predecessor Arthur [Douglass] Gray.  Did you know him?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Arthur Gray was the first black president of Talladega College [Talladega, Mississippi], he was a graduate of Talladega and was called to be the president and left the church open and that's when they called me 'cause they knew me but they also, I found out later, had done a lot of checking around, they called a lot of people before they even contacted me.  When they found out what they liked and what they wanted they liked what they found then they had that meeting and called me without my knowledge that's the reason I said what I did.  I said, "No Lord we've got to talk 'cause I want it in black and white."  You accept the call but then you get the call in writing and it states salary shall be, moving expenses shall be, housing shall be, et cet- all of it.  By that time I had learned what is appropriate and proper in our denomination.  So I went home and I was called and it wasn't easy and don't faster than you can, move at a pace that is commensurate with your ability and skill and feel you way carefully.  All those things I learned and I did slowly and I had fourteen wonderful years.  I didn't make many mistakes; I made fewer mistakes than I did at Grace [Grace Congregational Church of Harlem; Grace Congregational Church of Harlem United Church of Christ, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Did you make any changes in the church in any kind of way?  Were there any things (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah they never had an assistant pastor that was a major change.  They said, "What do you need an assistant for?"  That was a brand new idea and there were a number of people that were against it.  I looked around and interviewed a number of people including Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and I said, "No this is not for me."  Even then I could tell that man was too much with himself.  But we called Clyde Miller.  Clyde went on to have a good career, still living he lives in Denver [Colorado] now, retired just been through triple by-pass surgery.  Clyde did well, he was a good assistant he did youth work, Sunday school work all that area I didn't have to fool with.
Speaker 1: Was he here from Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Boston City Missionary Society [Boston, Massachusetts] he was the executive.
Speaker 1: I remember him.
Speaker 2: Clyde held a number of very good jobs.
Speaker 1: I remember him.
Speaker 2: Clyde Miller and then moved out to be the conference minister of the Rocky Mountain Conference, surprised many of us 'cause Clyde used language that you're not supposed to use and said, "He was going out among those German farmers out there.  They'll all kill him."  But they loved him, I don't know why or how.  He stayed out there.  I talked to his wife the other day, Eva [Whitlock Milller] and she will never go anyplace else, she loves Denver.  He's now retired, does interim work and whatnot.  So that was a new thing calling Clyde.  Then we were ministering to full services.  I instituted two services on every first Sunday.  I found that our communion services were the best services.  Communion for black folk is very, very important if you deal with it right.  In my church where I'm now a member of the First Church [First Congregational United Church of Christ] in Sarasota [Florida] it's a kind of a tack on, it's an add on at the end of something you do it in ten minutes and it just drives me crazy.  But the focus of the Lord's Supper in the black church is a very, very important ingredient to understanding the nature of the church of the life of what our Lord did.  So I instituted two services.  I'm not a morning person to get ready for a nine o'clock service was terrible I did to myself but it worked, I had full church.  Arthur Gray and I and Harold [M. Kingsley] and Ken Smith [HistoryMaker Kenneth Smith, Sr.] who followed me, we all preached to four and five hundred people Sunday.  Every Sunday the church was full.  It's in bad shape now sorry to say.  So I did several things like that and Clyde developed a strong youth program 'cause he could give it his full time you see.
Story_ID: 296881
Speaker 1: During these very important years in the development of your pastoring you had actually three daughters and we jumped over the youngest.  Let me just back up if I can (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah she was born in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay and that was--
Speaker 2: Barbara [Evans Edelin].
Speaker 1: --Barbara. The year?
Speaker 2: Oh Lord, she's fifty-five, 1950.  The reason that fifty is so important 'cause she was born that year--that's our first year that we came here on the island [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts].  So she's fifty-five.  She went to Baldwin-Wallace [College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio], didn't like and I said well I'm not going to do anymore paperwork if you do the paperwork I'll pay for it.  She applied at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and got accepted and went to Fisk, got her undergraduate work then went to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania] and got her graduate degree.
Speaker 1: And where is she now what is she doing?
Speaker 2: What does Barbara do?  Barbara is on island, has a house here.  Barbara is an event coordinator.  She will put on an annual meeting for anything and anybody, you name it.  She does it for banks, for weddings, for corporations, she's good at it.  She's a director, gets (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I've been to some of them.
Speaker 2: Gets it from her mother [Harriette Clark Evans] and she's doing well right now.
Speaker 1: And she lives where?
Speaker 2: She lives in Brookline [Massachusetts]--they live in Brookline but they built a house in Sarasota [Florida] it's empty, sitting there empty.  Well Ken's [HistoryMaker Kenneth Carlton Edelin] ready, but she's not so they've got to work that out. They gotta work that out.
Speaker 1: I think he told me that in the HistoryMaker interview.
Speaker 2: I think he's making it next year, I think he said he's making it.
Speaker 1: And so just so we close the whole story on this, Harriette is where now and what is she doing?
Speaker 2: Harriette works at Brigham and Women's Hospital [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: In?
Speaker 2: The OB/GYN [obstetrics/gynecology] department.
Speaker 1: And where in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: In Boston as an educator--no that's not her title.  She helps to plan the program for staff their future training, education and whatnot.  She has a good job, she's doing well.  I don't know how she got it, she's the one child didn't want to go to school but she evidently has pushed herself along and has a good job.  I've been there several times and they like her, they respect her, she's well thought of, she's very busy, she evidently is very important to their program.  She's on the staff of Brigham and Women's Hospital.
Speaker 1: That's great. Well, they're all doing important and different things, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right all completely different, yes.
Story_ID: 296882
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your wife Harriette [Clark Evans].  All during the development of your pastorate, ministries and she's moving along with you and raising your daughters what else did she do?  I'm sure that she was involved in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She didn't do much because she had these three little ones to deal with until we got to Chicago [Illinois] then because we were living in a large parsonage--ten room there was a whole basement that was empty.  I don't know how it happened but at least maneuvered me around so that I could approach the trustees that she would open a studio, a dance studio and she taught children from all over.  She couldn't-she had to refuse children when they came and the word got on.  So she was able to realize her own background and training (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the parsonage, in the parish hall.
Speaker 2: In the parsonage right in the basement.  She also directed--she was a coordinator for the Links Cotillion.  You know about those?  Every year they present the young ladies well she did that and did an excellent job.  Then some years later she got interested in the Faberge eggs well that didn't happen until we got to New York [New York]--to Boston [Massachusetts] rather.
Speaker 1: I wrote a history many years ago the early '80s [1980s] called '[Faith, Culture, and Leadership:] A History of the Black Church in Boston' [Robert C. Hayden], in fact I'm going to give you a copy, I think you'd like to look at it and of course I interviewed the ministers the current at that time and even some of the past ministers of the churches in Boston and learned although I wasn't surprised that critical important role that the wives of the ministers--the roles that they played in the work of the ministers in the Boston churches particularly those ministers in Boston who had long tenures of pastors like you did and I often said that someone needs to write a book about the wives.  Tell me how Harriette C. Evans supported you in your ministries?  What special roles did she play?
Speaker 2: There is no training ground for that; it's on the job training.  I guess first of all you have to have good instincts, you have to like people, you have to enjoy working with people, you have to know that you cannot enforce yourself upon them.  You learn by carefully working with folk and she's been marvelous at working with people.  I think Harriette was at her best when we were at Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd; Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois].  She had her own community, she had her own work, and her girls were all in school so she had free time.  She had her worst time when I went to be the secretary of the United Church of Christ, she was isolated and lately we have been talking about that and I made my confession of sin because I was on the road all the time.  I was gone sixteen years, I was in the air, went all over the country, all over the world 'cause that was my job.  She was there at 11220 and 78th Place at St. Albans, New York and it was, that was, those were tough years for her but I'm jumping the gun excuse me.
Speaker 1: No anything else you want to say about her role and support.
Speaker 2: Not because she's my wife but you've got to be a good person.  I think fundamentally she is a basically good person, she likes the right things.  She likes people, she'd come up in the church at Fifteenth Street Presbyterian Church [Washington, D.C.], she was not a stranger to it.  She had to think long and hard about marrying a minister that was not easy for her.  She had to leave what she had trained for.  She went to the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin], she went to Bennington College [Bennington, Vermont] and her mother [Sally Fisher Clark] had put a lot into her and into her education.  When her mother found out that she was keeping company with a minister she sent her brother Dr. Charles Fisher [Jr.] and his two sons up to meet me in New York.  That was an interesting--it wasn't bad but it was interesting (laughter).  They wanted to see who this dude was little Harriette had lost her sensibilities over.  But we didn't do it quickly, we had a year to really think about it and talk about it, work toward it and we've had sixty good years.  Not all of them easy.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Some of the early years were tough.  Those years in Hartford, Connecticut where we never got (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Never got the house.
Speaker 2: --our house, awful.
Story_ID: 296883
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967] you become the secretary of the United Church of Christ [UCC] how did that come about?  And tell us about the beginning of that dimension of your life, professional (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right. Now that's a very interesting story that could take a lot of time or a short time.  But you remember what the '60s [1960s] were like in this country?  That's when the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] emerged, black power emerged everything was happening all over the country.  Denominations were employing black staff.  In 1967 the national staff of the United Church of Christ president, secretary and treasurer and the heads of all the instrumentalities--that's the name we used for our program agencies, homeland, world, social action, et cetera, et cetera, they were instrumentalities--all white males.  The year before that we had developed our Black Caucus, we had chapters in New York [New York], Chicago [Illinois], Cleveland [Ohio], Washington, D.C., Los Angeles [California] and we had a Committee on Racial Justice.  It had not reached a higher status it came later Charles [Earl] Cobb was the executive.  Well they did some talking around themselves and they said oh in the meantime the first secretary of the church though his name escapes me for the moment, he was white decided in--see we were called for four year terms and at the end of two years he wanted to leave, he wanted to go back to the pastorate to finish out his ministry.  He accepted a call to a church in Sydney, Australia which left the job open.  Well our Black Caucus got together and decided this was an opportune time to put up somebody's name.  Well to make a long story short I was it, I said sure.  You don't beat the establishment; you don't win against the nominating committee.  I learned later on to my sorrow you do not beat the nominating committee and I went to the Sixth General Synod in Cincinnati [Ohio] in 1967, was a delegate from the Illinois Conference of the United Church of Christ.  My name was presented, the nominee of the nominating committee was Robert F.R. Peters who happened to be the executive associate to the president of the church and that very thing worked against him.  People thought that the president was trying to name the secretary because Bob Peters was his associate, his executive.  I ran against him and I won 492 to 192, I'll never forget the numbers.  I had no plans, I was happy at Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd; Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois]. I was at the peak of my career, and I was doing well.  I pastored a church it was then 1500 members when I went it was 2,012 but removed 519 names in my first year because the people just weren't there.  I went before the board of deacons and presented the facts and they tried to die 2,012 sounds so good but there were about 1500 of us.  It's a good church, big church.  I had no help until I got Clyde [Miller] in there.
Story_ID: 296884
Speaker 1: During the time of that tenure at Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd; Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois] you also served as the president of the Chicago Urban League.
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: Can we say a little bit about that and then we'll come back to the transition from the church to the UC (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I served in a number of positions.  I was president of the Illinois Conference of the United Church of Christ that's the state organization primarily a presiding officer; you don't have any responsibility accept for meetings and whatnot.  I was a member of the Community of Renewal Society [sic. Community Renewal Society] in Chicago [Illinois] and I had one or two terms as president of the Chicago Urban League.  My mother [Etta Hill Evans] who was still living then called me once and said, "Are you still pastor of Church of the Good Shepherd?"  I said, "Yes."  "Well how are you being the president of the Chicago Urban League?" "Well I've been on the board and they lost their president and came to a new year and I was the guy they elected."  I had a wonderful time primarily presiding at business meetings and didn't have much else to do. Because--can't remember his name, our executive was a great guy, it's gone from me.  Well let's (unclear) do that I had several jobs like that.  Over at the seminary [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] I did some things like that, I was busy.
Story_ID: 296885
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, coming back--
Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --coming back to the UCC [United Church of Christ] positions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah I was elected secretary which meant that within ninety days which is the law and rule of the executive council any officer elected of the church must be in office in ninety days.  Well again I believe that God was with us the word got out across the country and some friends that we had befriended in New York [New York] called us and said there's a house available in St. Albans [New York] I think you ought to look at it.  The person who owned it he was a labor arbitrator was moving to Los Angeles [California].  To make a long story short, I went out to New York looked at the house and bought it.  So I solved my housing proposition which meant we had to pull out of Chicago [Illinois] and move to St. Albans.  That was the first house we ever really owned all the others were parsonages owned by the church.  We lived at 11220 178th Place and Harriette [Evans Smith], Barbara [Evans Edelin] was in school and they were all in school then by that time.  Lesley [Evans Christian] was in graduate school in New York--school of social work at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and Barbara was at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] or Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania]  I can't remember the years.  Harriette was downstate at a state school.  So we moved to New York back to New York where I'd been there before and then I began my sixteen years at secretary of the United Church of Christ.  It was a--I guess my call to Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd; Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois] was my greatest thrill.  To be called back to one's home church doesn't happen very often and to have it to be a successful ministry is the second thing.  You generally have too much baggage that you carry.  I evidently didn't have too much bad package and made it and had a good reputation in Chicago.  Almost ran for the city council of my ward but my wife [Harriette Clark Evans] said don't do it and I'm glad I didn't now but there were a lot of inducements to do things like that.
Speaker 1: So what were your roles and responsibilities as secretary of the--?
Speaker 2: Technically secretary is the keeper of records of the whole church.  Editor of the yearbook, I could show you one it's that thick, it's a compendium of all the statistics of the United Church of Christ of six thousand churches.  Then it was a million six hundred thousand members.
Speaker 1: A million?
Speaker 2: A million six it's now a million four we've lost members as most mainline denominations have lost members.
Speaker 1: And how many churches did you say?
Speaker 2: About six thousand then but there were only three officers and one was a layman, the treasurer was a layman.  Charles [H.] Lockyear a treasurer the only treasurer I only knew 'cause he was in the job thirty-two years.  That meant that most of the invitations to speak came to the president or to the secretary, I was gone all the time.  That was the sin of my job I say 'cause I was out almost every weekend.  I learned down the road after a few years go through your calendar and mark out certain dates, you just cross them out and say they're filled which meant you stay home.  I just had to do it out of fairness to myself and my wife.  But I was gone all the time to conferences, to annual meetings, to consistorial councils which you've never heard of.  That's an E and R term, an Evangelical [and] Reformed term and all kinds of things.  I was constantly speaking all over the country and had a great time doing it, (unclear) (gestures).
Speaker 1: Two more minutes.
Speaker 2: Two more minutes? Okay. And I was in that job sixteen years and had a wonderful time.
Story_ID: 296886
Speaker 1: In 1976 I came upon one of the most difficult years of my life.  Our president [of the United Church of Christ] became ill in office Bob Moss [Robert Moss] who was the second president, came out of Lancaster Theological Seminary [Lancaster, Pennsylvania] as the president, was a former E and R, Evangelical and Reformed person was called, to make a long story short he died in office in 1976.  We were scheduled to meet as an executive council in October.  We went to the Lord Baltimore Hotel in Baltimore, Maryland and after his death from his funeral at Montclair, New Jersey at Union Church [Union Congregational Church United Church of Christ] after going through the procedure I think I spoke a little about it earlier.  To make a long story short the executive council elected me the third president. I'm the only person in the denomination that has served in both offices.  I've served as secretary for sixteen years with a year out to be the president of the church and I'm glad I did because the job is a killer.  It killed the president; it killed Ben [M.] Herbster (background noise) who was the first president.  He died as a sickly old man and I'm glad I went back to being secretary and I served out my four year term-four four-year terms in '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: But that elevation for that one year serving as the president made you the first--
Speaker 1: Of our race to be in that position.  I was the first as the secretary and first as the president of the church and there have been no others.
Speaker 2: But you made a point to me earlier of mainline churches and that's important too.
Speaker 1: Of mainline churches, yes.  Now of some of the Pentecostal churches I cannot say that, I do not know I just don't have the information.
Speaker 2: But for mainline churches across America you were the first.
Speaker 1: Then it happened back there in '68 [1968] and '69 [1969] it was happening all over the place.  I remember the Episcopalians called Tollie Caution, knew him well as a staff officer.  The Methodists called a dear friend of mine whom I knew very well, and I've lost his name and some of the others but I think I was the first in the Congregational Christian Churches to elect--no we were then in the United Church of Christ excuse me, an officer of the church.  There were three, president, secretary, treasurer.
Story_ID: 296887
Speaker 1: As the third president of the church [United Church of Christ].
Speaker 2: One of the wisest movements of my life when I look back on it.
Speaker 1: One of the what?
Speaker 2: Wisest I took a leave of absence and the treasurer became the acting secretary and we added another staff person to do the work.  A person who we knew and then when Dr. Post, Avery [D.] Post who was the conference minister of Massachusetts was elected the fourth president again after ninety days he had to take office which is October then I was able to return to my job as secretary of the church which I was delighted to do.  I say the job is a killer, you try to be all things to all people and you can't, you cannot.
Speaker 1: So you went back to the secretarial position and you remained there-
Speaker 2: For sixteen years.
Speaker 1: --for sixteen years.
Speaker 2: I had four four-year terms again nobody else they put a term limit on you, you could only serve two terms now, served four years.
Speaker 1: And so you retired in what nineteen--?
Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 2: Yes sir.  I'm twenty-two years away from that job, I can't believe it.
Speaker 1: In retirement or upon, quote, so-called retirement what did you move into?  Or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't retire, I took five interims.
Speaker 1: I'm sure that you were busy as ever.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I was not ready to retire.  I knew that mentally and physically 'cause I was still well.  People talk about these years where I am now being the golden years that's a lie these are not the golden years.  My golden years were from '50 [1950] to '75 [1975], I was at my peak, I was on the top of my profession, I was successful, I knew what I was doing, I was much in demand as a counselor, a preacher and lecturer and whatnot and I had a good time at it.  I decided when I left--I knew in my fourth term I realized that I needed to leave.  The pressures of the job were such that I realized in 1983 that I should give it up.  Four years--four four-year terms was enough.
Story_ID: 296888
Speaker 1: Then, what to do?  Well when it was announced that I was leaving [as secretary of the United Church of Christ], my first call was from the Ohio Conference of Congregational Christian Churches [Ohio Conference, United Church of Christ] to become their conference minister.  So not only have I been a pastor and the secretary of the church and the president of the church I've also been a conference minister.  We have thirty-nine conferences.  Ohio was our largest conference in membership a good mix of both of the former denominations, Congregational Christians and Evangelical and Reformed.  So from '83 [1983] to '84 [1984] we moved to Columbus, Ohio.  So I met my wife [Harriette Clark Evans] all over again and we were together from then on 'til this moment.  I served there for one year.  Generally interims serve a year you do not serve more than a year, it's very important.  If you do more than that people fall in love with you and you destroy the system, you don't do it you say you'll give so much time.  A year is about the time it takes a search committee to find the new pastor, call him, and get him on the job.  Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois] didn't do that they got lazy, committee didn't do its job and I had to leave and a lot of folk got mad at me.  What do you got to leave for?   I said I've got another job, I said I'd give you one year and I did, I was faithful to you.  But I had a wonderful time even though I did twenty-nine funerals that year, all people I knew but it was again back home, back in the parsonage just my wife and myself and had a great time being back in Chicago [Illinois] and enjoyed it thoroughly.  But then I had to move on at the end of my year's contract because it was the right thing to do even though many people did not understand it and it's a fact they did not call a minister until a year after that they had not done their job--the committee had not done its job.  Then of all places I was called back to Chicago and I really had to pray on that one.
Speaker 2: You went to Columbus, Ohio Conference.
Speaker 1: That's where I lived, that's where the office was.
Speaker 2: That was one year.
Speaker 1: One year
Speaker 2: Then what was next?
Speaker 1: Churches of Good Shepherd in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay that was number two.
Speaker 1: I went back to be their interim.
Speaker 2: Yeah that was the second interim.
Speaker 1: Yes--no, no yeah that's the second interim.  Conference minister of Ohio first interim, Good Shepherd--Church of the Good Shepherd in Chicago second interim.  Again, I met with committee, I said I'll give you a year I helped the search committee get going but they never did their work and I did everything that I'm supposed to do.  Lived in the parsonage and we had a wonderful time.  At the end of the year I had to go because I had another job.  I went to Amherst, New Hampshire, I'd never been in an all-white church so I did three white churches to see what it was like--no, no I didn't go there I went to State Street Church in Portland, Maine, had a wonderful time.  You have never seen snow until you go to Portland, Maine, it covers cars.  As you drive through the canyons of snow but I had a great time and developed friends that I there, in touch with, wonderful people.  They really received me well and I helped them I think, I hope I did.
Story_ID: 296889
Speaker 1: Then I went to Amherst Church [ph.] in New Hampshire.  First Congregational church on the green, an old congregational church on the town green as is true of all over New England and pastored an all-white church it was great.  They had never heard preaching like mine and they fell in love with me and wanted me to stay.  I had a call--I had an interesting problem there.  There was an associate on the staff, a woman so one of the first things I did I said I want to meet this woman and I went out and met with her.  She was very charming and very good looking, very young but I want it clear that I was going to be the interim, is the senior minister.  I don't want any stuff out of her that's to put it crudely but I made it very plain and we had a meeting and we had a good year together.  She is now the wife of our minister [John McCall] up in Maine, east Portland, Maine.  He has a big church [First Congregational Church, United Church of Christ, South Portland, Maine], Andrea McCall she was a lovely person.  I had a wonderful year there, a good year.  And then my last one was at Norwell, Massachusetts that's the fifth one.  That was the least productive of the five they didn't know what to do with me.  They left me alone so I took all their money and did nothing it was a sin and I finally came to their face and I said I've got to quit, I can't do this, it's immoral.  They really didn't know what to do.  There were two associates on the staff.  The senior minister had been there nineteen years and left to take a church out of Ohio, Chagrin Falls came out of another denomination, never wore a robe.  The first Sunday I walked in when the two associates were with me and I insisted they all wore robes the three of us walked in with robes you could hear the congregation titter (makes noise) just things like that.  And because I had not had a vacation, I insisted that I have vacation between my previous job and this job.  I came down here [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] for several weeks because I needed a rest that was a mistake.  An interim must be on the job immediately after the pastor resigns that's a rule, I violated it, I was not there.  As a result the people transferred all of their allegiance to the two associates.  I was never called on to do a thing, I never buried anybody, I never married anybody, I preached twice a month that was all, I was like a visiting preacher it was a mistake.  And I realized it three months into the job and I wrote the council and told them, I've not been abused or misused I've been underused you have not known what to do with me and therefore I feel it's immoral for me to take your money and to be coming here.  Norwell is about thirty-five miles from Brookline [Massachusetts]; I was living in an apartment owned by Barbara [Evans Edelin] and Ken [HistoryMaker Kenneth Carlton Edelin].  We had moved there and had a wonderful place to stay.  But it was wrong and so then I fully retired in nineteen--well five years after-- '88 [1988], '89 [1989], I think it was '89 [1989].
Story_ID: 296890
Speaker 1: No sooner had I said I'm gonna retire someone said, "Have you ever been to Sarasota, Florida?"  I said, "No.  Where is it?" I've never been on the gulf side.  I've been to Miami [Florida] and Palm Beach [Florida] and Fort Lauderdale [Florida] and some other places for meetings all of them down the east side.  We came home to Brookline [Massachusetts] and I called the agent that we dealt with and I said, "I want to go to Sarasota."  That was October, and she said, "Mr. Evans [HistoryMaker Reverend Joseph Evans] I can't get you down there for ten days that's the high travel period."  So I went down and we spent a week and came home with a house just like that.  I never thought she'd [Evans' wife, Harriette Clark Evans] do it.  She doesn't make decisions like that.  She's got to live with it for a while.  I make decisions easily, it's right or wrong, it's good or bad immediately, I've done that all my life have to.  We went down and we've been there fifteen years, it's been a good fifteen years it was good for us.  We're together and we're out of the snow and the cold and all of that.  I don't do very much--I did a lot of preaching in the early years but I can't do it now my health is such now that I've not been in the pulpit since '98 [1998] and I haven't been in the pulpit to read the lesson or give the pastoral prayer for two years.  I just try to sit there quietly and be a good church member and try not to find too much fault.
Story_ID: 296891
Speaker 1: You had some teaching that you did in early retirement at the Hartford [Theological] Seminary [Hartford Seminary, Hartford, Connecticut].  You taught at the Hartford (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: We can back up a little bit, maybe just talk--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Richard [I.] McKinney who was then the dean of Hartford.  You know where Hartford Theological Seminary is?  It used to be one of our seminaries but it became independent years ago and it no longer has an affiliation with our church [United Church of Christ].  It's also taken a turn, it's high in Muslim Christian relations of staff that deal in that area, it's one of the best in the country.  Richard McKinney who is--no not Richard but what's his first name--Bill McKinney [William McKinney].  Richard McKinney, he and I were--he's--he's black and he did his Ph.D. at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] when I got my M.Div. He was president of a college in Baltimore, Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], president of Morgan.  No this was Bill McKinney a white fellow called me and said, "Joe [HistoryMaker Reverend Joseph Evans] why don't you come and teach preaching?"  I said, "I do it I don't teach it."  He said, "You can do it," and I said, "No," and he said, "Yes you can."  I really resisted hard, I'd never done that.  But then I called [Charles] Shelby Rooks.  Did you know Shelby?
Speaker 1: I know the name.
Speaker 2: Shelby was president of Chicago Theological Seminary [Chicago, Illinois], the first black.  Had taught and became the executive vice president of the Board for Homeland Ministries of our church first one in that job.  He and I got together and he wrote out a curriculum for me and did some other things and turned me towards some books that I should read to bone myself up on some of the technicalities of it, of teaching.  So I accepted a call to go to Hartford Seminary and be an adjunct professor of preaching (background noise).
Story_ID: 296892
Speaker 1: So I got myself together (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Preaching, teaching-
Speaker 1: --and decided to take the course and it was called reclaiming the art of preaching and I taught (unclear) students all pastors who had been out of the parish and my job--one of my jobs was to break their bad habits and they all do it.  Preachers are notorious for doing the wrong things in the pulpit 'cause I've been there, I've done it, I see it and so I had a wonderful six or seven years I forget how much it was.  We used our local church Immanuel Congregational Church [United Church of Christ] in Hartford [Connecticut] for--and I had a period when they all had to preach and then we would critique, I would lecture, and we would critique their preaching.  I had a great time it was good, I enjoyed it.
Speaker 2: You did that one semester or all year?
Speaker 1: One semester, yeah, a year once a year for six years.
Speaker 2: So where were you living then?
Speaker 1: I was living--oh that was before I moved here up to Sarasota [Florida] 'cause I couldn't--they couldn't afford to transport me back and forth.  I was living in Brookline [Massachusetts] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: It was for six years I was in Brookline plus one more.
Speaker 2: That makes sense.
Speaker 1: The dates are, you know. You've got me on the definite dates.
Speaker 2: Oh we don't worry about those date.
Speaker 1: Because I could drive to Hartford you see.
Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981] to '87 [1987] you did that.
Speaker 1: Along in there yeah those were the years that I lived in Brookline, Massachusetts.  But that's the way I ended my busy active ministry and since then I've not done very much.
Story_ID: 296893
Speaker 1: Today you have become a HistoryMaker by participating in sharing your history and your family history and your work history.  You've demonstrated your understanding and the value of history but you also I think have been working recently on the history of the UCC [United Church of Christ] church.  Have you been doing some church history?
Speaker 2: Not as a task, I've lectured on the history.
Speaker 1: Well that's what I wanted you to say (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes I've lectured on the history.  Mainly to groups--you hear of us at our church of being Congregationalists, the term United Church of Christ in my judgment was an unfortunate name.  It's an awkward name.  You can't say Presbyterian, you can't say Methodist, you can't say a Lutheran you've got to say United Church of Christ it's too long.  That's one thing, the name was not a good name.  Secondly, not enough of us and I'll take some of the blame in the Congregational Christian sides you see we were Evangelical and Reformed and Congregational Christian two different denominations both made up of mergers, Evangelical [Synod of North America] and the Reformed [Church in the United States] co-forming the E and R church, primarily German in Pennsylvania around St. Louis [Missouri], some in Ohio, almost none in New England.  Congregationalists were merged into a small Christian group which is never used.  We are mistaken when we say congregational we should always say Congregational Christian.  Two denominations became one in 1957 so I have done a lot of talking about that.  How that happened, why that happened, when it happened; it began back in the '30s [1930s].  I won't go into all of that 'cause you don't need that now and it's been an interesting history but primarily because not enough of our pastors talk about it and even in the local church I'm a member of it's the First Congregational United Church of Christ [Sarasota, Florida].  That's the big sign out in front of our church in Sarasota [Florida] they don't get past the word congregational.  The denomination which is underneath in the same letters that high, they don't even mention it.  They talk about being congregational.  We are not Congregationalists, we are members of the United Church of Christ but we call ourselves the First Congregational United Church of Christ.  You may be the Pilgrim Congregational--we may be the Pilgrim United Church of Christ, you may be the St. Andrews United Church of Christ.  Our unfortunate title in our local church where I'm a member is that it's congregational in the title and that's unfortunate.  If there is some way they could change their name to be the First United Church of Christ of Sarasota might have been better.
Story_ID: 296894
Speaker 1: One last church question before we have some general wrap up questions.  You just returned from a major church meeting in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me what that meeting was and what role you played there.
Speaker 2: I was an honorary delegate.  I had no vote, I'm there at the expense of the General Synod that's the reason I went, one of the reasons.  Just to be there, I was not feeling very well so I didn't make too many of the sessions (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is an annual meeting?
Speaker 2: Semi-annual, semi--bi-annual every other year, every odd year we have met ever since '57 [1957] we have met '59 [1959], '61 [1961], '63 [1963] and so forth (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what do you call this meeting?
Speaker 2: The General Synod.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Synod that's an E and R [Evangelical and Reformed Church] term.  We took a piece of that term; we took terms out of both churches if I went down through the history.  But the national meeting is the General Synod of the United Church of Christ.  It speaks only to and for itself.  It has no power to speak to the churches.  Many people did not understand this.  This is a peculiarity or distinctiveness; I'll put it more positively of our church.  Just as in the instance of the local church no one can tell any local church of the United Church of Christ what to do.  It's a power unto itself.  It's in fellowship, voluntary what the church is in its area, the Florida conference of churches [Florida Conference, United Church of Christ], the General Synod of the United Church of Christ but nobody can make them do anything.  Synod cannot direct any church or any conference as to what it could do it speaks for itself and to itself.  But because it is the General Synod and because of our history the churches take seriously what General Synod says and because of its vote on same sex marriage which was in all the newspapers across the country, it's now a discussion that's going on across our church.  We may lose some churches.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about being at this meeting?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: How did you feel when you were there this year?
Speaker 2: Tired (laughter) I didn't go to--I wasn't feeling well and I don't do meetings well anymore, in fact this session will tire me I'll have to be quiet for a while.  I haven't talked this long in a long time.  That's all right, I said I'd do it and I will do it and I'm glad to have done it.  They gave me a scooter so I travelled all over the place on a scooter.  I went to what I wanted to and what I didn't want to I didn't go.  I spent a lot of time in the huge exhibition area where I saw a lot of people and as it happened in Minneapolis [Minnesota] two years ago I hardly made a move that someone didn't come up and say, "Hey Joe Evans [HistoryMaker Reverend Joseph Evans], you came out to our church in 19 so and so."  I'd say, "Yeah what did I say?"  They'd tell me, I don't remember.  I had a lot of that which was great for my ego and I saw a lot of people and I saw a lot of friends.  General Synod is a time when people meet and see each other and can talk and chat and whatnot and there were several actions that synod took which were very interesting.  The action to divest investments in Israel--from Israel was a very important move.  I don't know what it means because I wasn't there; I wasn't in the house when that vote was taken.  There are about seven hundred delegates plus several hundred staff plus several thousand visitors.  I was administrative of the General Synod for all the years I was secretary of the church that was added to me shortly after--I forgot to tell you that.  That means planning for these meetings.  You plan for a bi-annual meeting, means going into the local town wherever it is, Washington, D.C. in 1977, you meet with the hotels, you negotiate room rates, you talk with the police, and you talk with all the services that are available.  How do you get secretarial service?  How do you get health services? I did all of that in a number of towns in '81 [1981] in Rochester, New York, and I could go through the Grand Rapids, Michigan in '71 [1971] I can remember some of those that stand out.  I had a wonderful time.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: But I was just an honorary delegate, a visitor all of us who had been former presidents.  I was the third president, the fourth president was there Avery [D.] Post, the fifth president was there Paul [H. Sherry]--oh what's his name, name has gone from me and some of the secretaries were there and some of the other officers.  There were a number of us there.  And I like to do it.  I don't know that I'll make another one it's too tiring.
Story_ID: 296895
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would like to add to this interview that I haven't asked you about so far?
Speaker 2: Only that I feel that I have been privileged to be in the ministry.  I think I made the right decision.  It was my--we are called--I think I was called, it was a quiet calling, I didn't really seek it, but the urgings were quiet but persistent and I didn't even know they were happening in my life.  I didn't know what I wanted to be and I'm grateful to God that I was led this way and that I had a reasonable amount of success and what I did I did fairly well.  I say that not with any bravado or braggadocio (cough).  I think the record speaks for itself.  And that--I had a man call me the other day Fred Register [ph.].  He's white, lives in Alhambra, California I hadn't seen him in twenty-five years.  He heard something about my health and called me from Alhambra and just wanted to talk, I couldn't believe it.  I remember Fred as being a southerner, and being very stiff and whatnot but he called me and I'm still getting over that.  It was a wonderful experience to hear from him, I've heard from others but they are all my friends.  But Fred wasn't a real friend of mine he was somebody I knew as a member of the Executive Council and I forget where he came from but he is retired in Alhambra, California and took the trouble to call me just a couple of weeks ago since I've been here.  So it's been a gratifying profession, I'm glad I had it but I'm through with it now, I've done all I could.  I can't do it anymore.  There comes a time when you must stop and you must know when that time is and I think I stopped at the right time.  I was not ready in '83 [1983] five years later I was.  At Norwell [Massachusetts] I suddenly realized I don't have to do this anymore, I shouldn't do it anymore, it's not right to do it anymore, you can't do it well anymore so retire with grace and I did and I've not been unhappy ever since.
Story_ID: 296896
Speaker 1: Given that, given that--for yourself is there anything that you'd still like to do that you've not yet done for yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd like to see the big wall of China [Great Wall of China].  I always wanted to ride a motorcycle my wife [Harriette Clark Evans] won't let me.  Some things I'll never do.  I've wanted to go to Mecca [Saudi Arabia] certain places like that.  We've travelled all over the world we've been very fortunate.  We've been to Africa, went to Jamaica any number of times for vacations.  I don't travel well anymore so I try to--I think I just don't want to think about getting home to Sarasota [Florida] the way I have to go.  But there are a number of places that I would have liked to have seen but other than that no I don't wish for anything else.
Story_ID: 296897
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today across America?
Speaker 2: Oh, you would.  It's such a mixed up community, it's a mixed up community.  It's being torn at and pushed at.  I think we have too many who think they speak for the African American.  I know Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], I know him well.  I don't agree with Jesse half of the time, he's a prima donna and there are some others.  We have not produced what I would call an outstanding leader since [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  I can't identify, we've got some great people who have come along.  [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin I think one of the great personalities that have come out of our race.  There have been some other scholars I think have been great but to stand up front and to be so recognized by a good majority of the people.  I wish [HistoryMaker Reverend Al] Sharpton would just shut up, he embarrasses me every time he opens his mouth he's not my leader.  So I just wish we could develop someone who could lift at least give some more direction (simultaneous) --
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, well--
Speaker 2: --that would be helpful.
Story_ID: 296898
Speaker 1: One last question, and in one sentence if you can. But I'm afraid to ask you to do that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Don't ask a preacher.
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered Reverend Evans [HistoryMaker Reverend Joseph Evans]?
Speaker 2: Just as a nice guy (laughter).  I want to be remembered because I did my best in the jobs that were given to me with some success, not with complete--nobody is completely successful.  I was successful as a pastor, I learned how to be a pastor; you don't learn it once.  It took me about three jobs to learn the job and that enabled me to go back to the Church of [the] Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois] my home church that notwithstanding and I think the record there will show that I was fairly successful.  I'm saying I didn't make mistakes, we're human we all make mistakes but as I counsel young people if they ever asked me I said try not to make bad mistakes.  You'll make mistakes but learn from them that's one thing.  Now what was the question?
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I want to be remembered as having done more that's fairly successful.  I think I was a good secretary of the church and I think the record shows that they are constantly referring to it.  I want to be remembered as a good pastor.
Story_ID: 296899
Speaker 1: Last question Reverend Evans [HistoryMaker Reverend Joseph Evans] how do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well I think it can be summed up in what I said when I was elected secretary of the church [United Church of Christ (UCC)] 1967 in Cincinnati, Ohio at our Sixth General Synod I was elected from the floor and I won and I was flabbergasted, I didn't know what to say.  Of course I had to be called to the podium by the moderator and I was greeted with applause and all of that not really knowing what I was doing but in my statement of acceptance I said I do not want to be known as the black secretary of the church, I want to be known as the secretary to the whole church and I will strive to be that secretary for everyone and they applauded again.
Story_ID: 296900
Speaker 1: I have a friend here with whom I play bridge.  This is a bridge group of men that meet every Wednesday down at the senior citizen's place.  His name is Joe Dobler [ph.].  I just know him when he was invited to our party on Saturday he said would you like for me to come and take some pictures for you not knowing that he's a photographer. By interest he's a--oh dear, I forget what he says his profession is but anyhow he came by and took a number of pictures and that's one that came out and he blew it up.  Just as a friendly gesture and as a gift for my birthday on this Satur- my birthday is Monday but we're celebrating it on Saturday.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tell us about this.
Speaker 1: Well I was very young and halfway decent looking as you can see.  I've changed a lot.  That was in New York City [New York, New York] shortly after I went to Grace Church [Grace Congregational Church of Harlem; Grace Congregational Church of Harlem United Church of Christ, New York, New York].  I wore the collar primarily because to go into hospitals, to call on patients in New York City is a tough job.  They want you to sign your life away and I was advised to wear a collar and they'll just wave you in.  So I put on a collar, I've never worn a collar you don't wear collars in our denomination but for that one purpose to get admittance to hospitals to visit the sick I wore the collar to make it easy on myself.  They'd see me coming, "Come in Father."
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: That was taken it says on November 16, 1942 when I was ordained at the Church of the Good Shepherd [Church of the Good Shepherd Congregational United Church of Christ] my home church in Chicago, Illinois.  I'd been called to Grace in Harlem [New York, New York] and I asked if I could go back to my home church to be ordained, I was ordained to the Christian ministry on that date in Chicago and that's my pastor, Dr. Harold [M.] Kingsley who is greeting me on the steps of the church.  In 1973 the General Synod met in St. Louis [Missouri] for the large mass worship service.  We got permission from the cardinal to hold our service in the Roman Catholic cathedral [Cathedral Basilica of Saint Louis, St. Louis, Missouri].  The first Protestant church to do so and the people--Peggy Way who was the chaplain asked if I would be the preacher and I was the preacher to four thousand people in that huge cathedral.  It was one of the great honors of my life.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we're ready.
Speaker 1: That was our wedding on October 15, 1944 it was at the Fifteenth Street Presbyterian Church [Washington, D.C.].  That picture was taken at my wife's [Harriette Clark Evans] home at 1842 15th Street northwest in Washington, D.C. and all of those are friends of hers and myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good, okay.
Speaker 1: Last year in 1904 [sic. 2004] my wife and I celebrated our sixtieth wedding anniversary.  We decided to go back where we met which was in Grace United Church of Christ on 139th Street in Harlem.  My son in law took that picture in front of the church.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: This picture tells its story on its own.  The pension board of the United Church of Christ is the agency which provides pensions for ministers of our church, in fact I have one that's what I live on and in 1988 as you see the date they asked if my wife and I would be on the cover of the folder that would go out to all the ministers of our churches especially to those who have difficulty and need help and they are helped by the Christmas Fund which is an annual fund which is promoted by the United Christ of Church for ministers of the United Church who are in need.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is picture taken a few years ago here.  Jose Melange [ph.] and his wife were here in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] visiting on their vacation and they came to see us.  He is the executive minister of the local church ministries of the United Church of Christ and this was just an evening that we had with them.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This a copy-one of the last copies of A.D. Magazine [United Church News] which was an official publication of the United Church of Christ, and in it they decided to feature me since I was near the end of my ministry with the church and the magazine was going defunct and we lost out funding.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I'm sorry. I'm gonna have to ask you to do that again, for some reason it didn't start rolling.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I'm ready now.
Speaker 1: This is one of the final copies of A.D. Magazine which was then the official magazine of the United Church of Christ which was published monthly.  They used me because I was near the end of my ministry and they wanted to give me the honor of appearing on the cover of that magazine which is no longer in existence.  I think I'll say it that way.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay. I think that does it. Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me in the pulpit in the preaching pulpit at the Church of the Good Shepherd where I was the pastor from 1953 to 1967.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: When you're ready let me know.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the annuity fund of the pension boards of the United Church of Christ which pays the pensions to at least four thousand ministers in the United Church of Christ and this appeared in its annual report of 2002.
