Story_ID: 22046
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interview today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Ralph Etienne-Cummings.  First name is spelled R-A-L-P-H, last name is spelled E-T-I-E-N-N-E hyphen C-U-M-M-I-N-G-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is August 20, 1967, and I was born on the Island of Mahe in the Seychelles.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, Mahe, M-A-H-E, and the Seychelles, S-E-Y-C-H-E-L-L-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your position and occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor of electrical and computer engineering, and computer science at the Johns Hopkins University.
Speaker 1: Okay, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 28, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 22047
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), basically, short.  Yes, curry.
Speaker 1: Okay, not that short.
Speaker 2: Chicken curry (laughter).
Speaker 1: I was just kidding.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: White.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, spring and autumn.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Seychelles.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, depends who you ask.  My friend say I say, "essentially" a lot, you know.  And, yeah, I mean that's probably the main thing.  And, oh, "exactly", I say, exactly a lot or something like that, you know.
Story_ID: 22048
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: But we ask about 'em separately so we can keep 'em straight.  And then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, so my mother's first name is Marguerita, M-A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-A, and last name is Etienne-Cummings again.  You want me to spell that as well or not.
Speaker 1: No, that's all right.  We already have it, but does your mother have a maiden name?
Speaker 2: Etienne.
Speaker 1: Etienne, okay.
Speaker 2: That's the part that comes from her.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is September 24, 1947, and she was born in the Seychelles as well, same place.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: So, my mother's father, are descendents of French colonizers of the Seychelles.  They, my father, I only know what my grandfather did.  My grandfather was one of the premier boat builders in the Seychelles.  They built these specialized little boats that fishermen went fishing in as well as bigger ones that went a little bit further out to the outer islands.  That's my grandfather's side.
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was, first name was, his is Pilgrim, P-I-L-G-R-I-M and Etienne is the last name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's mom was actually half Mauritian, well, she was from Mauritius which is another island in the Indian ocean.  But her father was French and her mother was Indian, Indian as in, from India.  And because, I guess, my understanding is that there were some racial issues there in the sense that he was marrying outside of the European line so they left and went to the Seychelles to, when they were very young children.  And my grandma, I think the saying goes that she learned how to walk on the boat that went from Mauritius to the Seychelles.  So that's, and that's around the turn of the nineteenth century.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Twentieth century, I guess, yeah, yes, 18, you know, 1899 to 1900, that's what I'm--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are there any stories about, from your mother's side of the family that are passed down about life on the Seychelles?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, so I, I mean the kind of stories that my mother tells me is about, you know, her, you know, her growing up and so on, the fact that my grandfather worked, kind of like a boat-building yard on a different island.  Even though my, you know, my grandmother and the family was on the main island, my grandfather worked on an island which was, you know, which is not that far away from the main island, but I guess back then with just sailboats (laughter), you know, it took a while to get there.  So my mom would tell stories about getting there during the holidays after school is over and getting on the, you know, on the passage and things like that, you know, seasick, and so on.  But she enjoyed the outdoors, and it was a beautiful place to go for, for the holidays.  So, you know, that's kind, you know, the stories that are more less organized around, you know, swimming, climbing, being outdoors, being, you know, very much of an outdoor environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my mother was the last of the family of twelve, so she was the twelfth.  So she, you know, she was the baby and all the other siblings were much older and some had kids that were older than her (laughter).  So there is all that kind of interrelationship of the family, you know, pretty big family on her side.
Story_ID: 22049
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I've read that television didn't come to the Seychelles till '77 [1977], I think it was.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, around that time is when, even that time, I don't even remember whether it was broadcast.  It might have been just video because I remember like the first, like Betamax, you know, VCR, and movies, you know, that was a big deal, you know.  So that's about '77 [1977] also.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I am probably like a lot of people who don't know anything about Seychelles.  And the time that your mother was growing up, there was no TV, I take it.  Was there a radio or anything?  I mean how did--
Speaker 2: Radio, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like for example, my grandmother was very keen on listening to the BBC news.  So every day at eight p.m., you know, the (unclear) cadrasic (ph.) sound would come on and we'll listen to the news.  You know, it was short, nor medium wave.  So it's, you know, a little bit noisy, and a little bit crackling, but that was the way of getting the news.  And I think for my mother, it's probably the same way.  But even then, that's not that relatively new.  I mean, old, (unclear), you're probably thinking, I'm probably thinking that, you know, probably the mid-60s [1960s] was when radios and so on were available, you know.  And so my mother was born in the '40s [1940s], so there's a long time when there was no entertainment in a classic sense.  But they, you know, there was a big music environment, right?  So dancing and, and going out, you know, that was, I guess, the biggest thing that my mother got in trouble, you know, my grandmother for, for sneaking out, going dancing with her friends and stuff.
Speaker 1: Lots of live music and--
Speaker 2: Live music, yeah.  There's a lot of local music, Sega is the local dance style.  It's somewhat similar to Calypso.
Speaker 1: How do you spell it?
Speaker 2: S-E-G-A.  It's very similar to Calypso.
Speaker 1: And it's pronounced Sega?
Speaker 2: Sega.
Speaker 1: Okay, S-E--
Speaker 2: Yeah, just like the video game, long time ago (laughter).
Speaker 1: Sega, Sega though.
Speaker 2: But, yeah, so she would, you know, she would sneak out and go dancing and my grand, finally, my grandma would go find them, her and her sister.  She has a sister that--she had a sister that was a couple of years older.  She passed away at this point.  So they would sneak out and go down to the local night club or night whatever, and dance all night.  And then my grandma would come looking for them and take 'em back home.
Speaker 1: Now, was Seychelles in those days a tourist destination?
Speaker 2: It was, but not, not a great tourist destination because I mean the airport was not built until 1971-ish.  So you're not talking about, you know, the only tourists that came would have come by boat, right, would have come from the mainland of Africa, in fact.  I think there was a liner line that went from Mombasa [Kenya] in Tanzania, Mombasa, yeah, I think Tanzania--
Speaker 1: Kenya.
Speaker 2: --down to the Seychelles.  So that was a primary way of getting there, and then later on when the airport was built, then it became more of a, yeah, you know, a destination by air.  Yeah, so then the British Airways and the British airlines used to come to the Seychelles and bring tourists.
Story_ID: 22050
Speaker 1: Just kind of tell us what is the population of the Seychelles like and like when--well, your version of the history of the Seychelles on some level 'cause--
Speaker 2: Sure.  So currently, the Seychelles has a population of about 80-something thousand.  But it's been around that scale for as long as I remember, maybe a little, you know, maybe 10,000 less or something like that over my lifetime.  And the reason is that there is a lot of immigration from the Seychelles, right.  You know, there's, you know, the birthrate was not necessarily just, you know, equal to the death rate.  It's just that a lot of people immigrated over the time.  So my understanding is that Vasco da Gama discovered the Seychelles around 1496 on his way around the, around the, around the Cape.  The Seychelles was a destination, was a stopping over point for water, for food.  There's a lot of, of turtles and tortoise and birds and so on there, so it was a place where pirates spent a lot of time also restoring up their resources before they went--
Speaker 1: Now, was there a popu-
Speaker 2: --back to business.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, was there a population on Seychelles before Vasco da Gama?
Speaker 2: No, no, there wasn't.  The population basically were mainly either colonizers or slaves brought for working on the island.  But also the Seychelles was a stopover point for, for Arab traders as well, going from the Arabian peninsula down to the Eastern Coast of Africa.  So there as well, there's--so our language is a French derivative, French, Creole, but there's also, occasionally, you'll find Arabic words in there as well.  So this, so, yes, so Vasco da Gama came through around 1496.  And then between 1496 and somewhere like 1835, if memory serves, there was just kind of continuous exchanges of who owns the island between the French and the Brits and the English.  They just kept, you know, kicking each other out and taking over and so on until around 1835 when the Brits then held onto it for a long time.  So we got independence from the Brits in, in 1976.  And then in 1977, there was a revolution, a Marxist revolution, whereby the Socialist, one-party state, was created.  And that survived through the fall of the Soviet Union and so on.  So you're talking about 1992, 1993, timeframe.  I don't remember exactly, but around that time where there was a re, reincarnation of the governmental system in Seychelles, and it became a multi-party system where, you know, where votes and so on was allowed to be cast for opposition parties.  There was a rewriting of the Constitution, and, in fact, my dad was part of that group that participated in the writing of the Constitution.  And then, yeah, there was a, apparently--I wasn't there.  I was here in America at the time, but there was a really massive, kind of what's going on in the Middle East now, if you will, the Arab spring, where there was essentially a spring back then.  There was a lot of fervor in the new political system and so, but ultimately, the old party kept winning.  In fact, since '77' [1977] there has been one continuous stream of government that's been from the group.
Speaker 1: From the same Marxist group that took--
Speaker 2: Right, but they have revolved.  They're much more, less Marxist, but there's a lot--I mean it still has some Socialist bent, but it's, but it's a, it's more like a European Socialist environment as opposed to--
Speaker 1: A Communist totalitarian, yeah,--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  But, but they're, you know, they're doing well for the people, you know, at this point.  But the people vote them in, so, so that's what, that's the governmental situation that survived over that period of time.  So, yes, so that's kind of the evolution, at least of the political system over there, at least from my perspective.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what is the population, how is the population deployed in terms of racial groups and language groups and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: So, the population is basically a combination of Europeans, Africans and Asians.  It's a mixture of those three.  The language is, the native language is a French-Creole, similar to what's spoken in Haiti or in Dominica, other places in the Caribbean.  We don't have as big a population of Asians, like Indian Asians, as you find in Trinidad, for example, but there is still a big component.  I would say pretty much, I mean like the locals, the Creole, the, you know, we call the Creole, is a mixed stock of European stock, Asian stock and African stock.  But then you still have, you know, the kind of unmixed circumference, if you will, around that center which forms the core of the population.  Lately, I suppose, there's been a lot more of immigration into the country from Asia, from Europe and so on.  So if you walk out, you know, you walk to the town, you'll see a combination of everybody.  It's a, very much of a massive melting pot of different cultures and different genetic origin, I guess, a better way to put it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, are most of the people Creole there?
Speaker 2: Yes, the majority, the vast majority would be that.
Speaker 1: You'd almost guess on an island that would probably be the case, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --isolated island, like this--
Speaker 2: Exactly, I mean that's, you know, that's who you know, right (laughter).
Story_ID: 22051
Speaker 1: Okay, what does it, now, what city, were you born in a city--
Speaker 2: A town, I guess.  There is, Victoria is the main town.  That's the capital of the Seychelles.  You know, all the major facilities and resources are in Victoria.  So the hospital is called the Victoria Hospital.  But it's not exactly in Victoria, but close.
Speaker 1: Is it an old-looking place or does it look, does it look more like, is it more modern or old, based on--
Speaker 2: Today, you mean, like right--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I'm not sure what the weather is.  The weather might blow away buildings and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --I mean I don't know, so--
Speaker 2: No, so the weather is actually quite constant.  It's like 80, plus, minus three or four degrees, pretty much, you know, constantly.  Sometimes it may peak up a little bit, but it's pretty constant.  There's two seasons, if you will.  I mean there's a, the Northwest monsoon, which is kind of more a rainy season.  That happens in the December timeframe.  And then the Southwest, the Northeast monsoon.  And then there's a Southwest Monsoon which is more of the windy season and dry season, and that's more around the Northern hemisphere summer, shall we say.  So, you don't see, I mean there, you know, we don't get hit by hurricanes.  We don't get hit by, you know, cyclones or anything like that.  So in that sense, we're not too much at the mercy of the, of the weather, other than rainfall and sun.  If you look development over the last few years, I mean now, there's, everywhere is new buildings, building up and so on and so forth.  So there's a massive amount of new construction and so on.  But one thing that the government has done over the years is that they've tried to maintain a little bit of a character of the original architecture, this Creole, and the colonial architecture in a sense.  So you'll see a lot of that being reflected even in the new buildings.  There was also, I don't know if it's still true, but there was also at some point, where you couldn't build a building higher than the tallest coconut tree.  So that meant it could only be four floors or something or five floors, and I don't think I've seen anything recently that has exceeded that kind of height, except--
Speaker 1: What causes this respect for the coconut?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right. Oh, what caused it, you said?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what causes this--
Speaker 2: I don't know because I guess those were the tallest trees on the island at the time probably (laughter), you know, but that was, that's the, yeah, that was the decision that was made at some point to, you know, I guess here it's the Washington Monument or the Capitol, right? (laugher)  You're not allowed to build buildings that are, that dominate the landscape or the cityscape, that would take away from the Capitol or from the Washington Monument.  So it's a similar kind of thing, except I guess in the Seychelles, there was more reverence for local vegetation (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in terms of political clout, the African descendant population, do they have a relatively decent political clout?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, I mean the, that was one of the big, driving force behind the original revolution that took place in '77' [1977], was to kind of equalize the distribution of power among, among the folks of all kinds, you know.  I mean it turned out that the leader was still of European descent, but he had, you know, he had some African descent as well.  But his ministers and so on were definitely distributed genetically or ethnically, I guess.  And that has continued all along.  Yeah, so the president now, this guy named James Michelle, he looks like me, you know, a kind of mixed like this.  The gentleman who's the vice president, Danny Foe, you know, dark skin.   But, you know, he looks like he could be a little bit Indian, you know, he could be mixed with a little bit Indian.  You have other ones that look Asian.  You have others that look more European, and so on.  So, yes, so the government is very, you know, in power base really were distributed in terms of ethnicity.
Story_ID: 22052
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that being said, now, did your mother [Marguerita Etienne] have a chance to finish school growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother finished secondary school.  Back then, you know, college was not a viable option.  It was not something that folks did--
Speaker 1: So she finished what we would call high school here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what we call high school.  And then she got some training to become a primary school teacher.  So she taught like first grade or something like that for a few, for a year or two or something like that before I came along.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother share with you an ambition or occupational--did she wanna become a teacher?  Was that her goal?
Speaker 2: That was, that was considered to be a very, a very desirable position.  But I think over the years, if I've heard her say anything, I think she would have preferred being a nurse.  That was kind of, you know, I guess considered to be even higher rank in terms of the professions, if you will.  She's always, you know, she's always talked about the fact that, yeah, you know, she went into teaching.  She liked it, but maybe that was her first love, and there may have been some reasons for her not being completely, well, being a little mischievous might have led her to be directed in one way versus another or something like that.
Story_ID: 22053
Speaker 1: Okay, well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: So here's where it gets a little complicated.  So I have two fathers.  So my biological father who is still alive, his name is Eddie, E-D-D-I-E and the last name is spelled M-I-C-O-C-K, Eddie Micock.  He's a, he's a optician in the Seychelles now.  And my, my mom [Marguerita Etienne] married an American Air Force gentleman by the name of Herman Cummings.  And he adopted me as his, as his son when my mother got married.  And my mother got married when I was 12.  And so, so the Cummings comes from that part of my name.  So I have, you know, I've maintained relationships with my biological, my father--my, you know, American father died.  So he's not, he's not in the picture anymore, but those were the two people that I considered father.
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of your biological father, did you, was he around when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Not a lot because he went to school.  He went to University in the U.K. when I was, when I was growing up.  So the, the thing is this.  He, I came along when my mother and him were very young.  My mother was just about to turn 30, he was just about to turn 18--excuse me, 20, and he was just about to turn 18.  And he was about to finish high school and to go university.  So I didn't come at a, at an opportune time in develop, you know, in their development.  So he went on to university, and lived in England and Australia for some while before he moved back to the Seychelles, although there was a time when he finished university before he went to England when he lived in Seychelles for a couple of years, I guess, or three or four years, where we were close.  So at that time, I was, I was eight or something like that, eight or nine years old.  So that time, we were close.  But then when he moved back--and then, essentially, my father, my mom married Herman, and at that point, he also, my biological dad went to live in England.  And then I was not as close with him at that point until I went to school in England as well, for high school.  And then we, we got to know each other again and got closer again there.  And then at some point, we moved to America, and then, again, there was some distance, although we always wrote.  And then, but later on in life, as I've grown older and so on, then, now, when I go home, I always go, you know, we spend our little time together and so on.
Story_ID: 22054
Speaker 1: Okay, and your stepfather [Herman Cummings] was an American, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: African American?
Speaker 2: African American, yes.
Speaker 1: Herman Cummings.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And, now, tell us something about him.
Speaker 2: So he met my mother, so it's kind of interesting.  He met my mother in England when my mother was working in England.  However, it turns out that he was also posted in the Seychelles for one of his posts.  Now, I don't know whether it was a chicken or an egg thing, right (laughter), whether he, you know, he requested that he be posted in Seychelles because he had met my mother or whether it was completely accidental.  But they ended up in Seychelles at the same time, and I guess they continued their, their romantic liaison.  And so, he was, he was actually, pretty highly ranked in the Air Force.  He was, as an enlisted person, he was a Chief Master Sergeant, and I understand that there's only a handful of people at that rank in the U.S. Air Force at any one time.  He, he retired from the Air Force in '74' [1974], after spending 26 years in the Air Force.  But then he still worked for the company, like a defense contractor that was running the base in the Seychelles at that time.  And this was before, before GPS, you know, before lower orbit satellites.  The only way to track the shuttle was actually through terrestrial dishes, that was pointing up at the sky, and that's where he worked.  He worked at one of those big dishes and tracked, you know, the shuttle and missiles, I guess and what not.  I, he never, I never, or I--he was, you know, had top clearance and all that stuff.  So he never explained exactly what he did (laughter), nor was I old enough to even remotely understand what he did (laughter), you know, I, you know, before he, he passed away when I was in college.  And I never had a chance to really talk to him deeply, but he, he was, he's about 20 years older than my mother.  So he, and this was his second marriage.  And he had been in, you know, he had lived in America, he had lived in England, he had lived in, you know, he had, (unclear) I don't know if he had lived in the South, but he had certainly passed through the South during Jim Crowe laws, and--
Speaker 1: And where is he from originally here?
Speaker 2: So his parents are from Barbados, but he grew up in New York City, in Brooklyn.  I understand that they went to Barbados on holidays.  So in a sense, you know, kind of, a little bit similar to, to my background, but, you know, but just on this side of the fence.  But, yeah, so he grew up in America in New York City for pretty much all his life.
Speaker 1: From Brooklyn?
Speaker 2: Brooklyn, yeah.
Story_ID: 22055
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I didn't ask you anything about your biological father's [Eddie Micock] family.  Is there a family?  Does he have a--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --much family history, is there much family history there in the Seychelles about--
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean he's Seychelles.  He's from the Seychelles, right.  So I have, on my biological father, I have an uncle.  He was one of the top athletes in the Seychelles.  In fact, he was, he was one of the best soccer players that they ever produced.
Speaker 1: What is his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Ralph, that's who I'm named after, actually (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ralph, but his nickname is Billing, B-I-, like, you know, like bills, you know, Billing, you know.  But, yes, so he, he's the youngest of my father's siblings, and my aunt, actually, no my aunt will probably kill me.  I think my aunt is probably the youngest one (laughter), Juanita.  And she's married to an American guy actually, you know, though she lives in Seychelles now too.  And so there's three of them in the family.  They also, you know, there are some, the name Micock is an English name that comes from who her, who their, who their mother married, married an Englishman.  They lived in East Africa for a while.  Then they also moved back to the Seychelles at some point.  So it's, so the family there is--oh, my grandmother on my father's side is, look African, for all intents and purposes.  I don't know what the other mixes, that are in there, since it always is somewhere, something in there.  But on my, I think my grandfather on my father's side, although I didn't know him, is European, you know, mainly European descent.
Story_ID: 22056
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, we always kind of ask this question.  When you consider, you know, I guess all three of these people here, and consider their personalities, their dispositions, their intellects, the way they look and everything, and the way they act, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: So, yeah, so that's a very interesting question (laughter) because different people have ways of describing, you know, me.  And this is, I'm externalizing, I'm listening to other ones.  So most people that I have my mother's [Marguerita Etienne-Cummings] good heart.  She's very generous, you know, a very nice woman.  And I have my father's [Eddie Micock], my biological father's intellect.  And I've had the opportunity that my adopted father [Herman Cummings] has provided me.  So in a sense, I've been, you know, uniquely lucky, you know, to have had the three folks, you know, influence me that, you know, that have made really deep impacts on, on my life in every way and different ways, very different ways, but, yet, massively impactuous.
Story_ID: 22057
Speaker 1: So we were talking online about your adopted father's [Herman Cummings] work ethic.
Speaker 2: Right, yes, so he's definitely, I was saying that he was probably one of the hardest working individuals I've ever known, you know, extremely conscious about saving and, you know, being, you know, being rigid about, you know, about having a plan and executing it and so on.  I mean the gentleman would wake up 4:00 o'clock in the morning every day and get ready for work.  I mean everything was, he was impeccably dressed always, very well groomed.  He was one of the most liked individuals in the Seychelles at the time when I was growing up.  Nobody had ever a negative thing to say about him, and he always, you know, seemed to look at the positive things in life as well, and so on.  And, you know, eventually when, when the base was closed in the Seychelles, that's when we moved back to the U.S.  And that was in '84' [1984].  I was still in school in England actually at that time.  So they lived in New Orleans, my mom and my father and my brother, my little brother, lived in New Orleans at that time.  And then at some point, I guess, you know, the economics did not work out because when you, I think when you are, you know, a person working for an American company in a foreign land, the, the financials are much, much more in your favor, especially, if the cost of living there is not so high.  Then you move back in the country, and all of a sudden, you know, things are much more expensive and so on.  So, he decided that he was gonna go work at, you know, at Tully Greenland, you know, 200 miles from the North Pole for a little while and save.  This was partly, and his company had a base there or other, you know, had a thing there and so on.  So he would go do that to save money to look after his family in the long run, and, you know, while he was at, you know, while he was up there, he got sick and eventually, you know, passed away, you know, when I was in college.  But that's why I said that I think his work ethic eventually, you know, was the cause of his, of his demise because he was always looking for how do I, you know, improve the situation of my family.
Story_ID: 22058
Speaker 1: Okay, so, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: So my earliest childhood memory is, the young, the first one ever, I think is one when I was probably, I don't know, I wanna say before I was two (laughter), you know.  I remember being given a bottle to drink, you know, like of tea.  But back then, we didn't have, you know, all the beautiful, you know, baby bottles that we have today.  So what I remember is a, a bottle that looked like a bottle of beer, Guinness bottle, with a nipple on it, but there was tea inside (laughter).  And that was my, you know, my tea for the afternoon, being given to me by, by my uncle, actually, my uncle who just passed very recently, you know.  But that's, that's my first, the kind of zero or the memory that I have (laughter).
Story_ID: 22059
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.  Now, can you describe where you grew up in the Seychelles, 'cause I know you moved.  You were there for a while, then you moved to, went to school in Britain and then went to the United States.  Can you describe where you grew up and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Very interesting.  So I grew up, so, okay, so to kind of reset the history.  So, you know, so I say, I was born when my mom [Marguerita Etienne]and my father [Eddie Micock] were very young, and then I, when I was four, my mom went to England to work as an au pair, okay.
Speaker 1: Wait, wait a minute.  I'm sorry.  Now, this is my fault.  I messed this up.  Let me go back a little bit.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that one I don't really know.  I think they were just high school sweethearts or something like that or they met in school or something.
Speaker 1: They were both real young, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were very young, yeah, they were just finishing school essentially, yeah.  I don't know much more than that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yes, so when my father went to study abroad, he went to study in the U.K., I lived with my mother and my grandmother, you know, in a house in a part of the Seychelles called English River.  So, our, yeah, so I lived there until I was four--well, I continued living there.  But my mother went to work in England when I was four.  So I stayed living with my grandmother all the way through till I was eighth and when my mother came back to the Seychelles and lived in the Seychelles, you know, at that point.  So, the majority of my kind of formative years, if you will, from zero to four--to eight, was very much in the, you know, in the arms of my grandmother.  You know, so my grandmother was, what, I guess she must have been approaching 60, you know, 50-something, 60 at that time, you know, 'cause my mother was born when she was 40, and my mother was only well, in her twenties, so that's how I come to that number.  So I was, I was a very rambunctious and, you know, and disobedient and all those (laughter) kinds of things kid.  And you can imagine that, you know, an older, you know, 60-year old woman trying to keep you in line when you are running around and so on and so forth.  So it could not have been easy for her.  So my, so my time, when I, you know, when I was young enough to be able to get into trouble, to get (laughter) around by myself, I spent a lot of time out by the sea 'cause it wasn't very far where, from where we lived.  I loved fishing, I still do today.  You know, if I could spend the rest of my life fishing, I would (laughter), and I think that's all formed because of that time.  I was really intrigued by going also in the, in the bushes to go look for fruit, like natural fruit, like things that grow wild, you know, like I guess, in America you would think about going to, you know, find berries, you know strawberries or something.  Back there, we have mangos, we have, you know, different types of fruits that we would go--
Speaker 1: The bananas.
Speaker 2: Bananas, as well, and, of course, it didn't belong to us, so it was, that was part of the, you know, the intrigue of how to go, you know, that, the nice one, that's close to that house that's not yours and, (laughter) and so on.  So every, every night, I'd, you know, when I left school, you know, we would usually walk home.  And inevitably, there'd be this beautiful mango sitting on this, you know, one mango tree in this person's yard.  And we would spend time just going to throw, throwing sticks up to it to see whether we can knock it down and catch it and run away, you know.  So it's that kind of thing, very kind of, very outdoorsy, you know, I mean, you know, playing the kinds of things--the toys that we had we built.  You know, I built tops and kites and sometimes we made little boats that we went out, you know, clearly not seaworthy in any way (laughter).  You know, we get half way and it would fall apart, and how to find our way back home.  It's that kind of thing.  Cars, there were cars, but there were not many.  So it was not too dangerous to walk around, and we didn't have to worry about getting run over or things to that effect.  I didn't, I never had a bike in my life until I was, you know, in college, particularly, when I bought it myself.  So that was not part, I mean the Seychelles as well as very hilly.  So it was extremely dangerous if you 're a kid to have a bike because if you, yeah, if you make the mistake of going down the wrong hill, you may end up like off the road in the, in, in the sea, almost dead, right.  In fact, I almost died (laughter) when I borrowed a bike from a friend and decided I was gonna go touring around the island.  And, in fact, I have a big scar on my leg that I'll always have for the rest of my life because of that 'cause I fell over, and if it wasn't for a pair of Italian tourists who happened to be driving around just when I fell, that managed to get down into the rocks and fish me out, I probably would have bled to death or something like that.
Speaker 1: Seychelles is that hilly?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it's massive, it's, the tallest, the tallest mountain is on the order of about 3,000 feet.  So for my perspect--from his perspective, it's not that big, but if you consider that this only sticks out, out of a, you know, an island that's only four miles wide and 17 miles long, you know, it sticks out pretty dramatically out in the ocean.  So, yeah, so those kinds of things.  You know, always very, very, very deeply green, you know, for, because, you know, the vegetation was always that deep green and it's because it rained substantially.  And there's a lot of sun.  The sea was always the kind of classical, almost postcard blue, you know.  Even today, you know, if I were to show you on my cell phone some pictures just from a couple, a few weeks ago, it's still that deep, deep, deep blue.  And the beaches were always the, you know, striking white.  So you have that green, blue, white, you know, mixture.  And we spent a lot of times on beaches.  Beaches was also a big, a big element of my growing up.  I spent a lot of time trying to climb trees, spent a lot of time trying to, you know, develop our own technologies to improve our ability to listen to the radio or, you know, and things to that effect; played a lot of sports as well, soccer and--well, soccer was primarily, the primary sport.  I don't think I played anything else other than running, you know, and so on.  So that's kind of a sense of the, the growing up environment.  Yeah, there's a lot of kids in my neighborhood as well, so I've had friends that are still friends today, you know, 45 years later, you know, very close friends, that when I go home, I go visit, you know, as much as I can.  And, yeah, that's the sense of--oh, I think earlier we were talking about, about the movies.  So that was another element of my growing up.  One of my cousins was going out with a boy that was the doorman at the local theater.  There's only one at that time.  And every Sunday at 10:00, there was a, there was a movie, the matinee.  And he would let me sneak in, and provided it was not, you know, over my age 'cause movies were divided into over 12 and over 18 at that time, and provided it was general admission, he would, you know, let me go in and with my friend who would go sneak in, and we could watch the movie.  So every Sunday, practically, we watched a movie, you know.  So back in those days, it was, you know, cowboy and Indians, and it was, you know, the big Sampson movies and, and things to that effect.  So those were the type of movies that I grew up in, on, until later on in life, back in the '70's [1970s] where "Star Wars" and "Alien" and all those kinds of films came into being.
Story_ID: 22060
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was there a, was there--so I take it there was no segregation or anything like that in the Seychelles.
Speaker 2: I mean they, you know, it's difficult to say there is no, right, because there's always, as long as you have colonization, there's always a group that thinks that they are, you know, more privileged than others.  So there's always, there was some, but not among the, the Creole, shall we say, you know, although some may argue that, well, you know, they're, you know, the skin tone gradation may have, you know, influenced some decision.  If you're too, if you're darker, that, you know, are thought to be less than if you are not as dark or something like that.  So the closer you were to your colonial masters, you know, maybe you were perceived as being a little bit more privileged than the further you were away.  So in that sense, yes, but that was all, I would argue that it was all covert, as opposed to overt.  There was no overt racism, you know, that one could ever encounter.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, but there was, I guess, an elite British group or something there, that you think--
Speaker 2: Well, as least descendants, right, yeah, the English and the French.  I mean there's a term called the Grand Blanc (ph.), which means the big white, you know, which is kind of the people who own all the land, because why?  Because they were related to the original colonizers, right.  So you had some of those types of gradation, and then that was one of the things that the, the original revolution tried to correct.  In fact, that's one, the first thing that they did when they took over the island was basically to say, look, I'm going to, you know, seize property that has been, you know, kind of defacto given to people because of their lineage as opposed to because of what they've earned and so on.  And there was a legal redistribution on, based on that, but now it's back to, you know, more a matter of how much money you have more than anything else.
Story_ID: 22061
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where did you start school?  What was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: So I went, actually, I started school when I was two.  I was, you know, I think I was, again, too much of a, of a handful to stay at home.  So my parents put me in a, like a, the equivalent of pre-school, I guess, you know, which was just a little nursery school down the street in English River where I grew up.  Then from there I went to a couple of other, like nursery-school type thing until I went to Seychelles College which was the equivalent of the main private elementary school.  I think it was ran by a religious order of all religious was not part of the curriculum for that.  I remember like the brothers were the people who ran it.  And that, to this day, I guess they must have been Catholic, but I don't remember that to be the case.
Speaker 1: Was religion a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean I went--
Speaker 1: --church and all of--
Speaker 2: --school, I went to church every Sunday with my grandma and so on.  We were Catholic.  So we grew up Catholic, but it was not, you know, yeah, it was not a salient aspect of my upbringing in any way, I would say, other than the fact that we did do the Catholic things.  You know, like I did, you know, first communion.  I did the confirmation, and so on and so forth.  So, in that sense, yes.  But, yeah.
Speaker 1: But it didn't have an over, like it wasn't like the dominant force of growing up?
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't say so, no, I mean we just went to church on Sundays.  Yeah, it was that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, so, Seychelles College was where I started elementary school.  And, in fact, so that was kind of an interesting thing there too because I mean that's all my mother's [Marguerita Etienne] doing, okay.  So my mother has always been about the most important thing in your life is to get a good education, from Day One, Day Zero, I guess.  So I finally, you know, to get into the Seychelles College, you know, the moment that you're born, they have to go put your name on some registry (laughter), and hopefully, when you turn five, you get old enough.  Then they can accept you.  So my mother did that, you know, practically at the point when I was probably conceived (laughter), and knowing her.  She's a good planner.  So, so, yes, so when I was five and I ended up going to Seychelles College.  And I was there until sixth grade, but sixth grade, things change again because of the change in the political system.  So at that time, Seychelles College was still considered to be kind of a school of the elite, if you will.  You know, because it was a paying school, so the real poor folks could not afford to go there.  So it was mainly the school of the people with funds.  So in my case, my mother was working in England.  You know, she was an au pair, you know, in somebody's house, she was cleaning somebody's house to send me to school.  You know, she was sending money to my grandma so she could send me to school.  So, you know, so I don't know if you call that, you know, the elite (laughter), you know, in that sense, but there was a lot of people like me.  And I was not, you know, I was not the only one by any means.  So she, so she paid for me to go to school.  I was there until sixth grade, but then the government changed.  The government decided that, that schools should not be private, should be public to everyone.  So they re-did the whole entire school system, basically made it, made all, redistributed people.  And you had to go to school in your, where you were, where you lived, so kind of like public schools in America, and redistributed.  And that's when I moved to a different school called Anse Etoile School.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Anse IS A-N-S-E, Etoile is E-T-O-I-L-E School, and that's just the region.  And I was there for one year.  And that's the, that was seventh grade.  And then from there I went to, to the U.K. [United Kingdom].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you gravitate to any particular subject matter in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was always very good at math and, and things of that sort, but I was not very good at, at the languages (laughter), in fact.  You know, and so there was an entrance exam that, that one had to take in order to go to the secondary schools, all of the Seychelles colleges (unclear).  And my mother was, you know, again, my mother being, you know, so keen on making sure that we got the right education, I had a tutor.  Every afternoon I had to go to one lady's house, and she would do drills with me on math and dah, dah, dah.  And, you know, she always would say that, you know, if you, if you read the way you read now, when you go for your entrance exam--meaning like verbal reading, you will not get in, you know, especially French.  English was not as bad, but the French part was, I had, I was not as good as I (laughter) should have been with French.  So, yeah, so languages was always a hard thing for me, until, actually, until I went to college.  I think I didn't really learn to write properly until I got to the University which is kind of interesting how that worked out.  But, yeah, but math and, you know, and sciences and so on, I was always, you know, effective and did well in those things.
Story_ID: 22062
Speaker 1: Now, were you interested in science at all in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.  You know, I mean, in fact, our science was the kind of science that we did in the backyard, you know (laughter).  We built, you know, whatever rockets we could build.  We, (laughter) we tried to, we tried to build antennas and, and radar stations, you know, so we could hopefully boost the signals of the radio so we could listen to our favorite soccer games coming all the way on the short wave radio from England.  You know, kites and tops and all those kinds of things were, you know, somewhat, how does it work?  You know, why does, how does a kite fly?  So, always interested in those things.
Story_ID: 22063
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite teacher in grade school?
Speaker 2: It's difficult to say.  I guess the one that is most salient in my mind is Madame Moutia, M-O-U-T-I-A, I think is how her, her name is spelled.  And she was my sixth grade teacher, and she was very influential.  I mean she was tough, ooh, was she tough.  But I learned, I seem to remember learning a lot in that sixth grade class.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you, were your grades good in the Seychelles?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I always, yeah, I always had good grades.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That was how I got away with trouble (laughter) because I could be, I could make a lot of trouble, but my grades were always good (laughter).
Story_ID: 22064
Speaker 1: So, okay, so in seventh grade, you moved to Britain?
Speaker 2: After seventh grade.
Speaker 1: After seventh grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when my, so, yeah, so that time, you know, it was becoming, you know, again, I was, like I'm saying, my mother was always keen on trying to get her children the best education she could.  And it became obvious that I was not learning maybe as much as I should have, and I was, you know, I mean I was in a place where I was the star student, but, you know, I wasn't making any progress because, you know, the material was not up to what I was able to keep up with, put it that way.  So at that time, they decided that, okay, they were gonna send me to school in the U.K.  And what happened there was essentially I had to actually learn new material.  So I, so I spent some time just kind of going through books to take their entrances exams to go to the school in the U.K. [United Kingdom].  These days there's, you know, I mean there was all these common, what's called common entrance exams.
Speaker 1: Was U.K. a culture shock?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but so here's the thing that's kind of interesting about, about folks from the Seychelles.  I mean we spend, you know, I like to say we spend half of our lives trying to get off the island and the other half trying to get back, right.  So you're always like excited about going, you know, abroad and going to different countries.  So, yes, I was really keen to go to, you know, to the U.K., but then, of course, it was a big difference from what I'm used to.  I mean it was cold, it was drafty (laughter), it was, you know, complete different set of rules, and, you know, less ability to just kind of do your own thing.  But at the same time, I needed that structure, I think.  I think I was becoming maybe too unruly for my own good (laughter) at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you prepped first in the summer, I guess, before your eighth grade (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean like you said, well, I work actually, so this was interesting because there was a teacher there at the Anse Etoile School, that was an Irish fellow that they had, you know, imported to teach in the new school system they had just constructed.  So he had, and he was a math teacher, I remember.  So he, basically, I worked with him a lot, you know, and just, you know, I would do problems in, you know, in this Algebra book or whatever book it was.  And he would, he would correct them for me and would teach me new things and so on.  So it was not so much that it was over the summer, it was more during the school year.  But I just didn't do the same curriculum that other people were doing.  I just, you know, I had my own set of books that was a little bit more advanced that I was following.  Essentially, that's what it came down to.  So it's personalized teaching, you know.  It doesn't get any better than that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was the name of your first school in Britain?
Speaker 2: The name was St. Augustine's College.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where, where in Britain?
Speaker 2: So this is in Kent, England.
Speaker 1: In Kent, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the county, but, yeah, Westgate is the town, but I don't know if it matters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So now, was St. Augustine's better equipped than the school you had in Seychelles?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, I mean definitely.  I mean it was a modern school, you know, for all intents and purposes with, you know, with a science lab and computers, whatever that meant at that time, right?  It was, you know, you're talking 1980, so computers were, you know, single machines, you know, and not so advanced as we have today.  But, yeah, I mean and they were geared towards teaching children to get ready to go university or to go into the work force, right.  So it was a very different modality of operation.  And then at the end, the English system, and--which was I guess the same in the Seychelles system too, is that you are working towards these exams, called "O" levels and "A" levels, right, and these are national, or international exams that you work towards.  And then you get graded against international students.  So that's what we were working for.  So the curriculum was very strongly geared towards making sure that you can perform well in these exams.
Story_ID: 22065
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were a runner too in school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to be (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You ran the 400 meters.
Speaker 2: Yep, when I was in, I mean I started, I guess getting into athletics in England at St. Augustine's.  Yeah, I mean I like, I always remember this because it was the last sport's day.  So sport's day was like, okay, so you've watched Harry Potter, right, and you have the different houses, right?  So in a similar way, we had the different houses in our, in my school.  So instead of, you know, Hufflepuff and Gryffindor, we had Ocork (ph.), Burke, Egan, I think, yeah, those three, Ocork, Burke, Egan.  Okay, so these were, actually, just different students were just distributed among these three houses, and then we'd have sports events against each other.  You know, Rugby, Soccer, Hockey, athletics.  So the last year that I was there, I was the captain of the athletics team, and like on the sport's day, I must have ran, like, I don't know six, seven, eight races (laughter), you know, like, you know, 100 meters, 400 meters, 200 meters, relays, you know.  And 800, as well, and the 1,500.  So I was, I was a pretty broad, you know, athletic runner at that time.
Speaker 1: You must have been fairly good if your top event was 400 meters.  That's not easy to run.
Speaker 2: No, no, that was, that was the best in the score at the time.  You know, I was able, also able to compete at the county level, you know.  Had I stayed longer in England, I probably would have gone to like, the equivalent of the states, you know, state-level competition, and I would have had a pretty decent chance of, you know, either winning or coming close to winning.  But I finished my exams in June, and then I moved to the U.S. basically in June, you know.  But the county trials was gonna happen in like August, and, you know, I wanted to stay, but my parents said, nah, nah, nah, you gotta come back, come back home.  So then I came home, and then when I came home, then when I went to the University, Lincoln University, I played soccer for my first year.  I didn't really run, and then my second year, I ran a bit, and that's when I got, you know, a little bit more into it as well.  That's when I was running like, you know, in the, you know, in the 40-something second, you know, 48 seconds or so.
Story_ID: 22066
Speaker 1: Let's go back.  Did we get to high school graduation?
Speaker 2: No, we have not.  Well, you see the high school is, so that's the thing about, about the English system, right?  There's no formal graduation, right?  So you take your exams.  Once you're done with the exams, you go home.  So there's no formal, you know, ceremony like we do in America.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in America, high school graduation is a big deal, even if you're going on to college--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but I guess if you don't, you only go so far if you intend to go to college in the system that you were in, and you just kind of take it for granted you're gonna get a high school diploma and then move on, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and also, the other thing about it is that here, the approach is, you know, you've done these courses, you've gotten these grades.  You've met the number of credits, tah dah, you've graduated, right?  But in England, it's not, that doesn't really account to anything.  It's not, it's not a question, you know, a number of credits at the end of the day.  You take these exams and you find out the grades of those exams three months later, okay.  So even, you know, so there's no formal graduation in the sense that, you know, I may have taken my exam, but I don't know whether I passed them or not (laughter), right.  And I won't know for another, you know, three months.  And then if I passed them, then granted, now, I formally have enough, you know, credentials, right?  But if I don't pass them, then I've gotta go back and take 'em again, all right.  So, or something like that.  So you don't, yeah, so graduation just is a question of how many "A" levels do you have or how many "O" levels do you have.  It's not, yeah, it's a very different system in that sense.
Speaker 1: Okay, but if you had to say that you graduated from, so you would have graduated from St. Augustine's?
Speaker 2: Yep.  And if there was a graduation ceremony, that's where it would have happened.
Speaker 1: St. Augustine's in 1970, eighty--
Speaker 2: This is 1985 now.
Speaker 1: Eighty five [1985], okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: That's when I came to, yeah, came to the U.S.
Speaker 1: So you came to the U.S. in 1985.
Speaker 2: Right, permanently, yes.
Story_ID: 22067
Speaker 1: All right, so this is a new chapter, 1985.  You're in New Orleans [Louisiana] first, and then you go to Lincoln [University], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, what did you think about New Orleans, first of all?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved New Orleans.  It was a great city, you know, very warm (laughter).  I came in, like in June, so it was, you know, I loved the French Quarters, loved going down listening to the music and walking around and all the clowns and the paint and people drawing on the spot and all that.  So those were all new things to me, so.
Speaker 1: Now, did New Orleans meet your expectations of what you pictured America as being?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's an interesting question.  I think I, I looked it up.  You know, I mean I remember I had a notion because my parents had come in 1984.  So they were here a year before I got here.  So I, you know, I had some exchanges, you know, what was it like and so on.  So, but, yeah, I remember reading about it.  It's a big port, you know, it's in the middle of, you know, it's all the way down South.  I remember kind of, you know, drawing pictures of what I thought it was like and so on, but, yeah, it was not until I got here that I actually, kind of smelled it in and redid it and saw it and so on.
Speaker 1: What you just said, you drew pictures of what you thought it would look like?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in terms of like based on what, you know, I was an artist back, I used to draw a lot and so on, and so, yeah, so, it was kind of my manifestation of what, you know, what, like that picture in your head of what you think it is.  Yeah, I mean I think the French Quarters was definitely that, you know, what I had envisioned, but I certainly, I mean I did not know about the other part, you know, kind of the real part of New Orleans, if you will, right?  The, where people really live and the roads and, you know, and, yeah, just kind of the organization.  But here's an interesting thing.  So now, I, now, I appreciate it.  Back then I didn't.  So where we lived was right next to the Saints' [New Orleans Saints] practice field, okay.  So I could stand on my balcony, and I could see the Saints practicing right, literally, like, you know, as far as this wall is away from me.  So, you know, whatever, 10 feet, you know, or maybe just like the size of a road and over.  But, you know, I never paid attention.  You know, like I never, I, you know, people, I didn't go to the, to the park, parking lot and ask for autographs.  And there was always people doing so, but I just never cared--
Speaker 1: You didn't know who they were.
Speaker 2: No, I did not (laughter).  I had no idea.  Later on in life is when I appreciated it.  Oh, wow, this was the Saints, you know (laughter).  And back then I was not into American football at all.  I did not know it.  I did not, you know, have any understanding of it.  So,--
Speaker 1: Now, those watching this may appreciate this, this remark I'm getting ready to give, which is a backhanded slap at the Saints.  But I don't think that they were into American football in those days either.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, back then they were not doing very well, yeah.
Speaker 1: The fans used to wear paper bags and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Paper bags, that's true.
Speaker 1: --and called themselves the Ain'ts, New Orleans Ain'ts.
Speaker 2: You're absolutely right, yes.  Those were the years (laughter), before Bobby, what's his name, Mora?
Speaker 1: Bill Mora, yeah, came down, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bill Mora, right, before he came.
Speaker 1: Jim Mora, right.
Speaker 2: Jim Mora, there you go, right.
Story_ID: 22068
Speaker 1: So, okay, so you, but you went to school at Lincoln, right?  So, you're 18 years old.
Speaker 2: Right, so and that was kind of an interesting, almost like accident, right, but yet interesting at the same time in the sense, when I--so when I came to America, there was two things that was gonna happen.  Firstly, I was gonna join the Air Force.  That was, that was the primary reason why, in fact, why I had come before I turned 18 'cause I would have turned 18 in August, was that I was gonna come, you know, before 18 so that all my, all my papers, you know, in terms of immigration and so on and so forth were in place because at that time, I was on a green card, and I was not an American citizen.  And then I had enlisted to, to join the Air Force.  I did all the exams, and so on and passed everything.  In fact, on the academic side, I did extremely well.  But the problem is because I wasn't an American, I could not get the jobs that I wanted to, right?  I wanted the jobs in electronics or, you know, making, like aircraft mechanic or something to that effect, right, something that would be a little bit kind of challenging, you know, mentally and so on.  But I couldn't qualify for those jobs because of my citizenship.  So, in fact, I was about to leave for boot camp when at some point, I just, you know, my, my parents and my father and I decided that this was not the right thing for us.  You know, so we had to kind of withdraw from enlisting.  And that was not a, it was not easy (laughter), you know, 'cause they, you know, they don't let you just say, no, no, I don't wanna go anymore (laughter), right.  But, but luckily, the recruiter understood that that's not what I wanted to do.  And at that point, then it became, all right, let's, you know, let's find a university.  So, so the University of New Orleans was a thought, you know, and I had looked into it and so on, and I might have gone to that one, had my uncle, whose my father's brother, not had his son going to Lincoln on a program called "Laser" at that time which was a program, an NSF, National Science Foundation program--I think it was NSF, if I'm not mistaken.  Or it might have been the Department of Defense.  But anyway, it was a governmental program geared towards training young, black physicists in this country.  I mean there's just not enough young, black physicists.  So they basically went and recruited as many gifted African Americans and brought them to Lincoln.  They trained them over the summer to get them ready to go into taking, you know, physics courses in the fall.  And, so, and my cousin was in that.  So I had gone to his graduation from that program in the sense that, you know, from the summer program of it.  And at that time, yeah, it seemed like it was, you know, that Lincoln would have been a nice place to, to end up.  So my father, my uncle then basically said, hey, Michael is gonna go to Lincoln.  Why don't you send Ralph to Lincoln at that time?  So then my father, all right, told him, fine, because my uncle, you know had--my father had been living all around the world, right?  So he really didn't understand the college system as well as my uncle who had been living in America.  And my uncle was also a Ph.D.  He was working for GTE or GE [General Electric], and he was a mathematician.  So he understood--and he had been a professor at Xavier University in Cincinnati and I think at the University of Cincinnati as well.  So he understood the landscape of academics a lot better than my father did.  So my father kind of deferred to him as far as where I should go for university.  So that's essentially how I ended up going to Lincoln.
Speaker 1: What is your uncle's name, just for the record?
Speaker 2: Marcus Cummings.
Speaker 1: Marcus Cummings, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's passed away as well.
Speaker 1: So was he a Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a Ph.D.   Here's kind of like an anecdotal thing that, when we were in Atlanta, the woman who monitored the program, who hosted the program, I think her name Jocelyn.  She was, she's a local Atlanta celebrity host.  So she had been in Cincinnati at some point in her life.  She had been a computer science student before she decided to go into broadcasting.  And her father had worked with my uncle, Marcus, and she--and he had been her tutor in computer science.  That's completely kind of like seeing a circuitous loop back to, you know, this relationship, this connection.
Speaker 1: This is the lady that hosted The HistoryMakers' ScienceMakers program in Atlanta recently.
Speaker 2: In Atlanta, yeah, recently, the one in February or whatever it was.
Speaker 1: February, 2012.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I just wanted to make sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the one, yeah, yeah, so it was kind of interesting that, you know, here we were talking about (unclear), yeah, and then she started saying, yeah, you know, Marcus Cummings was my, my tutor.  I'm like, wow, that's my uncle (laughter).  So, anyway, so that's how, that's the connection that I, that I had with Lincoln through him and it also turns out that my father and Uncle Marcus had gone to Lincoln at some point in their undergraduate, but my father never finished.  My father went to the Army or the Air Force like, out of college, whereas my uncle finished his undergraduate and then his Ph.D., which kind of make me wonder--yeah, I don't know exactly where he finished his Ph.D., but he had a Ph.D.  I don't remember where.
Story_ID: 22069
Speaker 1: Okay, Dr. Marcus Cummings.  Okay, so Lincoln University, you're there in 1985, fall of '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: Fall of '85 [1985], yes.
Speaker 1: And so, well, what was it like?  Did you like it?
Speaker 2: It was a shock to me.  So, so here's the thing that, the shocking part in a sense, was the following, that, you know, so I had, you know, lived in the Seychelles, as you pointed, as you asked me earlier on.  It was a kind of very multicultural, you know, people from all kinds, people not really knowing much about race.  You know, just living happily and so on, right?  Then I went to England where, you know, in my school there was not much of an issue of race because there were people from Nigeria, from China, from Hong Kong, from all over the world, and again, a melting pot and so on, right.  But at Lincoln, it was primarily, I think it was 99.999 percent African American.  So I just had never been in such an environment initially, you know.  So just kind of, you know, being in an environment where folks, you know, we're of a single, particular ethnicity and also being aware that they are different from everybody else, you know, in a sense.  That was, that's kind of a little bit different.  I would, I guess I expected a diff--even if you are, you know, you are in Kenya, you are among all Kenyans, you don't think yourself as being different from, you know, other Kenyans or something, right?  So that was kind of the weird thing that, that initially shocked me, you know, when I first came to, to Lincoln.  But, yeah, but over, you know, but quickly, you know, I assimilated well and made friends and have friends again, you know, forever from that time.  But it was very interesting.
Speaker 1: Was there any, what particular things impressed you about African Americans, positive or negative?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean it, yeah, so, so from my perspective, it was, you know, it was a, I mean there was a cultural change, right?  This was in the, you know, in the advent of rap and, you know, the, being, you know, played on the radio.  Like there's a lot of music going on, on the campus as well, you know, people blasting it out of their--
Speaker 1: So this is the age of Kool Moe Dee, the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we're talking about all the beginning, yeah, the beginning rap, right, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, Biggie and all this stuff.
Speaker 2: All those, well, no, before Biggie.
Speaker 1: Yeah, before him, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Biggie is like '90s [1990s], you know.  We're talking about '80s [1980s], right.  So you're talking about, you know, "Lattie Dattie, we like to party", you know, (laughter).  You know, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Was it, LL Cool J began, right, the 'Radio Song', right, 'Can't Live Without My Radio', that was, kind of was blasting out of every, every room practically, right.  I mean there was, there was nothing that necessarily struck me one way or the other.  It was just that, you know, I was definitely not all that culture.  It was kind of just more my own otherness, you know, rather than anybody else's, you know.  So, just it took me a little while for me to adapt myself to this new milieu that I found myself in, you know.  I just had no, you know, yeah, just had been used to a little more of a diverse, you know, group of people that I socialized with, and now I was socializing with primarily African Americans.  That's, that's just the only thing.  You just, yeah, it was just new to me, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, my college roommate, well, I had one incident though that I guess my, you know, my parents, I never told my parents until much later in life that, that probably they would have pulled me out of Lincoln (laughter) for it.  But there, but there was, you know, there was some illegal activities going on here and there, right?  So, so my roommate was extremely good apparently at playing dice.  So he would win like a massive amount of money on a daily basis however, massive, you know, it's all relative, of course, right.  But, but I guess one day somebody who he had taken their cash did not appreciate it, so they came knocking on the door with a gun.  So to me, that was an, you know, and, again, guns, that notion of, you know, things was just not in my vocabulary.  I had never seen one, never touched one to this day.  I've, you know, I've never interacted with firearms, and so, and this gentleman knocked on the door and said, you know, with a gun, and luckily, he got to the door before I did because I don't know whether things would have worked out the way they did if I'd been (laughter) the one at the door, you know.  But he was able to wrestle with the gentleman, 'cause he was a big guy, and, and able to, you know, there, the firearm discharged, blew a hole in the ceiling, and so, so (laughter), and I, here I was like, very shocked.  But that, so there was a little bit of that, at that time.  And then I moved to a different room after that, and I became, it was a good friend of mine who's Jamaican, and we became friends forever.  And like I'm the godson [godfather] of his child and, you know, we've been friends ever since.  But it's, yeah, so there was a little bit of that element of criminality as well, but as well as all the other good stuff that, you know, that comes with the culture.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was the science department like, I mean the--
Speaker 2: So, so Lincoln University had really good people.  I don't know whether their resources were as good as they could have been, but, but in terms of dedicated individuals who are teaching us were, you know, were absolutely first-class I think.  So there's this gentleman named Irving Heard who has become kind of a long-life, almost like a third father to me.  You know, he basically, you know, saw something in my abilities very early, invited me to be a researcher in his lab as an undergrad, you know, and brand new undergrad.  And we started doing stuff, and I started learning new, new aspects of, of semi-conductor physics and so on, and that ultimately has become the area that I, that I work in or at least one of the areas that I work in.  But he, and he has, you know, continued and continues to be one of the most influential individuals in my academic life.  You know, and that was because he was dedicated, you know, to the students.  And I wasn't the only one who was in his lab.  There were three of us.  There was a guy named Peter Anosekay (ph.) who ended up being a professor as well.  And he's, I think he's in Tennessee somewhere.  And the other two gentlemen also got Masters degrees and went on to different careers in different aspects of science.  But the point is, they were, you know, it was because of his dedication to kind of teaching us from a level of not just books, but, you know, how do you go about understanding research and what is research and, you know, what are the questions that you're trying to answer and how do you go about answering those questions.  And he also had really good equipment in his lab that, there was no, like no other place.  So I would get to play with computers before, you know, this is, again, mid-'80s [1980s], right?  I typed all my papers that I turned in when people were still writing by hand.  Why?  Because he had computers in the lab, you know, and--
Story_ID: 22070
Speaker 1: Now, what was the state of the personal computer in those days?  I think we had the green screens and the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was basically, you know, an IBM PC-AT, I think was what I was using.  It was DOS, you know, just little, you know, characters on the screens, you're writing it directly.  There was no Windows, you know.  The closest thing to Windows was Apple IIe, you know.  There was an Apple IIe in his lab, you know, that we used as well.  But that was, you know, far, but that was the closest thing to anything that (laughter) resembles, you know, anything called a Window.
Speaker 1: I know the Apple SE was out then, in '83 [1983], '82 [1982], '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Okay, so I didn't--
Speaker 1: But I don't know if he, he might not have had any.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: With the little square--
Speaker 2: The little square one, yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) box.
Speaker 2: I didn't get one of those till like, you know, the late '80s [1980s].  You know, like that's what I wrote my thesis, my Ph.D. thesis, I wrote on that Apple SE30, you know, Macintosh, I guess was then, but anyway--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Macintosh, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so yeah--
Speaker 1: Black and white, it was all black and white.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, all black and white, yeah, and no colors (laughter).  I remember when I got that extended 50 megabyte disk drive, I was like wow (laughter).  That was a big deal.  Yeah, so, so the resources in the classrooms themselves were, you know, average.  I don't think they were anything spectacular.  But there was a net investment in people.  I think that was a big deal.  That was, they were definitely trying to grow the next generation of young physicist by trying to, you know, give you resources as much as possible and people resources to try to get you to the point where you can understand where physics goes.
Story_ID: 22071
Speaker 1: So in retrospect, when you look back on those days, do you think that you got more individual attention from the teachers at Lincoln than you would have received someplace else?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I mean I, you know, if I think about, you know, if I'd gone to Penn State or some big school, definitely, I would not have had that same attention, right?  But on the other hand, you probably would have had more opportunities to pursue different things.  And, you know, I was lucky because I found, because Professor Heard, you know, decided that he was gonna spend his time and work with us, right?  That kind of attention anywhere is going to be top-notch, right?  But if you are the ones who are not selected to be, you know, to be pulled into the lab and to work on, on special projects of that sort, then, yeah, then you are going to be completely out of sorts, right.
Speaker 1: Now, Lincoln has a history of sheparding through foreign nationals from other countries.  I mean two big stars were Nkrumah and Azikiwe of Nigeria became the presidents of the country, coming out in 1930.  So was it, does it still have that same strong tradition of--
Speaker 2: At that time, they did, yeah, at that time, that was a, that was still considered to be one of the star achievements, if you will, right?  And also Thurgood Marshall came out--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --of Lincoln.  And a number of like thespians and, you know, and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Roscoe Lee Brown--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: --and Langston Hughes.  But I was just thinking in terms of Azikiwe and Nkrumah, you know, I mean you can't get too much better than that, I mean two graduates--
Speaker 2: Yeah, African leaders.
Speaker 1: --that go on to become presidents (unclear) and leaders.
Speaker 2: So, here's that other interesting thing.  At that time, so, South Africa was still in the Apartheid, right.  So there was a lot of exiles from, from South Africa, who were studying at Lincoln as well.  So you had that connection, you know, through, you know, through people that, in fact the dean of like the University of South Africa in Pretoria was, and I met him at Lincoln because--he was, he was not a proff there.  He was not a student.  But he, you know, he started, you know, he was teaching political science with his wife there.  And his wife ended up being the, kind of the equivalent of the Bernanke of South Africa or assistant to Bernanke, you know--
Speaker 1: Over the funds--
Speaker 2: Heads of the Fed in South Africa.  Also, he, she taught me micro-economics, you know, at Lincoln.  So you had, you know, you had some pretty big, you know, people who became pretty influential even at that time, you know, on the faculty, yeah, and so on.  And so, yeah, I mean absolutely, there, you know, even then there was a, there was that sense of history, you know, that, you know, we have produced some pretty big people.  Now, it's up to us, this new generation to do it, to do it as well.  When I graduated or at least within the next, the last surrounding year, plus or minus one year, of when I graduated, I think Lincoln graduated a quarter of black physicists in the country.  I mean that's the kind of numbers that were being produced at that time, right, and all, pretty much all these kids went to graduate school somewhere at one of the big universities.  I went to the University of Pennsylvania.  I know some people went to Penn State.  Some went to Drexel, some went to, you know, Iowa State and University of Colorado.  Right now, the, the chair of the physics department at Howard was my contemporary.  He studied atmospheric science, Greg Jenkins.  So those are, like at that time, we were producing some pretty massive, you know, intellectual output for, you know, (unclear) yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, we're interviewing Greg Jenkins tomorrow.
Speaker 2: Oh, you are?  No way.  You have to tell him I say, hi (laughter).
Story_ID: 22072
Speaker 1: So what did you learn, you know, that, I mean what were you focusing on, you know, when you were on the verge of graduation from Lincoln?
Speaker 2: On the verge, what do you mean by focusing?
Speaker 1: What was your focus in terms of physics and--
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.  So I had worked with Professor Heard the entire time, working on understanding how to make microchips essentially, right?  So, you know, how do you micro-machine silicon to make them into transistors or to make 'em into different, what are called MEMS today, micro-electro mechanical systems.  Those, that's the technology that, you know, that allows us to have computers that run as fast as they do.  The same technology allows us to decode the Human Genome Project, you know, and it uses that kind of technology, communications to, you know, to send light, you know, through fiber optics and direct them and so on, same technology.  You know, but we were trying to understand electrochemistry a bit, but that's what we were working on at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And from there, when I went to grad school, when I went to Penn, that's what I also worked on.
Story_ID: 22073
Speaker 1: Now, were you like involved in, when you were at Lincoln, were you involved in any clubs or groups or did you--
Speaker 2: No, not, I mean--
Speaker 1: Did you join anything or--
Speaker 2: Not really, and soccer.  I would play soccer.  I played, I ran track, you know, (laughter).  That was where kind of my sense of groups and obviously, the academic side of things.  But, yeah, the International Club.  There was such a thing (laughter), you know, which was--
Speaker 1: Did you have any, did you graduate with any honors or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the Valedictorian.  I was--
Speaker 1: Well, I think that's important.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I didn't wanna speed you out of there without trying to find those things out.  And--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, say it again.
Speaker 1: I didn't wanna speed you out of Lincoln without finding those kind of things out.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any other teachers there or students there at the time that are notable that we, you know, historically, that we need to talk about that--
Speaker 2: You mean teachers--
Speaker 1: Besides Dr. Heard?  Was there anyone else?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Professor Heard.  I mean notable, yeah, I mean, I don't know.  I mean I guess the president of Lincoln was the first woman, black woman president, I think of, well, maybe just of Lincoln, maybe not of a university.  I forget her name now.  Yeah, no, I--I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just don't remember too much.
Story_ID: 22074
Speaker 1: So this is, okay, so 19--
Speaker 2: This is 1988.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '88 [1988], that you graduate?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when I graduated.
Speaker 1: So you came out in three years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Did you go to school year around?
Speaker 2: No, just in, I took a lot of credits.  I graduated with a 4.23 like A plus, average (laughter), and I, you know, I did pretty well in undergrad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, yes, so I had the option to work like over the summer I had the option to work at AT and T and by that time Bell Labs, you know, was a big deal, right?  But I opted to stay and work with Professor Heard because I thought that I would learn the most there.  And I don't regret it.  I think that was the right decision.
Speaker 1: Well, this is really, Professor Heard really sounds like quite a person, just a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, absolutely, yeah, he was very influential in my life, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in '88' [1988], you went on to--
Speaker 2: To the University of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Penn, okay, yeah, University of Pennsylvania.  And so tell us about what you did at Penn?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I kind of, I always tell a joke about this.  So when I applied to the University of Pennsylvania, I actually wrote, hand wrote my application.  And there were places where I made mistakes, and you can see where I crossed it off (laughter) and so, so it was not a very professional application by any means.  And I was kind of almost lucky that, (laughter) that they decided to, you know, to give me a position anyway.  But, yeah, I mean, I went there to speak to the, to one, to the chairman at the time.  His name was Professor Rabii, and he was actually, he's been one of my, you know, big supporters throughout life as well.  I mean he would, he somehow, again, he also saw something, you know, in me that, that he thought that I would do well at Penn.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: R-A-B-I-I.  Rabii.
Speaker 1: I mean is he of East Indian extraction or?
Speaker 2: No, he's, I think he's actually Persian, Iranian original, I believe, yeah.  So, yeah, so he's the one that kind of recruited me to Penn, you know, and gave me, you know, a scholarship and all that kind of stuff.  So there, I--when I went to Penn [State University] the first time, I remember, you know, being in the room where all the other students from all over the country that had come to Penn to go to graduate school came.  And there was, you know, people from all over the world obviously.  So there, it was kind of going back to the diverse, dichotomy that I was used to, but at the same time now, it was flipped the other way, right, so that, and I was, I think I was the only African American in that room, if I'm not mistaken.  I think, yeah, I think that was true, you know, but, you know, everybody else being from all over the world, right.  I remember, yeah, I mean, but I met my eventual Ph.D. advisor at that time, 'cause he was running the, the graduate programs for the electrical engineering Department.  I remember him being young and energetic individual.  He was working in a similar area that I was interested in.  So--
Speaker 1: Is this Yon Vonderspiegel (ph.).
Speaker 2: That's Yon Vonderspiegel, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yon Vonderspiegel, okay, all right.  Now, was he an American?
Speaker 2: He is now, I'm sure, but at that time, he might have been Dutch still, Belgian, yeah.  I don't know what, yeah, because he was, he was a fairly young guy at that time.  He had, you know, recently graduated and finished a Ph--finished a post-doc and he had become a professor, not many years before I got there, three or four years maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so he kind of guided your Ph.D. project?
Speaker 2: Yes, so here I'm, yes, so the way that it works is that, you know, you basically find a proff that you are, area of research you're interested in.  Hopefully, he has a project that interests you, that it needs, you know, to be manned, right.  So he did have such a project, and initially, I was working on more similar work that I was doing with Professor Heard, you know, more kind of the micro-machining aspect of things that I was referring to because I am so, the interesting thing is this, right.  So as a physicist you get to learn a lot of different aspects of physics.  But you don't focus on any one thing.  In engineering on the other hand, you tend to focus more on the aspects of physics that relates to electrical engineering, right?  If you are, if I was in mechanical engineering, then I would be focused on the mechanical engineering aspects of physics.  So given that I hadn't focused, I had to go, actually go back and take a lot of undergraduate courses.  So I was taking my full load of graduate courses, plus sitting in on a number of undergraduate courses so I could make up the holes that I had in the engineering domain.  So when I first went there then, I wanted to work with Professor Vonderspiegel, but I didn't have the skill set yet because I hadn't filled up all the holes.  So then he gave me a project that was still related, but was more physicsey in nature.  So that's what I started off from.  By, by the time I built up my bona fedas, in the rest of the important aspects of the work that he does, then I started working on understanding neuro, neuroscience and applying that to technology.
Story_ID: 22075
Speaker 1: Now, like most physicists, I guess, that I've interviewed, the Masters degree is just a speed bump along the way to the Ph.D.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You don't even notice you even have it and just keep going.
Speaker 2: Right, just keep going, yes.
Speaker 1: So there's no point even talking about the Masters.  So--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you just went right on for a Ph.D.  And I don't know if this is the big project you worked on, but you built a circuit model of the brain--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --with Dr. Vanderspiegel (ph.).
Speaker 2: Yes, so that's what we were trying to do.  Basically, we were trying to build a computer that would work the way that our brain works in terms of, you know, how the neurons, you know, work together, they communicate, how they process information with the idea that you could apply it to anything, like how do we see the world, or how do we hear or how do we--can we make a car that will drive by itself.  And things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, was this your dissertation?  Was your dissertation--
Speaker 2: Yes, dissertation was--
Speaker 1: --based on this?
Speaker 2: This, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what did you find out?  I mean what was your, can you explain what's--
Speaker 2: Explain the results.
Speaker 1: --yeah, I guess to layman--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --what this was.
Speaker 2: So the main thing that we, we did was to basically show that we can use the same technologies that people are using to build computers, you know, the digital technology.  But we were using it in a different mode called analog mode, right, to represent the type of, of circuits that you find in living tissue.  So that was the first time that that had been done, and we built a computer that still is, works today at Penn [throat clearing] excuse me, that is essentially the first neuro-computer, you know, fully integrated, ever built, okay.  With that then, what I was also interested in there, was interested in understanding the mathematics as well as the, the computer science of how do we understand how things move.  So when, so when an object comes towards our head, you know, our brain computes that, hey, this thing is gonna hit us, and you duck, right?  So how does, how do you build an algorithm now with this brain tissue, a silicon version of it, that would also be able to measure that motion and, hopefully, tell your neck to duck, right?  So those are the types of things that we were trying to, to build.  So look at different little pieces of, of how biology solves problems.  Biology, I mean humans, flies, monkeys, you name it, right, different animals, right, and see whether or not you can then build algorithm software, hardware that can do it the same way, that can do it as well or as close or approximately.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you achieved the Ph.D. in 1994--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, December.
Speaker 1: --and in electrical engineering, and you took a position--was it immediately at, as an assistant professor at Southern Illinois University in--
Speaker 2: So I defended in September of 1994, but then I drove across country with my friend, the one that's in the picture actually, you have over there.  He was also in America at that time.  So we, we had my first--well, not my first car, my first nice car, I guess I should say (laughter).  So I got my first nice car, and we drove across county.  We stopped at my uncle's house in Cincinnati.  We stopped at friends in Kansas City.  We stopped at other friends in Texas.  We just kind of just, you know, just literally just bummed all across the, you know, the highway and until we got to Irving, Texas which is where my wife at that time, was working.
Story_ID: 22076
Speaker 1: So I (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now, wait a minute.  We have to talk about how you met your wife and who she is?
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So my wife, I met my wife at Penn [Penn State University].  So remember I explained that I had to take these undergraduate courses when I came there because of my background was not fully engineering.  She was an engineering undergrad.  So I remember the first time I was in the class with her, so this was '88' [1988], I guess, the fall of '88' [1988] is when I remember thinking, I remember her saying something, and I looked back.  I was like, wow, very pretty, but, wow, I'd never talk to her (laughter).  I didn't like her for whatever reason, yeah.  So, anyway, so that was like the first engineering course that one person takes, electrical engineering course, that a person would take.  And somewhere along the line, and so we kept moving along.  So in 1990, now two years later, she's much more advanced, I think, yeah, she was a transfer student.  So she was not really starting from, from scratch.  She was kind of already in her, in her degree.  So, but in 1990, she was a senior.  And then we were taking, we were taking courses that were much more kind of almost graduate-level courses of that type [throat clearing] excuse me.  Oh, not a senior, she was like a junior, I guess.  That's what it was.  So we started essentially trying to--well, we were working on harder problems, right.  So given my background as a physicist, I had a much better or easier opportunity to grasp the subject.  So finally at some point they had decided that a group of students, you know, like her contemporaries had decided that they needed to ask me a question.  So they had straws, they drew straws--apparently, I guess I was not approachable easily, they drew straws and she drew the shorter straw (laughter).  And she called me up to ask me a question about this particular problem set that we had for homework.  And I guess from that point on, we started talking and, you know, and that's how we got to know each other better and so on.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you got married while you were still a student?
Speaker 1: I got married, yeah, my, in '93' [1993], so it was the year before I graduated.  But she had graduated.  She graduated in '92' [1992].  She just, she got her Master, an undergraduate degree and went on to work for GTE.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so you drove across country to Irving, Texas, right?
Speaker 1: Irving, Texas, which is where she was stationed.  So she was actually in a very interesting program.  Her program was one where, it was called an executive development program with GTE--GTE is the parent company of Verizon.  That's how Verizon became Verizon, where they would basically through the country and pick very bright young graduates and put them in these accelerated programs to try to get them to the point where they would be vice presidents and so on, executives.  But to do so, they had to rotate through different technology centers.  So, like when she first went there, she was working in, in Houston.  And then she worked in Dallas 'cause that's where the headquarters was.  She also worked in Chantilly, Virginia and so on.  So it just happened to be, for the six months rotation in Dallas, and that's where we ended up driving there.  While she was there, just as an aside, but I think it's very important.  I try to tell people this as much as I can.  While she was there, she was trying to convince the head, the higher ups that people would have cell phones, multiple cell phones, you know, at one time.  They didn't believe it.  They thought everybody would have maybe one.  You know, back then, you know, they still had the brick phone (laughter), right, you know.  And she's the one that bought a lot of the air, the spectrum that ended up becoming Verizon Wireless, you know, for then GTE, which was also part of, which was MobileNet and then MobileNet became Verizon.  So she was very influential in, in making the, you know, one of the biggest telecommunications wireless companies that we have today.  I think that's a cool thing (laughter).
Story_ID: 22077
Speaker 1: It is, it is.  Okay, so you, when you drove to Texas, this is the summer between graduating and going to SIU.
Speaker 2: SIU [Southern Illinois University], yes.
Speaker 1: So, now, did she go to SIU with you?
Speaker 2: So, yes, so, so I started at SIU in January--
Speaker 1: Of?
Speaker 2: Of 1995.  So when I was going there, I negotiated part, part of the deal was that, you know, that it would be easier for her to go to, I mean she couldn't work, you know, her field in Southern Illinois in Carbondale, there was not much that she could do.  So she decided that she would go on and go to law school.  So that's, so that was part of my negotiation when I was deciding to go there, that she would get an opportunity to go to law school.  So she did.  So she came in the fall of '95 [1995].  And, yeah, and that's where she finished law school and then came to D.C., and then we both moved to, you know, to this area after that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, how did you like SIU?
Speaker 2: I think, again, I think, I mean it was a good place for me because of the following reason, right.  So most, what do most academics do, right?  So you would end up finishing Ph.D.s.  You would almost always go do a post-doc somewhere, okay.  And the idea behind the post-doc is that you are finishing publishing the papers that comes out of your Ph.D., and you get a new problem set that you work on.  And then when you finish your post-doc, at that point, then you might go and look for an academic position, okay.  I got kind of a, of a fast away into the academic life, right, because I went directly into being an assistant professor.  But I went to a school that was not like one of the competitive schools where I could actually grow and develop at my own pace, right.  And the advantage of that I essentially got a post-doc plus a, either training to be a real academic all at once, right.  So, so I was in a better position when I came out because I had published all the papers that I was supposed to publish, plus I had taught courses, you know, as a real proff, right.  Plus, I understood a little bit more the politics and, and I had students that I could take with me, right.  So when I go to Hopkins [Johns Hopkins], when I moved to Hopkins in '98' [1998], I was hitting the ground running, you know, way faster than most folks, who are just starting out of post-doc, you know.  So that made a big difference as far as, I think, in terms of my ability to navigate the, you know, the academic landscape of a real competitive environment.
Story_ID: 22078
Speaker 1: Okay, now, while at SIU, you're inaugurated an ongoing, annual seminar called the Institute of Neuromorphic Engineering.
Speaker 2: No, no, that happened at, when I was at Maryland, actually.  It was later.
Speaker 1: That was at Johns-Hopkins?
Speaker 2: So, okay, so there's a little bit of a job in between.  And so I came to Hopkins in '98' [1998], but in 2001 I was recruited to move to Maryland, University of Maryland, College Park.  And so I went on leave from Hopkins, you know, while I moved to Maryland and, and, you know, see whether it fit my, you know, my personality and what not.  So while I was there is when we did the Institute of the Neuromorphic Engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's at Maryland, okay.
Speaker 2: And then at the end of the year, I decided that, that Hopkins was closer to my personality, so I went back to Hopkins, okay.  So there was a year like between 2001 and 2002, or was it 2003, but anyway, in that timeframe, where I was at Maryland.  And then that's where the neuromorphic engineering institute came about.
Story_ID: 22079
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  Well, let's go back to '98' [1998] at Johns-Hopkins.  You're an assistant professor there.  Now, it says here, and I don't know if this is right or not.  It is says here in 1996 you received the National Science Foundation's Career Award?
Speaker 2: Yes, that I did.  So the career--
Speaker 1: It seems early in your career to receive the career award?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so let me explain what my career award is (laughter).  The career award is exactly that.  It's a, it's an award to help young faculty develop their career.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: It's not a career, it's not one where you celebrate what you've already accomplished.  So, yeah, so it's a prestigious award that is, you know, that is afforded to young faculty as they're starting out.  It's kind of like your first big grant, you know, where you can actually have enough money to hire people and execute and actually, you know, make progress on your research.  And that's what that, that's what that was.
Speaker 1: Now, this means that you're on the radar, I mean the National Science Foundation already is recognizing you, and you haven't even got started good yet.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, to get started, yeah, (laugher).  But I was able, yeah, I was producing, you know, papers.  I mean the way that you select, you apply, you have to write a proposal, but, you know, it depends on your, your CV at that time.  And at that time, you know, I had, I'd published, you know, extensively, well, not extensively, but I had published enough to be considered, you know, competitive and so on.
Story_ID: 22080
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, it says that at Johns-Hopkins, you, one of your first projects was causing a fast-moving toy robot on a track to avoid obstacles on its own.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that was, that was done with my first student that I had also recruited from SIU, in fact.  He's a professor now too, at University of Washington in St. Louis [Missouri].  But, yeah, so he came with me, and basically, what I wanted to do is, you know, wanted to use that same type of ideas that I explained earlier on about learning how the brain computes things or the fly's eye and so on.  But we built a silicon chip that could look at a track and know where it is, you know, in (unclear) to the track.  And so as you drive a radar-controlled car really fast, can it turn by itself around corners without skidding out essentially.  That was the whole thing.  I mean how do I maintain, you know, following a track and not skid out and not overturn and so on.  So, so that was done automatically by this chip that we had developed.
Speaker 1: So did it actually work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it worked pretty well.  Yeah, I mean--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --then, at that time, that kind of real time, you know, fast-moving robotics was not really readily available.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What else did you do there?
Speaker 2: Well, I, so my, my work at that time was mainly focused on understanding how our eyes work, you know, and how, you know, how we understand motion and how we understand movements and so on.  So we built, you know, cameras, so the precursors to, you know, to your optical mouse, like, you know, like inside of your optical mouse, there is a tiny chip that measures how you move the mouse on the table.  And that moves the cursor on the screen.  So we were building similar chips to that except those chips were not looking at a table, but they were looking at how people were moving in a room or an environment and so on.  So we were trying to measure, you know, we were trying to build the silicon that could, you know, that could immediately give you an estimate of motion, estimate of movement.  And 'cause that has a lot of implication in guidance and surveillance and, you know, in, you know, automation and so on.  So we spent a lot of time working on that.  Also, around when I first got there, I met this gentleman that has become one of my long-time collaborators.  His name is Anthony Lewis, who was, who was a roboticist in the sense that he worked on legged machines.  So can we build a robot that doesn't have wheels, but has legs to walk around environments.  So we don't, we don't like R2D2, but more like C3PO, you know, in 'Star Wars,' right, the legged guy.  So that means that somehow, you've gotta control those joints, those limbs in a way that is, you know, it's able to, you know, to walk on different types of floors and carpets and, you know obstacles and not fall over, right.  Well, who does this best in the world?  We do, right, humans, right.  You know, we do it, well, not best, but we do it really well (laughter).  So we wanted to understand how the spinal cord of humans and of, you know, generating the control signals that goes to our muscles, you know, the first to be able to control our walking.  So from there, we basically, tried to build legged robots that would have a similar kind of thing, that was similar kind of capabilities of being able to walk around and control itself and so on.  So Tony Lewis, you know, we started working on that around 1999, so one year after I got to Hopkins.  And we've been, you know, we continue to work on different aspects of this.
Story_ID: 22081
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the, we have an illustration here of a cat with, who's wired up.  And is this, this is a schematic of an experiment showing locomotion stimulated by a central pattern generator chip.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so can you explain this to you?
Speaker 2: Sure.  So that's much later, so that's, I guess it's later, but it's a continuation of that same evolution of though, okay.  So in the sense that we wanted to understand how does one control legged locomotion, right.  So you can make that platform be a, a robotic platform, mechanical.  And then you use a, you know, a model of what the spinal cord does, you know, in addition to the brain and everything, right.  And you implement that on the robot and the robot can navigate the environment.  All right, but more importantly, or at least more importantly, from a human perspective, you know, what happens if that robot was actually a person, all right?  And a person that would need such control would be a person with spinal cord injuries, for example, right?  So, let's say you are, you know, your spinal cord is severed.  The lower part of your body it turns out is fine.  The problem is that you cannot control it.  You cannot get a signal from your brain to it.  So what we wanted to understand there is how do you reactivate the lower part of the body, okay, in such a way that you can get somebody with spinal injuries to walk again, okay.  So, so that's the, that kind of, that's the, that's the long-term goal.  But you cannot go to human experiments directly.  What we tend to do is we tend to look at different animal models that are as close, you know, to the extent that they can be close, to human as you can, as you can find, okay, and also, allow you to do the experiment, right.  I mean I guess I could have, we could have done it in monkeys, but monkeys are really hard, okay.  So, so cats is a very good model of the human locomotion.  So what you see there is an example of, the first example, in fact, of a part of a spinal cord being implemented in a microchip, and then that being used to restore locomotion, restore walking in a paralyzed cat.  This, you know, which the next transition of that is, can we do the same thing in a paralyzed human?
Speaker 1: So you could do it in a cat?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Yeah, with a cat, we've done it in a cat many times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The hard part is actually making the cat walk for a long time.  You know, in terms of the--there are different ways that you can stimulate the nervous system of the cat to get 'em to walk, and some of them are, makes a cat tired fast.  Some of them does not.  And lately we've been, made a big breakthrough in getting--and when I say lately, I mean last November, where we had a cat walking for kilometers.  The humans were getting tired before the cats were getting tired, you know, and this is all, you know, electrical.
Speaker 1: But is the cat controlling its own walking or is--
Speaker 2: No, no, we are.  And this is, this is controlled in the sense that it's on a, it's on a tread, not a treadmill but a walkway.  The cat is not free to move around yet 'cause that would require another leap in the technology.
Speaker 1: But is the--I'm sorry, I don't want to interrupt you, but I was just thinking.  Is the cat deciding to walk itself or--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, it still--
Speaker 1: --are you all stimulating--
Speaker 2: We are stimulating him to walk.  But, but the other thing about it is that the cat is actually fully, he's paralyzed only in the sense that he's anesthetized.  He's not actually, physically paralyzed, right.  So the cat is asleep, right?
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Okay, for these experiments, but we are about to embark on some experiments now that where the cat will be, you know, paralyzed too.
Speaker 1: That's what I was thinking at first that somehow you all found a good cat, paralyzed it and then (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No, no, we try--
Speaker 1: --made it walk.
Speaker 2: Right, no, we try to avoid that as much as possible for all these reasons, right.  There are ethical reasons, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, ASPCA and all that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But the cat is anesthetized, is actually asleep--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but he's walking in spite of himself because you all are making him walk?
Speaker 2: Yes, we're able to stimulate his spinal cord in a particular way using, you know, chips that work the similar way as the spinal cord so that the cat then can put, left one leg, put it down, put the other one down and walk down the walkway as often as we want it to do.
Speaker 1: I was just thinking if you could make something that would stimulate a sleeping student to study--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Yeah, well, I think that would seriously have ethical issues (laughter).
Speaker 1: --to study in spite of himself.  But that's interesting, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so the biggest thing there is that, you know, ultimately, this technology can transfer to helping people with spinal cord injuries.  And another aspect of the work that we do is also trying to decode the intent of the person, right.  So when you put electrodes in the brain and that will read your mind, if you will, right.  And because if you can do that, then you can link the thought process to the stimulation and then you can have the person control the entire thing, right.  So that's kind of, you know, the evolution of the work.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that is feasible too because, I was thinking at one point, well, if you had, if a human had paralyzed legs and they wanted to walk, and they had the chip installed, and all that, they would be able to use a remote control instead of the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  That's the first step.  That's a zero (unclear) step as well.  You know, pun not intended, but that's the first, you know
Speaker 1: Step, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) --step in the thing, well, yeah, exactly.  You push the button forward, and that would get you to go forward.  You turn it to the left, and your leg would turn.  So, yeah, that's what we're trying to do first.  And then the next thing is, instead of you pushing a button, you just think it, and you go.  And we have done that, we have done the thinking part for moving prosthetic limbs, arms, where you can decode the intent of a person to grab a, you know, a glass and, you know, and drink out of it and so on.
Story_ID: 22082
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a movie years ago, I think it was called 'Firefox' with Clint Eastwood--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: You may have seen it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, long time ago, yeah.  I read the book too.  That was a, I used to love those films, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, well, you tell us the premise of it since you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's basically this super-duper aircraft that the Russians had invented where you could fly it completely by thought.  You didn't have to really touch anything and so on.  It was extremely fast, extremely agile and so.  The book was about how the Americans decide that they have to go and steal this aircraft, and essentially, Clint Eastwood is the pilot that's going to Russia, pretend to be Russian and steal the aircraft and bring it to the West.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that seems like the American way of doing--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Go steal it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what it is, is spying, right?  That's like spying.
Speaker 1: But the idea was that the aircraft would react as human thought--
Speaker 2: To thought.
Speaker 1: --so it would be no lag time between what--
Speaker 2: Well, there's always some, but the idea is, yeah.  But, and today, you know, that's, that's not science fiction anymore.  You know, I mean there are different types of ways that you can tap into the thought of humans now, right.  So in the sense that, you know, what was in that movie was what would be called EEG today.  You know, it's like these electrodes that you see on people's heads that, you know, there's usually like 64 electrodes or 128.  And they are being decoded, and the computer is processing that information to determine what the person is trying to do.  That's an external one, which is, that's why the helmet is the ideal scenario.  But more evasive ones, you can put the same set of electrodes underneath what's called the dura.  It's below the skull, there's a thin membrane that separate the skull from the brain.  You can put it underneath that membrane and now you, now, you're contacting the outside of the brain directly.  Of course, the signal is much better, much more localized and you can, you can interpret the signal a lot better.  And one step further which is work that, that I'm working with as well, where we put electrodes that penetrate the brain, that goes into the brain now.  And you can record from different depths of the brain.  And that gives you even more abilities to decode what's going on and to control aircrafts or robotic arms or whatever the case may be.  So all that is work that is ongoing that I'm partly involved with.
Speaker 1: It seems like it all reverberates back to the days when you were trying to get a better television reception in the Seychelles (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It is, it's a signal, yeah, it's a signal to noise problem, right.  How do you put your antenna in the right place to get you the best signal?  Well, same kind of thing.  Out here, it's harder and underneath the skull is easier and into the brain itself is that much more easier.  Of course, there are, you know, a myriad of technical issues that you've gotta deal with.  And that's where the research and development comes into play, but that's the idea, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, this sounds like quite a project, and today, so today, you're still trying to figure out how to do it with, do what you did with a cat with a human, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, yeah, I was at a meeting last week, when we were up in Canada with my collaborators there, the cat physiologists.  And we're now essentially planning the transformation of the work to human subjects.  There's a grant that was, it's not my grant, but my collaborators' grant, that was recently awarded that basically will recruit volunteers that are willing to try to see whether our technology will also work with humans.  So this is, you know, this is now becoming a real scenario where we're gonna try human subjects, which is, you know, a big step, a big evolution in the, in the technology.
Story_ID: 22083
Speaker 1: So in, I think you referred to this a few minutes ago, in 2005, you had a secondary employment at the University of Maryland in College Park.
Speaker 2: It was not 2005.  It was not that late.  It was more like 2002, 2003 or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, I sent Marta a recent copy of my CV.  It's all in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I may be working in with some older information.  But so, but you, that appointment's finished then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I was an adjunct professor for a while, but it's, but there's no need for me to be there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so 2006, you received the Trailblazer Award for top minorities in science from Science Spectrum.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In 2007, you're named the Kavli Frontiers in Science Fellow by the National Academy of Science.  Now, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: So, essentially what they do is they find like, you know, top, young scientists in the country where they wanna bring them together and discuss kind of their research.  So it's, it's actually, it was a very interesting seminar series, if you will, where people there are physicists talking about astro physics.  There were people talking about, you know, chemistry of, you know, of how cells communicate with each other.  And me, you know, building prosthetics, you know, on the other side.  So, it was just essentially a, a combination, you know, of bringing together some of the top minds in the country to discuss across fields, with the notion that there may be, you know, fertilization of cross disciplinary work.  And that's, that's what it was.  It's, yeah, I mean the Kavli Foundation is almost like a Nobel foundation.  It's that kind of a big deal, but this was nowhere near, and that was not a Noble Prize (laughter) or anything like that  It was just the ability to bring people together and communicate and share information and talk about your work and so on.
Story_ID: 22084
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about your work at Johns-Hopkins.  I've read here that you work in a gothic-style place called Barton Hall.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Where did you read that?
Speaker 1: It's right here, and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Gothic style, well, it's not so gothic style, but it's--
Speaker 1: It's, I can see the lightening outside of the, you know--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  No, it's not quite that bad.  Yeah, it's a, it's an older building, but it's been completely renewed.  I think what they're referring to is the ceiling 'cause I, where my lab is, is a kind vaulted ceiling place in the attic (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, you know, I could open the window and put up a, you know, a mast for if I want to read, you know, get a lightning strike, you know, (laughter) to "It's Alive", no, (laughter), not quite that bad.  No, Barton Hall is the electrical engineering department building.  I, yeah, they revamped a whole, a floor on the top floor, half of the floor for my colleague and I.  And we collaborate a lot together.  So that's what it's referring to.
Speaker 1: And, now, we've been asked to do this before, and I don't always remember to do it, but what's a typical day like for you?  When do you show up for work and what kind of projects are you and your colleagues working on?
Speaker 2: Sure, so a typical day would be that I wake up with, my son wakes up around 7:30 in the morning, 8:00 o'clock.  I try to get, you know, some exercise in.  I think exercise is important, and so on.  And then, so that brings me to about 8:30 or so,  8:30, 9:00 o'clock.  And I, I don't leave, I leave home about half an hour later.  I drive to Hopkins for D.C., so that's an hour drive.  So I don't really get up to Hopkins till about 10:30, shall we say.  But the good thing is that I can, I work on the road.  I, you know, I have phone, you know, I make phone calls.  I, you know, kind of plan the way, on the way up or I listen to NPR or I listen to a good book on, on audio, right.  That's, so I'm, my wife keeps telling me that I'm well heard, not well read (laughter).  So anyway, when I get to campus, yeah, it's usually around 10:30.  By that point, my office is in my lab.  So I like that a lot.  You know, like I have the option of having an office over there and a lab over there.  You know, I turn that down every time because I want to walk through the lab as I go to my office because, you know, if there are students that need to talk to me, I can ask them what they're doing.  I can ask them how the work is going.  If there's problems to be solved, we can try to do it right then and there and so on.  So by the time I get to sit at my desk, you know, I've already interacted with whoever is there by that time.  Not everybody are early morning people, but you aren't early morning by either (laughter) by 10:30, 11:00 o'clock.  But you know what I mean.  There are some people who are kind of more late night, you know, some of my students are more late night.  But, yeah, so then I'm at my desk, and at that time, I mean the rou--reading emails these days is continuous, right. That never stops.  You know, it's not like I go and I sit and start reading them.  But, no, it's just always something is coming in, it's flowing in.  The majority of my work now is more writing grants, writing papers, reviewing papers, you know, making, like producing the publications and so on.  And my students are the ones who are doing the hands on, okay, with, you know, constant interaction with me.  And so I don't sit at the lab and poke transistors anymore or write code.  And I, you know, I do that during the summer when I go to workshop or something, but I don't do it when I'm, you know, usually, I don't do it when I'm at Hopkins, like in the lab because I have, my students are doing it.  So, but we talk about problems and try to, you know, resolve issues that needs to be resolved.  Most of the time I have multitudes of meetings that I, that I set up with different colleagues and discussing research or governance of the department or governance of the school, you know, of the University.  Let's see, there are also seminars that occasionally are happening that I might go listen to, you know, the brand new speaker that's talking about some new and interesting topic that I might be interested in.  So there's all of that participation.  I also teach, so, like this coming, this fall, I will be teaching Monday, Tuesdays--no, I'll be teaching Tuesdays and Thursdays, for an hour and a half in the afternoon.  So I gotta prepare for my class, so those two days I'm preparing for class and then teaching in the afternoon.  For the other three days, I, actually, I spend one day a week at home, I work from home because I, there's a lot of distractions at work.  So that gives me a chance to actually read and get more focus work done at home.  So like this coming fall, it'll be Friday that I'll stay home.  So Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, I'll be on campus.  So Monday and Wednesday then, I'll be working with my students, you know, just kind of, you know, trying to figure out what's going on and trying to make, you know, move the problem forward as well as writing grants and so on.  And Tuesdays and Thursdays, I'll be teaching in the afternoon.  So that's kind of a snapshot.
Story_ID: 22085
Speaker 1: Okay, some of the projects, and I guess this came from an article, but they said one student from Nigeria, at the time this was written, was working on hooking up a circuit board that models the retina of an octopus.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: One thing.
Speaker 2: So Fopai (ph.), so she's now on Wall Street (laughter).  She went, she got her Ph.D. and moved on to Wall Street.
Speaker 1: So she got out of physics or is she--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean she wanted, I mean she's doing, she's doing kind of technology prognostication for the third world, in fact, for developing countries.  So it's still associated with technology and, you know, you have to understand the field, you know, to be able to do the job that she does.  But she's not, you know, a hardcore engineer.  No, she's not doing engineering.
Speaker 1: And it says another student's working on electrical engineering project which is a device that measures electrical signals in the body and combines the functions of electrocardiograms, encephalograms and other medical tests into one box of circuits and wires.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Wow, interesting, yeah, that was, that was Andy, (unclear) another Nigerian.  And he's about to become a professor at CMU at Carnegie Mellon [University].  He was an electronics guy, so we were developing electronics for, for different types of signals that you could record from the body, brain, heart, neurons, you name it.
Speaker 1: Another student, another graduate student's working on sensory, a sensory substitution project.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Remember that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that's, you know, there, what they were looking at is, you know, so if I'm blind, and I want to go and purchase my favorite box of cereal, how can I tell the difference between if I'm holding a box of Frosted Flakes versus a box of Corn Flakes.  And so what we do is we have cameras, if you will, in the hand, so when they hold it, that camera is also taking a picture of the box itself, and it stimulates the body with different displays, (unclear) tactile displays that will transmit that signal to the skin, and then the person has to learn the difference between, you know, Frosted Flakes and Corn Flakes in order to be able to, you know, find their favorite cereal.
Story_ID: 22086
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What are some of the other things you're working on now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so a few other things.  I mean I continue to work on the spinal cord injury stuff, right, that's a big part of what we do.  Another big part of what we do is, we try to understand how does the brain decide what to look at when somebody, you know, when you walk into a room or somebody gives you a picture.  How does your eyes move around those pictures and decide, I look here, there, there, there, you know, those are, that's called, essentially, overt attention, is how do we direct our attention to important parts of a scene.  Or, to take it in a different direction, suppose you are a fisherman and you are looking for signs of, you know, of bone fish on flats.  How can you tell the difference between those little ripples at the corner over there that are fish, whereas those little ripples over here is just the wind blowing over, across the ocean?  What makes, what gives us that ability to distinguish those?  You know, or in the case of a, of a military scenario, you know, you are walking to, you know, into the forest and you see something in the corner of your eyes that is something to be worried about, you know, that is an enemy or something like that.  You know, how do you tell the difference between what is camouflage, yet, you can see it as not natural versus something that is natural.  So those are the, that's attention.  That's how we direct our direction.  So I'm working on understanding how that happens in the brain and then building machines that can also do it in similar way.  We work, actually, another big part of our work now is on ultrasound, you know, trying to build better ultrasound devices that can look inside the body and see fine details.  So, you know, we are familiar with looking at the baby in the tummy, but it's never really that clear.  Even the 4D ones are not, so how do you make that a sharper image.  Or, you know, if you are trying to use invitro fertilization to, you know, to direct, you know, to implant an egg in the womb, how do you do that in a most effective way under ultrasonic guidance and things like that.  So we also work on that.  We work on, yeah, on understanding how humans recognize objects.  You know, how do I know that that's a computer mouse, that's a phone, that's a cup.  What is that process and how do we, again, build computers that will do it as well as, as humans.  Dah, dah, dah, yeah, we worked on the flying robots as well, on understanding how motion of movements translates into controls, you know, like for, think about a fly.  Have you noticed that if you try to hit a fly, you almost can't.  You know, if you go fast, the fly always gets away, but the way to hit a fly is to go slowly, and you can get it.  And the reason is that, it's really good at detecting fast motion, not very good at detecting slow motion.  And so we're trying to build a similar kind of capabilities in little helicopters, you know, little hovercrafts that will be able to, you know, behave as insects in a room and fly around without crashing and things like that.  Yeah, I mean those are some examples of the types of projects that, that we work on.
Speaker 1: Okay, and there's a note here about the spinal implant project with Vivian Mushahwar.
Speaker 2: Vivian Mushahwar, yeah.
Speaker 1: Mushahwar, yeah.  Okay, so, now, in 2011, you're the director of, you became the director of the Whiting School's Computational Sensory Motor Systems Lab.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, that, no (laughter), that's incorrect.
Speaker 1: That's not true.
Speaker 2: No, no, I am the director of that lab, but that's my lab.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's your--
Speaker 2: That's been the case since '98' [1998].
Speaker 1: All right, it's something, it's not anything new.  It's just--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  That's--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) on our--okay, but that's the name of your lab?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And one, I know I had a question that, one of the heroes of Johns-Hopkins was Dr. Vivian Thomas.  Did you ever meet him, well, not doctor.  He was never a doctor, but Vivian Thomas.
Speaker 2: He's the guy with the heart thing.  No, I never met him, but I saw the film on HBO (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know very little about him.  I, I mean I interact with the med, with the medical side of things, right, with doctors, but mainly, actually, I was working with a surgeon at one time where we were trying to figure out how to prevent objects from being left behind after surgery, like how can, you know, because sometimes people are going home with, you know, with a, a scissors inside, you know, and things like that.  So those are the kinds of things that I've worked on.  And I worked on medical robotics, how, you know, how do you measure how good a surgeon is so that you can make all surgeons, you know, as good as the best and things like that.  So, but, no, but I haven't come into contact with the gentleman.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what are you working on now that you think is, I mean of all these other things, everything you've talked about, what do you think, what's the most important project that you're working on, do you think?
Speaker 2: I think for me, it is the spinal cord injury project.  I mean I think that's the one thing that potentially can have the biggest impact on humanity because it's not just the question of, you know, I'm solving one problem about spinal cord injuries, but if we can do that and do that well, it has other implications and other injuries like these, you know, with a lot of our soldiers coming back with missing limbs, coming with, you know, brain trauma and, you know, and, and so on, with missing parts of the brain, can we find ways to, to use electronics to restore those functionalities and to the point where one, hopefully, will not be able to tell the difference between how they were initially and what they are now.  So it's using, you know, using electrical engineering and electronics as a means of augmenting human capabilities and solving human problems from a medical perspective.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that's very important.
Story_ID: 22087
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a personal ambition that you wanna reach that--
Speaker 2: Personal ambition?
Speaker 1: --or are you in Heaven already?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, of course, I mean we always have personal ambition.  No, I mean, I, you know, my personal ambition is to be able to retire when I'm 50 (laughter) and to be able to do whatever I want at that point and not have to worry about, about anything.  But, no, I mean the bottom line is that it's really more a function of, you know, continuing my research, finding new problems to solve and, you know, continue to influence young minds and hopefully, they go on to become professors in their own right and develop their own ideas and their own thoughts, and, you know, and continue to populate the world of science.  I try very hard to have as a, a diverse lab.  You will find probably, my lab is probably one of the most diverse in terms of African Americans and other folks in, in the university, I'm almost willing to bet, you know, percentage wise, you know.  And I try to be as involved with, you know, with K through 12 education as I can as well.  You know, I have now been involved with a number of projects where we've tried, we've outreached heavily to high schools and, you know, in middle schools and tried to bring 'em into the lab, and, you know, teach and give 'em new places where they can learn science and math and technology.  I think, yeah, I think those things are, are important.  As scientists, we're not just, you know, for me anyway, I mean that's not, maybe it isn't the case for everyone, it's not just about a discovery in the lab, but it's how you translate that discovery in the lab into effectuating life, society, overall.  And that's the thing that's really, I hope to try to continue to do.
Story_ID: 22088
Speaker 1: Okay, is there any dream project you foresee humans being able to do before you're--no, while you're still here?
Speaker 2: (Chuckle) Dream projects.  So I guess the one is, you know, is always, you know, to build a machine that can reason like humans, right.  That, you know, so, so we saw Watson, you know, on 'Jeopardy'.  So here's the, here's the trick about Watson, right.  So Watson was the equivalent of 3,000 humans trying to answer the questions all at once.  If you look at how much energy Watson was consuming.  So obviously, if I, you know, if he was, if Watson was competing against 3,000 other people, then I would say that would be a fairer match, right.  But I would like to make a Watson that operates on the same kind of energy consumption as we do, which is 25 watts of power for our brain and, you know, like a hundred watts for our whole body.  I mean that, that is incred, that's just so absolutely incredible.  So that's the, you know, the future, I think of robotics, you know, in terms of, you know, trying to build robots that really work the way that biology works, you know, and compute the way that biology computes and understands the way that biology understands.  You know, that's really been the thing that, you know, I would like to see happen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's why you have the open roof in your hall that (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Climb up (laughter).
Speaker 1: Lightening bolts and all that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 22089
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Do people react like that when you talk about that kind of thing or do they act with wonder or fear when they talk about--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --artificial intelligence, replicating what the human can do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I think there's a little bit of both.  I mean I think that, you know, the 'Terminator' has painted us into a really bad corner (laughter), you know, where, you know, he went because of his single-minded determined to kill this one person, you know.  But the point is that, those are, you know, Hollywood's extremes on, you know, on what could happen.  And say with, you know, with Mary Shelley's 'Frankenstein,' I mean it's, you know, it's, again, it's an extreme, you know, of, of what could happen if humans really, quote, unquote "played God", you know, as the saying goes.  But at the end of the day, we are, I don't, it is such a hard problem, you know, of trying to even understand what the brain does before you can even replicate it.  So, yes, so while that's a big dream of maybe one day we'll be able to replicate how well the brain works.  But the reality of it is that it's gonna take a lot before we get there.  I think, I think something like what goes on--you're familiar with 'Blade Runner,' right, the movie?
Speaker 1: (No audible response).
Speaker 2: Yeah, what happened there where it was more like a cloning of humans, right, I mean the replicates were clones, right.  They were not robots.  That's more likely to happen, you know, than the kind of stuff that I'm talking about.  The kind of stuff that I'm talking about ends up going into making Siri, you know, answer your questions, (laughter), you know, or, you know, how you have a personal assistant robotic, robot in your house, that when you say, "Please make me a cup of coffee.  I need to, you know, I need to sit here because I'm tired", it will actually make you a cup of coffee and not trip upon itself when it brings it to you.  That's what, that's what I'm talking about it's getting towards.  It's not getting towards, you know, the, the Terminators of the world, no (laughter).
Story_ID: 22090
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so today, when you look back at the things you've done to this point, and you're still young.  You're still working, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy, wow, that's a tough one.  I mean I don't have a legacy yet (laughter).  Well, I mean, look, I mean I guess I could say, you know, where have I made the most impact, you know, as a scientist.  And, yeah, it's in this not, it's this place where neuro science and electrical engineering come together to attempt to solve problems, and particular, the places where I've made contributions have been, you know, like I said the first neurocomputer ever built, you know, and that models the brain, something that we did, understanding how the visual system works, you know, in building silicon brain, artificial version of eyes and the retina, that's something that we've done as well.  That's, that's, that is important.  This model of the spinal cord, you know, and being able to reproduce in silicon models of the spinal cord that can actually reproduce walking in a, you know, in a little, intact animal, that, that nobody has done before.  So, so it's like, yeah, it's where we, we translate knowledge from biology from neuroscience into silicon implementation and electrical engineering implementation and then uses it to effectuate some change in humans.  So, well, humans in the long term, but right now, on animal prep.  That I think is a line that I, that if you ask somebody what has Ralph done, that will be where they'll say my contributions have been.
Story_ID: 22091
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me ask you about, oh, let me ask you this.  If today, when you look back at everything you've done so far, is there anything that you'd do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I always thought that, you know, if I, if I knew then what I know now, I'd probably go into economics.  And I'll tell you why.  Economics is a, is a very quantitative science, right, I mean it's a science at the end of the day, right.  Yes, it's a very fuzzy science in the sense that the systems are so big and so difficult to understand and so difficult to know how to tweak to make 'em work, right.  But that's probably "the" most important  part of human life.  You know, everything that we hear about, there's a human development in terms of, you know, moving, you know, moving human development forward.  It doesn't happen if there is not a really strong economic background for it.  If you want to, you know, to effectuate change on a global scale, you know, that happens again at the, you know, at the realm of economics, you know.  So I think that that would probably be what I would recast myself as.  I would probably go, still do a physics degree in undergraduate, but then for grad school, I would try to go--oh, and mathematics, physics and math.  And then I would, for grad school, I'd probably try to go into a, into an economics program.  And, you know, with the hope of, you know, like working for places like the World Bank or, you know, a (unclear) where you can make changes that really, you know, effectuates the world and hopefully, you know, solve developmental problems in Africa, you know, in Asia and really try to, to make a big difference.
Speaker 1: Do you think one economist can make as much change, I guess, for humanity as one physicist?
Speaker 2: So the one physicist that does make the change probably does it, you know, if they're lucky (laughter), you know what I mean?  I, in the sense that, you know, your research happens to have been there and you've made the, that discovery that leads forward to different things.  I think an economist, you know, has the potential, especially, like, you know, if you think about, you know, the head of the central banks of different countries.  There are, what, 200 and something countries, right.  So these guys who are head of these national, central banks, I think can make massive impact for their nations, okay.  So there's a lot of, I think there's a lot of opportunity for economics to make, to make impact.  I mean even at the U.N. [United Nations] or, you know, these big, you know, these big agencies.  But, you know, my, my leaning is still, you know, towards development of, you know, of Africa and how do we get Africa to be, you know, to where it should be in, you know, in the world, you know?  How do we solve these conflict problems and, you know, in a way that everybody feels that they're part of the system as opposed to everybody trying to cut a piece and take it their way, you know.  So that's the kind of thing that, you know, that I think one can make a big difference in.  And the other part of an economist, I think, is that it port, one of the most portable degrees you can have.  You can go anywhere and work.  As a scientist, you know, if there isn't a major scientific infrastructure where you are, what do you do?  Yeah, in America, it works.  In Europe, it works, some places in South America, some places in Asia.  That's it, you know.
Story_ID: 22092
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: So, I mean I guess my, you know, my major hope is that we, you know, we want to be able to participate more effectively in the economy, right.  I mean and the way to do that is, is to get as good an education as possible.  And the fact that, you know, that schools continue to fail, the fact that the representation of blacks, you know, in the higher education is still very much at a minimum.  We're not representative of the population chunk that we are, you know, in leadership positions.  I mean, you know, now we happen to have a present who is black, which is wonderful, but that's still the elite of the elite of the elite.  It's a very small piece, right, it's not, you know, the global swarth of, you know, of society.  And I hear folks talk about how, you know, like this, here, we're in the law firm in Skadden.  And, you know, if you ask how many partners there are in this law firm, I don't think they'll many (laughter), maybe a handful, maybe.  And Skadden is what, like a top three law firm in the country or something.  So I mean it's that kind of thing where, you know, accessibility and, and the ability to, you know, to get to the point where people give you the benefit of the doubt, independently of whether you're black or not.  That's the thing that I would like to see happen.  I think, you know, how do you, you know, how do you get to the point where you walk into the room with the same credibility as other races, you know.  You know, that, and that comes out of proving over and over again that you have the education, and you have, you know, you've accomplished things along the way.  And you are among the top SAT testers, and, you know, or, you know, you are in the spelling bee and you can win the spelling bee as well.  You know, all those places where academic prowess are demonstrated, we have to be, you know, we have to keep trying to get there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my sense.
Story_ID: 22093
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us something about your family.  I hear that one family related item is that you keep at least one night free each week for a patent attorney.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.  That's my wife, but this has changed (laughter).  This has changed because we have a two and a half year old.  So ever since Blaze, who is my son, came, came into being about 2010, no more time to go watching movies (laughter) and so we try.  I mean we have, my mother is my, is our childcare provider.  And she's wonderful.  I mean he's a beautiful, well-rounded child, you know, and fully inquisitive and friendly and so on.  And that's all because of my mother.  My mother talks to him--he has been talking since he was like, what, 10 months, you know.  And now he's just chatterbox, and it's because of her because she never stops talking to him.  It's like dah, dah, dah.  So, yeah, so anyway, so he's been a big part of our life over the last two and a half years, and as a result, things have changed slightly.  So our, you know, our Friday movie has been replaced by Friday going to, you know, to get a pizza together, the three of us (laughter), you know, and having, you know, a Friday dinner or something like that.
Story_ID: 22094
Speaker 1: So we were talking about family and I just wanna ask you if you, you mentioned your mother and you said your stepfather passed a few years ago.  Do you ever, when was the last time went back to Seychelles?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was there oh, about a month ago (laughter), a little bit more than a month, but, yeah.  I was, I was in Europe, and I decided that I'd go visit, for a visit.  It was a very short visit.  It was only for 10 days, but it was good to see the family.  And my favorite island is this island called Bird Island, which is in the middle, well, literally, in the middle of nowhere, literally, with, it's--you can walk around it in about an hour, like you can circumnavigate it.  It's a Coral (unclear) island so it's flat, just beaches all the way around.  And there's a very rustic little hotel that's on it.  And that's it, you know, and the people who support the hotel.  So I was there for six days doing absolutely nothing.  It was excellent.
Speaker 1: Would you recommend it for other people too?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, that's my favorite island in the Seychelles.  I mean the main island is, you know, the bustle and hustle of, of modern life or life, right.  But this is like getting away from it all.  And somebody, in fact, I read an email yesterday.  I didn't respond to something, and I was saying, I'm sorry, I didn't respond to this, but I was literally on a deserted island (laughter).  I mean that's exactly where I was.  That's, if you want that, that's the best place for it.
Story_ID: 22095
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, is there anything we haven't talked about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, yeah, we talked about family, we talked about my wife, we talked about my son, which, you know, is very important to me.  We talked about Maryland, about Hopkins. Yeah, I mean, yeah, I think it's fine.  I mean I--oh, I guess the only other thing is I did spend some time in South Africa at the University of Cape Town.  And that was, that was very interesting.  I mean to me, you know, I always wanted to, you know, to give back to Africa and to be part, you know, to participate in the process of development in Africa.  And so I spent a sabbatical in 2006 there for a semester, for nine months actually.  And it was, yeah, it was a like, you know, kind of mind altering experience in the sense that, you know, it really showed me that, you know, that Africa has, you know, has, you know, world-class science, you know, science infrastructure as well as needing significant developments (laughter) in other places.  I mean, you know, it kind of covers both gamut's, right, I mean, you know, they have really bright students.  I brought two students from there to my lab.  They just graduated actually, just finished this year, two of the brightest kids I've had in my lab ever, you know.  And, now, one is going back home.  The other one is gonna be doing a post-doc in Singapore and partly spending time in Paris, you know, and they get to, you know, to go and study the kind of the things that they've wanted to and so on.  So, yeah, so it's, it's, it was a very cool experience.  And this was part of the, a Fulbright Fellowship that I had been awarded.  And also, I spent a, I spent time also in Australia working at University of Western Sydney where, again, doing research with, with collaborators there that I've known for a long time.  And that also gives me access to other types of, of work that may, that I may not be able to have access locally because there's different expertise, different, you know, different people.
Speaker 1: When was the trip to Australia?
Speaker 2: Oh, I go all the time, like I'm supposed to go in August.
Speaker 1: Okay, so ongoing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's ongoing, yeah.  It's a three-year appointment as an eminent visiting math scholar.  Yeah, I mean I, yeah, I tell you, my job is really cool.  I get to collaborate with people all over the world and go visit people.  And as I said, I just came back from Alberta visiting with Vivian Mushahwar.  Before in May, no, in April, I was in Italy, working with a group out of Zurich, you know, that was having a conference there. I get to go to Australia a lot.  I have a partial appointment at a university in Singapore, the National University of Singapore.  I have collaborators in Paris.  I'll be spending a year in Paris next year.  And so it's a really interesting, you know, capabilities of going all around the world and working with different scientists and so on.  So that's a good part of this life.
Story_ID: 22096
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, primarily, I'd like to be remembered for being a good human being.  I think that's the number one thing.  I don't, you know, there are many people in science who are very good scientists, but not very good humans.  You know, they do not necessarily treat their students well.  They do not necessarily care about the other aspect of, of our responsibilities as scientists in terms of, you know, like K through 12 education or, you know, promoting STEM [Science, Technology, Engineering and Math] in the black community or whatever or it doesn't have to be in the black community.  But in some community.  So I think that, that, you know, of my scientific achievements, I would like to make some good ones there, obviously, you know, to have, you know, some recognition for having made some good contributions.  But I think most of all though I'd like to, I'd like to be, be considered to have been a very good man towards my students, toward giving them the tools to go on for their own career as well as having made a contribution to the growth of education overall and, hopefully, promoting, you know, the roles of African Americans in science and society in general.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Those are my kind of thoughts.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 22097
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead and tell us about this photograph?
Speaker 2: Okay, so this, I think I was like around, this was around 1990.  So I was, what, just 23.  And this is an old childhood friend, Germaine.  This is the guy that I used to go to see all the movies with on Sundays.  And he's, continues to be a friend for a long time.
Speaker 1: So this must have been a New Year's Eve party in the Seychelles with my wife in the middle, and my mother-in-law on the right.  You know, we went there for the holidays.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: So again, family, so the gentleman in the yellow shirt, that's Professor Heard that I've talked a lot about, as being very influential in my development as a scientist.  The gentle--the woman in the green hat is my wife, my mom is in the red hat, and my mother-in-law in the green shirt, looks like a party (laughter).
Speaker 2: And that's a funny one there as well.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is when I was in school in England.  This is in boarding school.  This is just a group of us just goofing around, a bunch of students, you know, through a doorway (laughter).  And I'm one, I think this is me right there.
Speaker 2: So like I was saying, I was an artist when I was high school and middle, and high school (unclear), so this is, I was using kind of a blow torch--blow, how do you call, a blow spray--.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Stem?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but one that you do with your mouth to spray paint, and make like, before you get to, what's the word I'm looking for?  Those really, intricate paints that you do with a brush, but it sprays it out, but, you know, but you can do it with your hands as well.  This is kind of my newer version of it.  I've forgotten the name of it.
Speaker 1: This is, yeah, you know, (unclear) (laughter), and you're right.  This is a friend's wedding, but it kind of shows my mom very young.  I think this is also like around 1990 timeframe.  My mom is next to me in this other friend's wedding.
Speaker 2: So this is kind of an outside shot of my school in England.  It was snowy that day (laughter) as you can see.  There must have been a fire alarm.  That's why everybody was outside (laughter).
Speaker 1: Airbrush.
Speaker 2: Airbrush, that's it (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is my friend and I.  Actually, he's also from Seychelles, so he's an example--he's Asian, but he's from the Seychelles.  He was also going to the school there with me, and we're just running around, taking some pictures.
Speaker 2: So this is my mom and my stepdad, Herman, and this is their day that they had their wedding.
Speaker 1: So this is outside where the picture of my mom and my dad was taken.  This is our house in the Seychelles.  This is a shot of it, looking up at it.
Speaker 2: I love cooking, and this is just shot of me, probably in my mom's house in Delaware at the time, doing something in the kitchen.
Speaker 1: And this is my stepdad in his full Chief Master Sergeant uniform.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Can you give us his name again?
Speaker 1: Yes, his name is Herman Cummings.
Speaker 2: This is my wife and I at, going to some, I think it was a wedding somewhere, Shamita. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: S-H-A-M-I-T-A. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: So I'm a big diver.  My wife and I both are.  So this was on one of the islands in the Seychelles.  This is called Dennis Island, which is also a beautiful island.  And we're about to go diving or we had come back from diving, saw some pretty big sharks that day.
Speaker 1: And this is our wedding in Atlanta.  So I talked about Herman, I talked about my Uncle Marcus who was a Ph.D. mathematician.  He's the one in the back, the third one from the right, I guess, or left.  The gentleman next to him is Masatorshe Nishimora (ph.) who is my fellow grad student at Penn [State University], a good friend of mine.  Then the lady next to him is a family member who lives in Alabama.  And then my wife and then her husband, and then good family friend, next to me, and then my mom and my brother next to them.
Speaker 2: And this is more on my father's side, my biological father's side of the family.  So the--
Speaker 1: Go left to right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's me, from left and my aunt, Juanita, is, is the next, the lady, then my cousin, Lee, who lives in Hawaii, and then my wife, my mother-in-law and her husband, and my auntie's husband.
Speaker 1: And this is when I got my, my PhD at Penn [State University].  I think I was the first PhD in the engineering school, if I'm not mistaken, apparently at that time, definitely in the electrical engineering department.  And I'm willing to say probably in the engineering school too.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Thank you very much.
