Story_ID: 24864
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: William Joseph Evans, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, capital J-O-S-E-P-H, capital E-V-A-N-S.
Speaker 1: Now, I know there's a story behind your name, a kind of unexpected story.  Can you kind of tell it for us?
Speaker 2: So, this is just, this family lore (laughter).  So my father's name is Billy Joe Evans.  He's a chemist, he's retired from the University of Michigan as a chemist.  And one of my uncles said that, I believe when my father was going to, I think Macalester College [St. Paul, Minnesota], that they wanted him to clean up his name and he would need to change his name to William Joseph Evans to conform more to societal standards.  That's a family, family lore, I only heard a few years ago.  So.  But the name William has been in the family for quite some time.  My maternal grandfather was named William J. Sampson, and my paternal grandfather was named Will Evans, as I knew him, although there may be, also be a story behind that.  I've heard his name might have been Niles Roundtree, previous to that.
Speaker 1: Right, right, that's true, that's true.  Now, well, we'll talk about him later, but I just wanted to establish that your name is really the long version of your father's name--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --which people would consider a contracted version of William Joseph--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, it's interesting.  So, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born September 16th, 1965 in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a physicist at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory [Livermore, California].  My title is group leader. So I head a group of about eleven staff, mostly staff scientists, I think about six staff scientists, three post-docs, some technicians.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November the 5th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at my home in Oakland, California.
Story_ID: 24865
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I'm sure I do, but (laughter), wow, what would my favorite food be?  Probably cookies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like all times of the year.  California winters are very mild, so winter is not too bad out here.  I like the bright sunshine, but I don't like the heat so I, I guess maybe fall, so, when you still have the sunshine from summer, but the coolness of the coming winter.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  I--
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: So, I, I have affinity for Malcolm X's, "By any means necessary" phrase.
Story_ID: 24866
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But we'll start with your mother.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's name is Adye Bel Evans, and her maiden name was Sampson.  Spelling is capital A-D-Y-E, capital B-E-L, S-A-M-P-S-O-N, that's her maiden name, Evans, E-V-A-N-S is her married name.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born December 7, 1941, so that's Pearl Harbor Day.  She was born in San Antonio, Texas.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family.  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: So I can't go very far back.  My mother was an only child, so she doesn't have any siblings.  Her father was an only child.  His name was William J. Sampson.  My mother's, my maternal grandfather--grandmother, so my mother's mother, her name was also Adye Bel Washington.  She had two siblings, no three siblings.  And, unfortunately, I can't call their, I'm not sure what their names were, but as kids, we called them Uncle Buddy, Aunt Waitie (ph.) and Aunt Mel.  Now, let's see, so none of them had children.  So she didn't have any cousins, maybe first cousins.  I think one generation further back, there's a large branch of her family that relocated to California.  So I've got many, so she has many, I believe, second cousins who live in Southern California.  And that, that family's actually got a very broad, rich family tree.  We keep in touch with them.
Speaker 1: Are they Sampson's?
Speaker 2: They're, they're not Sampson's, no.  They're, so, so most of those, most of them are female, so they adopted their married names.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The last name on that group is More, M-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my father's side is very different.  He had, I believe seven to eight brothers and sisters, oh--
Speaker 1: Let's not go into him yet.  I just wanted to ask about, now, did your mother grow up in San Antonio [Texas]?
Speaker 2: My mother grew up in San Antonio.  So, in fact, the day she was born was Pearl Harbor Day.  And her father was serving in the military at the time.
Speaker 1: And, now, did she have any stories about growing up in San Antonio?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, so at the time that she grew up in Texas, blacks were not allowed to attend the Texas schools.  So she tells stories of how her mother and father--her mother and father were educators.  Her father was a school principal when he passed away.  But they would go to Southern Cal--they would drive to Southern California to go to, I believe USC [University of Southern California] for training as teachers.  She would tell stories about how, when they were driving from San Antonio to California, they really couldn't stop anywhere.  So they'd load up a cooler full of food and drive across, you know, the desert basically, stopping, I guess for gas.  But, you know, it was certainly not a pleasant time in, to be African American, even in, you know, what now are seen as progressive areas in the U.S.
Speaker 1: Now, so your mother's parents were educators and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --they, how far back, I guess, do the educators go in the family?  I mean, or what was the first generation to go to college, do you know?
Speaker 2: So, that, I don't know.  I know that both her parents went to college, although I can't tell you where they went.  And beyond, I don't really know the family history.
Speaker 1: Now, what were her parents' names?
Speaker 2: Her father's name was William Jae, so J-A-E, Sampson.  Her mother's name was Adye Bel Washington Sampson, as a married, her married, last name.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know where your grandfather and grandmother went to school?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you know that they studied in Southern California?
Speaker 2: I know that they went for, I think, post-graduate training in Southern--at, I know that her father went USC [University of Southern California].  I believe her mother probably also went.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, your mother went to college too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, she went to Spelman College--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And just back to your grandfather, he was a principal of a school in Texas?
Speaker 2: Yes, so my maternal grandfather was, well, I know that when he passed he was a principal of a school.  I suspect he was also a teacher and probably worked his way up through the, the ranks to principal.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you remember the name of the school?
Speaker 2: The high school, no, not at all.
Speaker 1: So this would have been a segregated school in Texas?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yes, yes, very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay, it probably wasn't too many in San Antonio [Texas], I wouldn't guess in those days because of the black population being so small, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, so we would go to San Antonio when I was a child, but, you know, a child's memory tends to focus on the location where they were most frequently.  So I remember being at my great aunt and uncle's houses, but I don't really have any recollection of San Antonio beyond that two-block area.  But it was certainly a segregated school.  I mean my mother tells many stories about the impacts of segregation on her life in San Antonio.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother have any stories about moving, going to Atlanta [Georgia] at Spelman?
Speaker 2: Not that I recall.  So Georgia was, again a very segregated state.  So, no stories come to mind.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there a--I know your parents met at, when she was in Atlanta [Georgia], right, at Spelman?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  So both of my parents were, my father was in college at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  My mother was at Spelman College.
Story_ID: 24867
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna stop here and then go to your father's side.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Then we'll have 'em meet (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Billy Joe Evans.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: So he was born August 18th, 1942 in Atlanta [Georgia]--no, no, in Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but he grew up in Atlanta, right?
Speaker 2: No, no, he grew up in Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Grew up in Macon, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: As I understand it, Macon, the distinction Macon had, at least at that time, was it was a major junction point for railroads.
Speaker 1: That's right, and his father worked for the railroads.
Speaker 2: His father worked for the railroad.
Speaker 1: And now, here comes a story now.  Tell us the story, well, first of all, how far back can you trace the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: So, I can only go back as far as my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know my father has spoken about his maternal grandmother.  So my paternal great grandmother, but I never met her.  All I know of her is through stories.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, your grandfather has an interesting story because he had another name at first.  He was a railroad man, fireman, right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for the railroad, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Right, so, so that's--so again, this is my understanding from family lore.  So he was a fireman, meaning that he was responsible for getting the coal into a steam engine.  When steam engines transferred over to diesel electric, it was actually a very nice job.  I think they still needed the firemen, but you weren't there doing the heavy labor of shoveling coal.  My understanding was he, he went by the name, he had the name Niles Roundtree, and lived in, I believe in Mississippi.  And my understanding is that those firemen jobs were very attractive now, and so people wanted to get African American out of those jobs.  And so there was some incident and someone either got hurt or killed, I don't know.  And he left Mississippi and relocated to, to Georgia and took the name Will Evans.
Speaker 1: Right, I think your father says, it was--that we talked to week before last, he said it was actually a shoot-out at some point--
Speaker 2: Wow, yes.
Speaker 1: And Niles Roundtree had to, had to shoot a white man--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --which, but the railroad stood by him, in the changing of his name and keeping his job--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: -- and they moved him to another place.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, which is interesting because I'd--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, I mean who would guess the railroad would stick by you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's, I think he probably was good at his job (laughter), and so that was, there was value in that.
Speaker 1: And so, at any rate, he changed his name from Niles Roundtree to Will--
Speaker 2: To Will Evans.
Speaker 1: --Evans.  All right, and that's how your father becomes an Evans?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, but your dad was raised in Macon, and did he have any other stories of growing up he shared with you that you remember?
Speaker 2: Yes, so my father, so Niles Roundtree had had a family before he began the second family.  So my father had a much older sister.  Her name was Leonare (ph.) Ford.  And I believe she was actually an established adult when he was growing up.  My father, his, you know, full siblings, he had I believe seven or eight brothers and sisters.  One sister, his half sister, who was much older, and then I think six to seven brothers.  They lived in a relatively small house.  I think it's not, it would be called a shack.  He talks about living in a place called the alley.  I think he, his father, I think earned a pretty good living as a, as a railroad fireman, but life still wasn't easy.  He talks about going to a farm, working on a farm in Mississippi quite a bit.  I think early on in school, he, teachers actually called him a bad egg at some point, but he kind of overcame a lot of those limitations and went on to a very successful career.  There are many stories about, so many of the stories I have heard that relate to racism and, and those types of experiences primarily focus on his experiences, you know, as a, in graduate school and beyond.  From his youth, I don't, I don't know many stories of incidents that took place, but it was Georgia, (laughter) you know.  I don't know, there were cross burnings as far as I know in front of his house, but I'm sure it was, it was not a pleasant experience, but I think he excelled nonetheless sin that environment.
Story_ID: 24868
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, so your dad was able to go to Morehouse [College]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --College.  I know he cited a number of mentors he had that got him to, and their names are in the other interview.  But, yeah, but he had some help--he had talent.  They recognized him, he's a talented person, young man.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, I believe he was an early admissions student at Morehouse.  I believe he went to Morehouse when he was sixteen or seventeen years old.  So he went in very early.  He had some teachers, and I can't call their names, that I think in his schooling, both of my parents are, feel that their schooling played an important role in their excelling, that there were teachers--schools were segregated so that many of the teachers were African American teachers.  These teachers took a special, special interests in them and supported their advancing their studies and moving forward.  So, you know, while they're, I often read my son a book about Martin Luther King [Jr.], and it's this little board book.  But it talks about how Martin Luther King's school was dilapidated and run down and the school for the white kids was, you know, pristine with brand new toys.  And it says that Martin Luther King, you know, was, was an avid student and wanted the best resources.  And so at the end of the book, it says, you know, after--as a result of his work, you know, he got access to resources, but at the same time, he may have lost the personal interest that his teachers took in--students may have lost the personal interests that teachers took into them, when the teachers were part of their community and had a vested interest in seeing these children excel.  So, both of my parents talk about the value of teachers they had in helping them to advance their careers.
Speaker 1: Right, that's a common observation too amongst that generation, that they talk about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, your father's at Morehouse.  Did, now, what about stories from Morehouse?  Do you remember any of his Morehouse stories?
Speaker 2: So mostly I remember stories about how my father, he was very focused on his studies.  He didn't do a lot of dating, but I think as he progressed in his dating, he began thinking about marriage, and he, I think his--so one of his main mentors was Dr., Dr. Henry McBay, a chemist at Morehouse.  I believe, so his stories were much more colorful than mine (laughter).  But I think Dr. McBay counseled him to focus on his studies and then finding a partner would take care of itself.  And I think there were some funny stories about how he finally met my mother and they dated, married in San Antonio and went off to graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think your father says that Dr. McBay advised against him getting married.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but he was determined (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, at any rate, so they got married in San Antonio [Texas]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and so your father, I think he moved on to graduate, he was going on to graduate school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think they were on their way to U-C [University of California] Berkley.  So he was, he was accepted at U-C Berkley, and I believe he met my mother, well, they went to my mother's hometown.  Unfortunately, her father had already passed away, but they got married, I believe in the backyard of his mother's home, of my mother's mother's home (laughter), and headed on off to U-C Berkley.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is in, about what year is this?  This is, say 19--
Speaker 2: This would probably be the early '60's [1960s], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm thinking, yeah.  So, your father would have come out of college at around--
Speaker 2: Around '61' [1961] or '62' [1962].
Speaker 1: Right, um-hum, right.  Okay, So, your father went on to University of Chicago [Illinois]  to work on his PhD, and then--
Speaker 2: Yes, so he went to U-C Berkley, and something happened at U-C Berkley.  I don't, I don't recall right now the details of it.  I think there was some sort of racial incident where the faculty weren't providing the same opportunities or something to the, to the African American students.  And I think my father decided this was a, a poor environment to try to excel and get a PhD and move on to do scientific research.  And so he went on, he moved on to the University of Chicago, I think within a year.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is the school that his mentor, Dr. McBay, had received his PhD from the University--
Speaker 2: Chicago.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, that sounds right.  I don't know for sure, though, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, you know, so he was able to, there's a more helpful environment than--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Story_ID: 24869
Speaker 1: --than Berkley.  Okay, so, so this is where you're born.  You're born in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes, so I was born in Chicago while my parents were in graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I also have a brother, well, I have a brother and sister, but my brother is passed away, but they were also born in Chicago.  They were twins.  My father finished school in Chicago.  I believe my mother went to Rosary College and got a Masters in Library Science.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And then my father, I think his first position was at University of, well in Winnipeg, Manitoba [Canada] at a university.  I don't recall what the name of the university was.  I do remember pictures at least of snow that looked like it was ten feet tall.  I guess we were there for, I don't know, for a year or two.  He then went to Washington, D.C.  I believe he had a position at either Howard [University] or an association with the National Bureau of Standards which is now called the National Institute of Standards.  One story I remember from that area is my--so he must have been at Howard because I believe he was teaching a class.  And I think he was watching the three of us kids that day.  And he started teaching the class, and the three of us decided to pop up our old lunch boxes.  We had these little bus and fire truck lunch boxes.  And I think that cases a little bit of a disruption in the classroom.  But it was fine.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is, so, yeah, I think your father was working with Warren Henry, Dr. Warren Henry?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, Warren Henry was on the faculty at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], who had a very productive career studying magnetic materials.
Speaker 1: Now, are your brothers older than you or younger?
Speaker 2: So, my brother and sister are younger than me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're sixteen months younger.  My brother has passed away, but my sister is, she lives in Delaware.  She's a deputy warden at a prison.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: She has a PhD in criminal justice.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were born in '65' [1965] and--
Speaker 2: I was born in '65' [1965].  They were in '67' [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay, so two years behind you.  So when you grew up, the household consisted of you and your twin brother and sister--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and your parents, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 24870
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, so your father takes a position at University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when you're about five years old.  This is about--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's about right.
Speaker 1: --1970, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yep, yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: All right, and so, and there, he becomes a distinguished scientist at the University of Michigan.  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I believe he started in geology and then I don't if, he eventually, is in the chemistry department.  I don't know the mechanism of how that occurred.  And that he's fully tenured and so he spends the remainder of his career there with, with brief periods, I think he did a one-year sabbatical at Morehouse [College] at one point.  One, it might have been L.A. University, actually, there was a one-year sabbatical at Phillips University in Marburg, Germany.  And there might have been another sabbatical interspersed in there some place.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you go to Germany with your father?
Speaker 2: Yes, so we all went to Germany in '76' [1976].  I was in the, I had just left the sixth grade.  I was going to the seventh grade.  And so we spent a year in Germany.  It was, we went to German schools, so the first, probably month was, challenging for kids who didn't speak German.  But we had a tutor, and somehow we picked it up.  And, in fact, I stayed on--my parents, so at the end of the sabbatical year, the school year in Germany hadn't ended.  And I wanted to finish the school year out.  So my parents and brother and sister went back, but I stayed with a German family to finish out that academic year.
Story_ID: 24871
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we always ask this question and we got back to the very beginning.  Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: There, so my childhood memories are blended with pictures.  So I remember this, I remember the big snow drifts in Canada.  But that's blended with a picture that we have of that, of that event.
Speaker 1: So you're not sure if it's a memory or--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure if it's a memory or picture.  Now, I do, when we lived in Washington, D.C., when we were probably four or so, my brother and I were playing one day, and he was chasing me, and I ran into the house, and when I put my hand out to reach for the door handle, it went through the glass.  And so I cut my arm.  So I remember that (laughter), but I was, you know, I was probably four, at least four if not five at that point.  So I have memory of that.  But I can't think of anything earlier than that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, so you grew up mainly in Ann Arbor [Michigan].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Can you describe the house you grew up in or were you in one house basically the whole time or--
Speaker 2: So initially, we lived in University housing.  And then my parents bought a house, probably--I'm trying to remember what grade I would have been in, probably in the third grade, they bought a house.  And so we moved.  University housing, we lived in what was called North Campus, which was displaced (unclear) from the main university campus.  Then we moved, probably in third grade to, to this house that was closer to the university.  So, I think it was a typical Midwestern house.  It was reasonably large.  I think there were three, it was three-story house.  We all had our own bedrooms, had an ample backyard.  I was never really an outdoor person, so I certainly did not like cutting the grass, (laughter) but--
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the house that your father lives in now?
Speaker 2: That's right, the house they live in now, yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is one of the few times we actually can visualize the house 'cause we were there like last month (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 24872
Speaker 1: All right, now, this is one question we always ask, and we always ask it like this.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: So Michigan is pretty, it rains quite a bit.  It's very green in Michigan.  It also snows quite a bit and so it's very white in Michigan.  I remember we, we, I think they're called cicadas, it's a bug that makes a really loud buzzing noise.  I remember that vividly from, from childhood.  So I remember, I remember things growing far more than I would like to 'cause I really didn't like doing yard work, and my parents would have us, our chores were to cut the grass and dig up weeds and things like that.  So those are some of the major sights.  We lived very close to the university so the sounds of students' parties and things kind of got in, got in my ear a little bit also.
Speaker 1: Now, the house is, when we were there, the house was like two doors from a frat house.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I think he said it used to be a sorority house at one time.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  So, in fact, there're fraternity houses on either side of the house, and there's another one diagonally back on, either left, on both the left and the right.  So, yeah, there were quite a few fraternity houses around.  I was, I think I tended to sleep pretty hard.  So while we were hear the university, the students making noise, I would go to sleep and sleep late.  So I do remember their, their, the music from their parties kind of seeping in, but that was kind of the extent of my experience with them.  What else of the sights and sounds?  So one thing that we enjoyed a great deal was--so my father [Billy Joe Evans] is a chemist.  He was a low-temp, he did some low-temperature experiments.  So he had, he would maintain a vat of liquid nitrogen in his office, in his laboratory.  And he would, we would often, we would often, because we lived so close to the university, we would walk--these were the days when kids still walked around alone (laughter), we would walk up to the university in the summertime and even during the school year to meet my parents.  He would often pour liquid nitrogen on the floor and the little bubbles of nitrogen would start vaporizing, and they'd bump around like they were an ameba.  And we would often stamp on those.  That was a particularly enjoyable activity we had.  You know, all the, so a lot of experiments he did used a lot of electronic controls.  So I was always kind of, I enjoyed looking at all the buttons and knobs and switches that were on his, (unclear) spectroscopy.  So they had to drive a radioactive source that was attached to a, acoustic transducer and that would move this source back and forth at very precise speeds.  So, as a result, he had a lot of control electronics.  So I was always kind of fascinated by that.  And I think that he also had something called a closed-cycle refrigerator.  So there was this little, I can't describe, it's hard to describe what it sounded like, but it was, kind of basically like a piston driving in the background, like a chic, chic, chic [sound].  So I remember that noise in his lab often.  That, those are the sounds that come to mind.  Smells, I've never been a big smell person.  I do remember, so there is one smell.  My father is from Macon, Georgia, and they had, I think he called it, it was G. Burns.  It was a glue factory or something.  And it would put an awful smell in the air.  And I can remember this smell of Macon, Georgia (laughter) to this day.  And I think he can remember it also.  So.
Speaker 1: I think he mentioned that when we interviewed him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: As one of his smells (laughter), brought up--
Speaker 2: So I'm not sure if the smell I associate with Georgia was, with Macon [Georgia], was G. Burns, but, you know, Georgia has this red soil, and it's, it's a much more, I think, lush kind of--at least that part of Georgia is much more lush with vegetation.  And I distinctly remember the smell of Macon.  I, it was very hot.  I, I didn't do well in the hot weather.  I would break out in rashes and things.  So I was not fond of those yearly visits to Georgia in the summer.  But those smells really do stand out.
Story_ID: 24873
Speaker 1: Now, you were right on the campus there, and, you know, the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] is famous for a lot of things, but--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: -- but football is one of the big things.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was football a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: No, so my parents were not, you know, I--they were more academics.  They really shunned the full football culture and felt that time was better spent doing other things.  There's a funny story that, so, this was back probably in the late '70's [1970s], very early '80's [1980s].  The University of Michigan had these big, big computers.  And so my brother and sister and I would go, and we would go to the computers.  And there was this game called Dungeons or something.  It was a very simple, graphic game where, I think you would type in, you were going to a Dungeon, and you could type in commands and ask questions.  And so we had gone to the University Computer Center, and we're playing this game.  And all these students were backed up.  This was apparently, probably close to the end of the semester.  And they were all trying to get their projects done.  And my brother and I were there, and I was mostly playing, and a student came and said, you know, you guys shouldn't be doing this right.  You should be, we need to use the computers and, and I think my response was, well, you guys should a done your homework in a more timely fashion.  I didn't, I was young, I was probably early teen at that time, but I wasn't gonna get off the computer 'cause I had just as much right to be there as they did.  So, I do remember that little, that interaction with the students, and I think as a result, I never considered going to the University of Michigan.  There's no doubt that there were exceptional students at the University of Michigan, but I'd seen the ones who didn't (laughter) apply themselves to their studies.  And so I was headed.  I wasn't gonna be a student there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, were there any other, other black children on the campus for you to interact with?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  So, I mean Ann Arbor [Michigan] had a pretty, it had a decent black population.  We went to, we went to an African American church.  We went to a Baptist church initially and then an African Methodist church later on.  There was a sizable black community.  So, I mean we certainly had playmates.  I was pretty focused on my studies when I was in high school, and didn't, I didn't really--I didn't go out.  I mean I interacted with my, my--with friends at school to the extent that, you know, we're doing homework together.  But I really didn't do a whole lot of socializing.  So, let's see.  Most of my, you know, of those friends, of the close friends who I was in classes with, they tended to be Asian or, or not many Caucasians, but, you know, the school was primarily Caucasian, so certainly I had a lot, I had Caucasian friends.  But I think one of, some of the closest friends I had were Asian.  Another guy was, I think Japanese and Russian, Japanese-Russian ethnicity.  They were, they were all born in the U.S.  But we had, we had close African American friends, but primarily, those were developed through, the attendance at church.
Story_ID: 24874
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you think that you were, your seriousness as a student was the result of just, is it more personality or, or rearing?
Speaker 2: I think it's personality because both my brother and sister were much more sociable.  They were much more social than I was, so I think it was just, largely, personality.  Now, my parents did, you know, they, they grew up during the era of segregation, of Jim Crow.  They grew up in the South.  So they often told us, you know, they gave us advice and guidance based on their experience.  So they were not terribly trusting of white culture because of what they'd experienced and probably continued to experience.  So, I think I certainly was wary of relationships too close with, with white classmates.  That's not to say we didn't get along fine.  But I did think, I do think I had some wariness.  I also, so the year we were in Germany was the year of seventh grade.  And that's kind of a big year.  You're going from elementary and you're being grouped with, you know, other kids around the school.  And there was, I think a one-week camp that kids would go into.  I think that it cements a lot of bonds between kids of that, at that age.  And I wasn't there for that.  I was off in Germany.  So when I came back, I knew all of my classmates from elementary school.  But I was, I think I may not have had the coupling to other students that I would have gotten had I attended that camp.  Now, I'm, in some regards happy (laughter) that I missed that camp because I think things worked out better for me in this way.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you think by not being a part of the--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --social dynamic, you probably faired better?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, the stories, you know, my parents told us a lot about these stories that you mentioned about Dr. [Henry] McBay saying focus on your studies.  So I think all of that contributed.  But it's also some (unclear) personality because my brother and sister have, you know, they're much more social than I was.  So, it's a combination of all these, all these influences.
Story_ID: 24875
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, where did you start school?  What was your first school?
Speaker 2: You're talking elementary school or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, first school (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So the first school I have a recollection of is Martin Luther King, Jr. Elementary School in Ann Arbor, Michigan.  And I believe I went to kindergarten and probably first, second and third grade there.  I don't know who my first and second grade teachers were.  I think, third grade, I had someone named Mrs. Craven, who--the classroom was kind of unique.  It was, we didn't have traditional desks.  It, my children now go to a Montessori school, and with that perspective, I think it had some Montessori influence because we had, instead of a desk, we had a box that we stored our school supplies in.  And you'd move those boxes around in the classroom, based on what you were studying at a particular time.  I then went to Angell School.  That change occurred when we moved, we moved from North Campus to the house that my parents now live in.
Speaker 1: It's called Angell School?
Speaker 2: Angell School, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they have any religious affiliation?
Speaker 2: No, no, I think, I think that's probably someone's last name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's, it's a block, block and a half from where our parents now live.  So I went there for the remainder of elementary school.  I then went to Tappin Junior High School, which is in Ann Arbor [Michigan], and finally, I went to Huron High School which is, I believe the newest high school in Ann Arbor.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you manifest a special interest in any particular subject in elementary school?
Speaker 2: No, I do remember in elementary school that in many grades I would get, I was beyond what the traditional school book was, and so we had this box where we would work on math problems out of, a box, meaning like a banker's box, where the teacher had just individual assignments and pages of math to do.  One event that stands out prominently in my head is that in junior high, we had a test one day, and we had homework for the next day.  And the teacher hadn't covered the, the homework, the preparation for doing the homework.  And so I struggled with that homework for quite a while the previous night, and I finally got it, finally figured out how to do it.  And so I was particularly happy with that achievement.  We were children.  We didn't have a TV in the home.  And so I remember doing a lot of homework, listening to NPR [National Public Radio] in the background and there was another "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Universe", was, they were reading that on the radio.  So I--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a British, like a science fiction--
Speaker 2: Yes, right, right.  So I remember that being in the background a lot.  But I think because we didn't have a TV, television, we didn't have that as a distraction to spend our time on.  So I think that helped us to focus on our schoolwork and--
Speaker 1: Was that a conscious decision on your parents', not to have a television?
Speaker 2: That was a conscious decision on their part, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 24876
Speaker 1: Okay, I think your father [Billy Joe Evans] was telling us about at some point, he did get a TV, and it had to do, something with being in Germany or something.  I'm not sure how that--
Speaker 2: So we didn't have a TV before we went to Germany, and we still didn't have one after.  Now, a TV appeared magically, I think the year I went to college (laughter).  But for the bulk of, you know, elementary and high school, we did not have a television in the house.  We did have a radio that picked up NPR constantly.  But--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I think also the "CBS Mystery".  There was a program where there was a creaking door at the beginning of it.  I can't recall what the name of it was.
Speaker 1: Was it a late-night program?
Speaker 2: It was probably nine, eight, 9:00 p.m. program.  But it was, it was mystery stories.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, okay, so did you have--so "The Hitchhiker's Guide" was your favorite show?
Speaker 2: I didn't really like "The Hitchhiker's Guide" (laughter), but there was nothing else on.  I didn't wanna listen to AM radio.  So I listened to it consistently.  I didn't particularly like it.
Speaker 1: Now, you came along, I guess when you were a kid, "Star Wars" was big in the '77' [1977].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you go to the movies to see these--
Speaker 2: So, we did, I remember my parents took myself and a friend from school to see "Star Wars".  I believe the first "Star Wars" came out when we were in Germany.  But I think the second one, "The Empire Strikes Back", they took us to see that one, yeah.
Story_ID: 24877
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now you're having an experience a lot of kids don't have being able to walk over to your dad's laboratory--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, play with substances like liquid nitrogen--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and stomp on (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean did you kind of realize at that time that that was special?
Speaker 2: At the time, I didn't realize it was special.  In retrospect, it was very special.  I mean for him to have the type of position that allowed you to go to see where your parents worked, at, you know, without any limitation was unique.  I think that there was a special effort made by my parents to expose all of us.  Certainly where I work right now, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, I had to get special clearance for my kids to even meet me for lunch (laughter).  So that was a unique experience and in retrospect, I think it was very important.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have any recollection of Dr. [Henry] McBay?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, very much so.  I remember, we, whenever we would go to Georgia, we'd stop by and see Dr. McBay.  It's interesting that Dr. McBay was so, told my father [Billy Joe Evans] to focus on his studies because Dr. McBay, I think, what's the--I'm trying to think of a way to phrase it.  Dr. McBay enjoyed dating people, so (laughter) it's interesting that he, you know, that he knew how to section that.  You know, dating is fine, but, in the case of his students, such as my father, he felt that they should focus on their studies.  But, yeah, I remember Dr. McBay vividly.  I remember he, he lived in a neighborhood I guess that had break-in's.  And so he had set up a special system to thwart thieves.  So he had a shotgun sitting on a milk crate aimed at a window with an extension cord coming out from underneath it trying to make it look like it was somehow electrically controlled.  But as I recall, the shotgun had no bullets in it.  This wasn't an electrical extension cord.  It didn't, it was just, it was all smoke and mirrors, no substance behind it.  But I do remember that.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Yeah, I've never heard that kind of story before.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you, did you go along with 'em when they drove across country to--I think they drove Dr. McBay across country at some point--
Speaker 2: I don't believe I was there for that.
Speaker 1: --I know your father was telling me.
Speaker 2: I don't believe I was there for that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I do recall that, but I'm, so I'm sure that I didn't drive across country with Dr. McBay--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but I knew him well.  I mean we, as I said, he was, he was an important mentor in my father's life.  And we, we knew him well.  His, I think my father has maintained close, close contact with his ex-wife, Shirley Malcolm, perhaps.
Story_ID: 24878
Speaker 1: Okay, right, right.  Okay, so, yeah, now, so you went to, so you were in seventh, you went to Marburg, Germany?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What are your memories of Marburg [Germany]?
Speaker 2: So, you know, I don't remember a lot of it in the beginning, and I'm sure the beginning must have been very traumatic 'cause, you know, we knew no German at all, and we were thrust into German schools.  My parents did arrange tutoring for us, and the students in Germany were learning English at the time, so they were very interested in talking to us in English.  I, I wish there was some video record so I could see how I dealt with that environment.  I remember this was about the time when Alex Haley's "Roots" came out. And it was, it probably had come out before, but it'd finally been translated in German, and it was showing on Germany TV. And I recall that, you know, there were some German students who would, you know, engage in, in improper behavior.  I think some students were saying, like, [speaking German] Dabis mien Squad", and "You're my slave" or something. And I think it was a combination of me being in a country that I didn't, you know, I wasn't a native of and perhaps not understanding well, but I think I just kind of ignored it and actually, some German friends we had got in a fight with the kid (laughter) over this.  But it was, I mean by and large, it was a good experience.  I, I still have an affinity for Germany even now.  Another incident along those lines, so I think I told you previously that I stayed, I stayed behind my, in Germany, to finish out the school year.  And so when I was flying back, I was flying alone.  And, of course, you know, the stewardesses and all helped me to get to my seat and all.  But as I'm flying back, this older German woman drank too much, and started saying similar things in German, saying like, "you're my slave", you know, "wipe my mouth" and various things.  And the woman's husband was there, and initially, I think maybe they thought I didn't understand.  So I told her in German, like, "Look, I understand what you're saying, stop it."  The stewardesses on the airplane didn't do anything to, to try to either move me, move her, to try to deal with the situation.  Now, I was, so I must have been seventeen at the time.  The reason I know the stewardesses knew is that when I left the plane, they gave me like every single gift you could think of.  I mean they gave me alcohol (laughter).  I had this box full of, of little, you know, airline kits.  But, you know, it's, it's still, a little bit distressing that, that the flight attendants didn't take some steps to deal with the situation.  But--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's interesting.  So, was it, did you run across any black Germans when you were in Germany?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, so we didn't live very far from a, we didn't live very--we lived close to Giessen which was a major military base.  People would often confuse our presence in Germany as being associated with the military.  But, you know, it's no big deal.
Speaker 1: It was like, was there a base, so the base was near--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and so I should correct.  So we did encounter a lot of African Americans and blacks in Germany, but most of them were Americans.  I don't recall any instance of us encountering black Germans.  But interestingly, my, my father's [Billy Joe Evans] older brother is, in fact, an opera singer who performed in Germany for many years.  And so, but, you know, actually, the first--I mean there are many Germans of black ancestry as a result of the U.S. military presence in Germany.  The only actual black German I can recall right now is someone I met here in the U.S. several years ago.  It was a friend of a friend.
Speaker 1: I know that, I guess the performers, Milly-Vinelli were two black Germans from--
Speaker 2: Yes, right, right.
Speaker 1: --you know, who had a, war, you know, lineage too, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your uncle's name just for the record?
Speaker 2: Allen, his, I believe his name is--I think he was born Willie Allen Evans.  But I believe his name is, he--at least performer name is Allen Evans.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I just wanna get that in the records.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, so okay, so you stayed there, as you said, a little longer than your parents to finish school--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and so, thus, you were coming back by yourself on the plane alone?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So when you came back, you were how old?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know what?  I'm mixing this up.  No, I was, so I said I was seventeen.  That's wrong.  I was, I was in the seventh grade.  So I was twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was twelve years old.  I mean that's, that's why this incident is really kind of alarming.  So they were giving champagne bottles to a twelve-year old, and they allowed this, this kind of verbal abuse to go on, on the airplane for, for literally hours.
Speaker 1: And then they feel guilty afterwards, apparently?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they clearly felt guilty, but at the same time, they didn't do anything to stop the behavior.
Speaker 1: And didn't know what appropriate to do (laughter), giving you these gifts.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, they didn't know what to do, to make amends.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, anyway, so you come back, and you're--
Story_ID: 24879
Speaker 1: So you say you missed the middle-school summer camp--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and so you came back.  And it's kind of, so you kind of felt like you were kind of on the outside of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a little bit of an outsider.  But I, I think I've always had a little bit of an outsider status by choice.  So it wasn't, we're a pretty tight, we were a pretty--we are a pretty tight-knit family.  So a lot of, a lot of who I played with was my brother and sister.  We, I think we really relied on each other quite a bit more than we relied on outside influences.  And I think that was partly my, a result of my parents' experience with white culture, growing up in Georgia and Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so did you and your brother share similar interests?
Speaker 2: Not, not really (laughter).  My brother is much more, he's much more of a garden, outdoor, animal kind of person.  I, I don't like any of those things (laughter).  So we were very, we have very different interests, but I mean we still had that family bond.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so your--what, did your brother like--I don't know how long he lived so I'm trying to--
Speaker 2: Oh, so, he passed away when I was in graduate school.  So, I mean he was, he was probably in his mid-twenties when he passed.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was he pursuing as a career?
Speaker 2: He had really not decided on a career.  He went to Morehouse [College] for a year or two.  And that didn't suit him.  So he had, he was pursuing various jobs in Ann Arbor [Michigan], no, no sharp focus, kind of like, like similar to what I, the career direction I was on.
Speaker 1: Okay, but did he have a specific interest in anything that you--
Speaker 2: Nothing comes to mind.  I mean he was, he was certainly a lot more creative and artistic than I was.  So, for example, when it came to, you know, deciding landscaping things about the yard or planting plants in the yard, he had very strong, very strong opinions about what looked good, what looked right, whereas, I would have been cool with just playing roundup, spraying some Round-up and leaving it (laughter).  So, I think he was still trying to find himself, still looking to what, to see what he was gonna do long term.
Speaker 1: Okay, what happened to him?
Speaker 2: He just passed away, brain.
Speaker 1: Aneurysm?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, it was, it was Lymphoma, I--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were in graduate school when that happened?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: And your sister, she pursued criminal justice, as you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so she, she graduated from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] with a degree in sociology, I believe.  She had various jobs.  She worked for a railroad management company for a while.  She had, she's had an affinity for mentoring people in the criminal justice system.  And so she had a position, I believe as a counselor, and she eventually went on and got her PhD in criminal justice from the University of Delaware [Newark, Delaware].  And now, she serves as a deputy warden at one of their facilities.  It's not, it's not a traditional prison, as I understand it.  It's a work release prison.  So, some of the inmates are there, all the inmates are there in the evening, but several, many of them go out to go to their jobs during the day.  And she, she seems to have a good rapport with the inmates.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --she's done that for many years now.
Story_ID: 24880
Speaker 1: All right, now, throughout school, I would just guess that your grades were good?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Because you're really applying yourself and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --have a focus.  Now, did you at, did you know in grade school that you were gonna be a scientist?
Speaker 2: No, but I think, so I, my father was a chemist.  So I had easy access to resources to pursue chemistry.  So when I entered graduate, entered undergraduate college, I was focused as a chemistry major.  Now, one of my favorite courses in high school was in physics.  When I went to--so initially, I had, I visited, you know, I, I got into, I was admitted to several schools for college.  I visited University of Chicago [Illinois], and had decided that was where I wanted to go to school.  I was, I'd done a lot of science fairs as a student.  And so I won a science fair trip to Hawaii.  And so on my way to Hawaii, I stopped off in California to visit Caltech [California Institute of Technology].  And I, I was pretty adamant to my parents before going that they should send the, the deposit money into Chicago [Illinois], that I was not going anyplace else, that I would go see this Caltech place, but I was not gonna go there.  And the sunshine and palm trees in California changed that within twenty minutes of touching down (laughter).  So I ended up going to Caltech, and Caltech back then was really a school operated by physicists.  I mean it, Caltech has, is, is, excels across the range.  Physics was the real focus there.  And I did well on physics.  I went to Caltech as a chemistry major, but quickly switched to physics and got a Bachelors degree in physics.
Speaker 1: That was the home of the famous chemist, a Jewish fellow, right, Caltech--
Speaker 2: There are many famous chemists.
Speaker 1: Oh, there's one though.
Speaker 2: Harry Gray, Leroy Hood, so I'm just calling names that were around when I was there, Linnaeus Pauling--
Speaker 1: No, I know about him, but that's not the one I'm thinking about.  There's one that they talk about all the time.
Story_ID: 24881
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wanna go, take you back to high school for a second and just when you look through your whole school experience, I didn't ask you about any of your special teachers or mentors.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But were there any teachers, you know, in--
Speaker 2: So, there was a physics, I had a physics teacher, Mr. Shyder (ph.) who I thought was (unclear) good.
Speaker 1: This is at Huron High School [Ann Arbor, Michigan], right?
Speaker 2: This is Huron High School, yes.  There was a chemistry teacher, oh, boy. I can't call her name right now, but I enjoyed her class a great deal.  Those are the two that stand out in my mind.  There were, there were a number of African American teachers also at Huron High School that, that I appreciated for the attention that they gave me.  I feel--
Speaker 1: Now, they, did they teach any kind of African American History or anything at Huron?
Speaker 2: No, if they did, I didn't take it (laughter).  So I tried to, most of my courses were AP courses.  So I took AP English.  There was an African American woman who taught that class.  I wish I could call this woman's name.  She, she was a teacher, she taught English and her husband, I believe, was a shop teacher.  He taught shop classes.  And it was, it was nice--so we also knew them from church.  It was, it gave you a feeling of comfort (laughter), to walk the hall and know there was a teacher who has your interest at heart.  So I mean I appreciate the instruction and attention I had from people like Mr. Shyder.  The chemistry teacher's name, I just can't, can't bring to mind.  But also these teachers that were part of, you know, our African, African American community that were present in this school were also important.
Speaker 1: Now, was church a big factor in growing up in terms of your development?
Speaker 2: So, I believe it was.  I mean we, we went to, we would go to choir practices on Sundays, and we'd go to church on--I'm sorry, choir practice on Saturdays, we'd go to church on Sundays.  It was largely my parents doing.  I mean they were the ones who made sure we got there.  But, yeah, I, I, yes, it was a very big factor.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: So we initially went to Second Baptist Church, which was in Ann Arbor [Michigan], and then we later went to Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church.
Speaker 1: It's interesting.  Those same names are the two, or two of the most prominent churches in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Second Baptist and Bethel AME [American Methodist Episcopal], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, I don't know.  Somebody listening to this, they can say, oh, and it might occur to them (laughter), I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, and you know, my parents, there were a lot of African American educators.  And oftentimes, my parents would get teachers books for the textbooks that we'd have in class.  And so, I mean these books didn't have, they would have--for problems, they'd have the answer.  They wouldn't tell you how to get to the answer.  But it gave my parents, I think an easy way to, to verify that I was, whether I was doing it correctly, my lessons.  I mean it--my father [Billy Joe Evans] was a chemist.  He was, he's accomplished in math and science. So he, he certainly could check it over, but, you know, with three kids and both parents working outside the home, it, I think these small things that helped them to verify that our schoolwork was being done correctly also have a, played an important role.
Story_ID: 24882
Speaker 1: So was your dad actually able to spend some time to help you with homework or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So you got a dad [Billy Joe Evans] that's a chemist.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your mother's [Adye Bel Evans] a librarian--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So that should be a helpful set of parents--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --when you're, when you're in school, yeah.
Speaker 2: And, you know, there was one, and I remember one incident where my grades in AC Calculus, I believe, faltered.  And I don't know what the details were, but my parents went up to talk to the teacher because they felt that the grades weren't warranted.  And my grades came up, and I don't--my performance didn't change.  So they are probably the only ones who can tell you what, what transpired in that interaction.  But I think my parents being very involved in monitoring my schoolwork and the grades I was getting back was important.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, having parents that were academically savvy and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, didn't hurt.
Speaker 2: I mean so the simple, I should, I'm being a little bit opaque.  The, the simple conclusion is the teacher was, was grading me too harshly.  And when they let the teacher know that they were watching this, and they were aware of it, the grades changed.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the implication is that because of your race, it was--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did your Asian friends have similar problems in school?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know.  Not that I recall, but, you know--
Speaker 1: Not that it happened to you that much,--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I'm just saying that they may have encountered--
Speaker 2: That I'm aware of, no, but I mean these, these were all children of accomplished professionals.  So, their parents were either doctors or lawyers.  The, the group of students that I kind of, from elementary school, grew up with had fairly accomplished parents, fairly accomplished families.  So these families were all, had high value in education, were particularly attuned to ensuring good educational experiences.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I would just think that growing in Ann Arbor [Michigan] on the campus of the University of Michigan, you would have, you would have like access to a lot of, you know, special lectures and programs that, so were you able to take advantage of that sort of thing growing up?  I mean, I know you were there, so you may have taken it for granted, but, but lecturers would come in that you don't, you wouldn't see in a, in another community?
Speaker 2: So, so, I'm sure that that took place.  The area that I benefited most greatly from was summer internships, summer hires.  As a result of summer employment, I actually won, I won the local science fair, I got the first prize.  And I went to the national science fair and won first prizes there also.  I worked with a professor in medicinal chemistry.  So there were several of them.  There was Dean Wise, Leroy Townsend and there was, I think a post-doctoral (unclear) named Cia Rohm (ph.).  And we worked together, well, I worked with them.  But as a result of the work I did with them, I actually put together a science project and went on to be one of the finalists for the Westinghouse Science Talent Search.  So I think that my access to experimental science, you know, had a, had a huge influence on my career path.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's not to say these weren't, these opportunities were open to everybody, but the fact that my parents were part of the university and were aware that these resources existed and could, could point me in the right direction, had a huge, huge, huge influence.
Speaker 1: Right, well, it was a good position to be in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I think often other people have access to these things and black students are normally the first ones to be exposed to some of these opportunities,
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --but you were in a good position there, at University of Michigan.  Now, do you remember any other lecturers coming to campus, political speakers and--
Speaker 2: Not really.  I was not very, I was very--my interests were very narrow.  I had an interest in computer programming.  So we had one of those, I don't know if you remember the PET computers.  It was kind of a monolithic console, so I remember we, we had programmed a little game where you could make a little cursor move around, a kind of snake kind of game.  But I didn't, I didn't have a strong interest in political areas and things.  I have no doubt that they were present at Michigan.  But I was completely oblivious to it.
Story_ID: 24883
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so now, now, as a high school student on the verge of graduation, now, were you--now, you said you were basically focused on your studies.  Did you participate in any high clubs or social activities, really?
Speaker 2: No, I think I might have been in the German Club or something, but that was pretty much.  You know, the science fairs actually took up a lot of time.  And so I didn't have much time outside of my classes to engage in any of these other activities.  I didn't play any sports in high school.  I would run home (laughter), so let's see.  So when I went to Germany, so I learned, I learned German, was actually fluent in German.  I was fluent in German, and when I came back my parents enrolled me in German at the high school, while I was still in junior high school.  So my day would start early.  I would go to high school--it started an hour before junior high.  I would then take a bus from the high school to junior high, join in there, and I think my day in junior high ended early.  And so I would go home from junior high early.  And I think in high school, I also, you know, high school flex--schedules are more flexible.  And I think that my days typically ended early, like around 2:30 and so I would just head home at that point, be it to work on the science fair project or various other things.
Speaker 1: You said you would run (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, so I would run with my back pack home so the high school was probably two or three miles from home.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty good run.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So, all right, so, now did you have any special graduation honors when you graduated from Huron [High School]?
Speaker 2: I did, I think I graduated with honors, and I might have gotten, you know, they have these mock elections like "most likely to fly an airplane" or something.  I think I got some sort of mock election honor.  But I don't recall what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean maybe "Most likely be a scientist" or something like that.
Story_ID: 24884
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so Caltech [California Institute of Technology], you told us how you chose Caltech, so I was asking you during a break about, I was trying to think of Richard Fineman.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And was he significant there when you were--
Speaker 2: So he was, he was a very strong personality on campus.  People valued, I mean the students certainly flocked to courses he would teach.  He didn't teach a formal course.  We used the Fineman lectures, a series of text, of text for, for a physics course.  And he would teach a course called "Physics X" where he would field the questions from the audience and then explain them.  I believe toward the end of my time there, though, he became ill with cancer and passed away.  I don't know if he passed away before I left or very close to the end of my time at Caltech.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were saying, I think off camera that he felt that if a concept could, if you could--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --not explain a concept so that an ordinary person could understand it, you didn't understand it yourself?
Speaker 2: Right, right, so I think that this Physics X class was partly an intellectual exercise for him to keep him nimble, so you'd, any question comes in, can he explain it to you?  I also, he also had a principle that if you can explain, if you could not explain a subject to someone, regardless of their background, then you didn't understand the subject.  And so I think this was, it was interesting for us as students to see his though process, to understand how you reason things.  I think it was, also kept him mentally nimble.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But there were many, I mean there were many, I think, extremely well-accomplished physicists at Caltech.  David Goodstein, condensed matter physicist was my advisor.
Speaker 1: Just for the record, let me go back one minute to, what year did you graduate from high school?  I didn't ask.
Speaker 2: I graduated from high school in 1983.
Speaker 1: Okay, in 1983, so you started Caltech in the fall of '83' [1983]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you talked about David Goodstein.  He was your advisor
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and somebody else you were getting ready to mention?
Speaker 2: No, I think that was it.  So I, I had an AT&T scholarship from the American--that was administered by the American Physical Society.  And through that, I was linked up to African American physicists, Herman White, who's at Fermi Lab and Kennedy Reed who is at Lawrence [Livermore National Laboratory], who is, now even, at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, in fact--oh, I'm getting ahead of myself.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so those were your major influences--
Speaker 2: Yes, influences.
Speaker 1: --at Caltech?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  It was also, I mean the other students in physics were all very well accomplished, and I think that I formed pretty strong relationships with those students at Caltech.
Story_ID: 24885
Speaker 1: Okay, and as you were saying, you switched from chemistry to physics--
Speaker 2: Physics.
Speaker 1: --at a certain point.  And why, again, did you switch?
Speaker 2: Well, so physics was kind of king at Caltech [California Institute of Technology].  And if you could do it, then most people would try it.  And I did pretty well at physics.  So, it worked out for me.  I would like to think that I would have gravitated to physics anyway, but--[background sound], that's my wife.  But if chemistry were king at Caltech, I wonder if that might have been different also.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you kind of talk about why physics is considered, was considered king at Cal--was it just Caltech or is it, among scientists, is physics considered like a highest--
Speaker 2: Well, probably among physicists (laughter), it's considered the highest calling.  I think the idea is that physics is the most fundamental of sciences, be it subatomic particles or atomic physics, but understanding how materials behave on a fundamental level, I think is the hallmark of physics.  Now, engineers and electrical engineers, in particular, have parlayed this understanding of electronics into, you know, fortunes on the semiconductor industry.  So just because physics is the most fundamental area, doesn't mean it's the most lucrative area, but I, I do, I do still think that physics underlies our basic understanding of the physical sciences.
Speaker 1: I get the sense that physicists think that they are--
Speaker 2: Yes, we're--
Speaker 1: --that they're at the top of the intellectual (laughter)--
Speaker 2: And it probably could even go further.  We know that we are (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, all right.  So, so tell us now, what were you focused on at Caltech in terms of physics?  What--
Speaker 2: So at Caltech, we had a pretty broad base.  I never was really that interested in-- I think the physics that, (unclear) a lot of people like particle physics.  I tended more towards optics and condensed matter physics.
Speaker 1: Optics seems to be kind of self explanatory on some level, but what was the other one?
Speaker 2: So condensed matter physics is the--
Speaker 1: Condensed matter, okay.
Speaker 2: --behavior of materials in condensed phases such as solids and liquids.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at that time, I think the hot areas were semiconductor physics.
Story_ID: 24886
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was the lay of the land in those days in terms of physics?  What were, I mean what, where were physics in 1983 as opposed to now, say, I mean what were (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: You know, so I would say that information technology hadn't yet exploded.  You know, a portable computer was the size of a small refrigerator (laughter) back then.  I still remember, so Caltech [California Institute of Technology] had resources so, where we could get these small computers.  They were, you know, they were that--so they were the size of a medium-sized suitcase with a small screen, that's probably barely bigger than, well, it's probably half the size of what we consider, what someone sees on a tablet these days.  So things were very much in flux, and we didn't have, there was no wireless networking.  And the Internet was basically nonexistent back then.  I recall in grad school one of, friends came by and set up something called the Worldwide Web so that that, those were, those were capabilities that were just coming on line or hadn't yet gotten online yet.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, these items are, I mean these things you mentioned really affect access to information and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, so, I think we had computerized catalogs in the libraries, but you couldn't call up a manuscript on the web like you can, pull a pdf down from a journal.  I mean we were still very much, you know, volumes of, of journals, bound in volumes in the library stacks.
Speaker 1: I would think that this was really, I mean information technology, would it be fair to say it really sped up the process of doing physics these days?
Speaker 2: In some ways, yes, in some ways, no.  You know, it used to be when I, when I wanted to get an article, I would go to the library and I would maybe read it, read a few pages, and I would go to the copy machine and copy it.  And then having, doing all of that caused me to be a little bit--well, first of all, I knew the articles I was getting.  And I wouldn't just willy nilly grab things 'cause copying took a while.  I mean like it took like two seconds for the copy machine to make a page.  Nowadays, when you hope on the Web, and you can download the manu--download a pdf in seconds, I'm not sure I'm always as aware of what I'm getting now.  So I think that's it's good and bad.  Information is much more accessible now, but with that increased access, I may not, I feel that oftentimes, we don't, we're overwhelmed in some regard.  We can't process all the information coming at us.
Story_ID: 24887
Speaker 1: Okay, interesting, yeah.  Okay, so, so at Caltech [California Institute of Technology], so you were a physics, physics major and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --did you have a senior project or something to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, I worked on something called the distributive feedback laser.  So it was a, it was a semiconductor, so the solid-state lasers. So rather than a laser where you think of a tube with mirrors at the end, it was basically a semiconductor chip and putting a modulated structure inside of that chip to try to select out certain wavelengths, was part of that project.  That was what the project was aimed at.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, now did you, I mean I, as you describe yourself, I guess you continued to study in an intense kind of environment.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So was it, I know scientists tell us that when you really get into deep science, you're really into it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it's hard to do anything else, really.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: So Caltech's a unique environment because everyone there for the most part is pursuing pretty hardcore science.  And so I think the general atmosphere, everyone's working hard.  It's not there're some people working hard and some people aren't.  I think everyone is really focused.  So, in that regard, it's a unique environment.  It's a relatively small school.  I think I had, I think there were 186 undergraduates in my class.  So, I mean that's a small community.  You know all your classmates, and, and, and as I said, the work ethic there is, is unique.  Everyone buys in.
Story_ID: 24888
Speaker 1: Okay, so you then, what graduated in '87' [1987].
Speaker 2: So I graduated in '87' [1987], and then I went to graduate school at Harvard [University].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did you end up choosing Harvard?  I mean it seems like a silly question, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so the two schools I was considering most seriously, out of three actually, so MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], Harvard and Stanford [University].  I had a bit of a bad experience at MIT (laughter).  I went there for a visit, and so I was meeting with a faculty member.  And the faculty member looked over my application and said, wow, this, you've got a, you've got a good record of performance here.  If we'd known, we wouldn't have, we would have considered you for, for a departmental fellowship.  So apparently, what they were doing at this time at MIT, was they were, it seemed like they were segregating the minority applicants, underrepresented group applicants, from the main pool of applicants.  And they were considering the main pool of applicants for scholarships, and they were considering the underrepresented groups as a separate--they were gonna admit them, but they weren't being considered for the departmental scholarships.  And, you know, and in many regards, I think the faculty member who told me this was being very frank.  He could of concealed this, and he simply, I don't know if it was an accident or what, but he told me.  And so that immediately turned me off to MIT.  And then I don't really know why I picked Stanford [University], or Harvard over Stanford.  I think they were both fantastic schools. I think Stanford probably would have had a stronger component of, of semiconductor physics into it, but--
Speaker 1: You chose Harvard, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 24889
Speaker 1: So, well, so you got your Masters and your PhD from Harvard [University]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you went straight--most scientists, once again just, the Masters seems like just a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so at Harvard, it was a matter of taking eight classes.  There was no, and at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] they actually had, you have to write a thesis for a Masters degree, but at Harvard, I think it was eight classes and you qualified for a Masters.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you just--
Speaker 2: It was, it was something you just picked up along the way.  You didn't even notice it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so what was your dissertation about at Harvard?
Speaker 2: So, I went to Harvard, so I didn't go to physics, I didn't go to the physics department at Harvard.  I went, at Harvard, I went to the, it's call the Division of Applied Sciences.  And that's where they had Applied Physics.  The Harvard physics department kind of had a stronger focus in particle physics, high-energy physics.  There was a little bit of condensed matter in the physics department, but I had the impression that it was really angled toward elementary particle physics.  And I had an interest more in kind of the technology component of physics, but after I went to Harvard, I kind of vectored back toward traditional fundamental physics, and I worked in high-pressure physics.  My thesis advisor was Isaac Silvera who has done quite a bit of work in studying, the behavior of hydrogen, high pressures and also he had a, his group kind of had two arms.  One was high-pressure hydrogen.  The other one was spin polarized hydrogen.  So there was, I worked on the high-pressure side.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your advisor was Isaac Sylvester?
Speaker 2: Silvera.
Speaker 1: Silvera, okay.  All right, I missed something here, Silvera, okay, Isaac Silvera.  Okay, and so, so you were then studying high-pressure physics.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is what you're actually doing now?
Speaker 2: This is what I do now, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I should back up a moment.  So, my junior year in college, I went, there's something called the Hertz Foundation.  It's, its endowed by the people who were initial owners of Hertz Motorcar Company, and they endowed a scholarship--they endowed a foundation that, whose intent was to maintain and enhance the scientific capability of the United States with a particular emphasis on fulfilling national security needs.  And so Hertz had a very close association with Lawrence Livermore National Lab, where I now work.  So at the summer institute that Hertz sponsored, the following year I applied for Hertz scholarship, and got a Hertz scholarship for graduate school, which provided a very generous stipend--it wasn't that long ago, but it seemed like a lot of money back then.  It was, I think it was 15 or $16,000 a year.  And so I had that when I went to graduate school.  So I was able to pick who I wanted to work with.  In the end, I ended up working Isaac Silvera on high-pressure physics.  And I think I maintained my relationship with the Hertz people over the years, and I think that a lot of the Hertz Foundation management also worked at Lawrence Livermore.  And I think that was beneficial in landing my first job with Livermore.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So, yes, I continue to do high-pressure physics to this day, less so within the physics of hydrogen and more on other materials that have national security importance.
Story_ID: 24890
Speaker 1: Okay, now, could you explain your dissertation to us, I mean just state it again, and kind of explain what you were actually doing?
Speaker 2: So, so hydrogen is the most abundant element in the universe, and, in fact, it's what drives, you know, our sun, fuses hydrogen together generates energy in a helium atom.  And so what we were studying was what does hydrogen do?  So under normal conditions, hydrogen is a gas.  But if you cool it or you compress it, it turns into a liquid, and if you continue to compress it, it turns into a solid.  One of the early predictions of quantum theory was that hydrogen would metalize.  So it would go from being an insulator, you know, the plastic cladding on a wire is insulators, the electricity doesn't, it doesn't pass electricity.  But compressing it would force the electrons on the different atoms together.  And they'd start being shared, and you can now pass a current through this material.  And so it becomes a metal.  And so the goal of the thesis work was to metalize hydrogen.  That was the kind of ultimate goal of my thesis advisor.  I worked on that for several years.  It's a very challenging problem that, to this day, hasn't been adequately solved.  But we did, we made some good progress on it, although we did not metal hydrogen.  But we made some measurements along the way of how the index for a fraction of hydrogen changes under pressure.  So the (unclear) [index?] fraction tells you, I mean one simple way to think of it, it's a, it's an indicator of the electronic properties of the materials, but effectively, it, in common experience, it'll tell you how light gets bent when it goes, passes into it.  So, for example, when you look at a prism, if you have a white light coming into a prism, it hits the prism, and the different colors of light get bent different angles, different, depending on index of a fraction.  And that's kind of a layman's explanation of what we measured, but we measured the (unclear) fraction of hydrogen high pressure, which--so this data helps you understand when it might metalize.  It also allows you to valuate theories that predict how hydrogen is behaving at high pressure.  So it's experimental data that's very important in the sense that it lets you understand if your theories are even close to being correct, and once, and also quantifying the quality of various theories to explain properties of materials.
Story_ID: 24891
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you were, you're trying to metalize hydrogen--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --by using pressure and, was it heat too or--
Speaker 2: So we were actually working at low temperature.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we used a device called a diamond anvil cell.  So we take two diamonds, very much like what you'd see in a, in a ring, but we polish a very small tip on one end.  And on the table which is the fat end of the diamond, we would apply a moderate load.  So we concentrate the load we've, at the fat end, to this very tiny tip.  And by doing that, we could generate pressures of millions of atmospheres.  So for reference, we live at one atmosphere.  The center of the earth is about 3.28 million atmospheres.  So we're generating pressures that are, you know, comparable to the pressure of the center of the earth.  And there are planets, for example, the Jovian Planets, Jupiter, Neptune, it's, so those are large planets.  They will have a very high-pressure core.  It's thought that hydrogen on the outside is either gas or liquid phase or solid phase.  It's not conducting, but these planets will have a metallic core on the inside where the hydrogen is pressed, kind of pressure where the electrons that were initially localized on this molecule are pushed together and they're all shared.  And they begin conducting.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And we were talking off camera about the abundance of, hydrogen is the most abundant element in the universe--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, I think you were referring to something that Carl Sagan in "Cosmos" about us all being made of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not sure who made, who initially stated the phrase.  I've heard it repeated several times, that we're all made of stars.  So, in a star, just as, in fact, just as our sun is, that can start as a, as a dense wall of hydrogen.  And the way that star is producing energy and light is that it's pressing those hydrogen molecules together.  And they're fusing, and they're forming helium, for example.  So the proton and the, so hydrogen is, the most abundant form is a proton and a neutron.  You push that proton and neutron together.  So now, you've got two protons and two neutrons in an atomic core, and that's now helium.  And so by pushing these, these atoms successively together, you form higher and higher weight atoms.  And that's how you form, for example, carbon or, or sodium, all the way up to iron.  And that's how you produce these high, atomic-weight materials that, you know, actually, we're all made of, you know, carbon, hydrogen, water.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, so your dissertation was completed in '87' [1987], I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I started in '87' [1987]--
Speaker 1: Oh, started in '87' [1987].
Speaker 2: I finished at Harvard [University] in '95' [1995] and then went to Livermore [Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory] the same year.
Story_ID: 24892
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, then, now, explain what Lawrence Livermore [National]  Laboratory [LLNL has a mission of strengthening the United States' security through development and application of world-class science and technology to: Enhance the nation's defense; Reduce the global threat from terrorism and weapons of mass destruction; And respond with vision, quality, integrity and technical excellence to scientific issues of national importance.] is?
Speaker 2: So Lawrence Livermore Laboratory is, it's a Department of Energy laboratory.  Within the Department of Energy there are several entities, and Lawrence Livermore is part of what's called the National Nuclear Security Agency.  And so it's the, it's the ancestor, essentially, of the Atomic Energy Commission, that was primarily responsible for the Manhattan Project [The Manhattan Project was a research and development project that produced the first atomic bombs during World War II. It was led by the United States with the support of the United Kingdom and Canada. From 1942 to 1946, the project was under the direction of Major General Leslie Groves of the US Army Corps of Engineers]. So, you know, our country has a long history of civilian control of nuclear technologies.  And so Lawrence Livermore is part of what's called the National Nuclear Security Agency which has a national security mission for understanding nuclear processes.  The mission's much broader than that.  It actually covers areas of Homeland Security and Lawrence Livermore has about 7,000 employees now with a broad range of missions.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how does your work impact, like, national security?
Speaker 2: So in my work, we study materials of high pressure.  So it has technology applications, it has (unclear) to nuclear science.  And so one prominent technology application is diamond.  So, and we all know diamonds that are on rings, but diamonds are actually a very important abrasive for industrial processes.  The diamond that's used in, for example, when they, when they go out and take up an asphalt street, they use diamond bits to cut that up.  That diamond in those, used in those is not always natural diamond.  Oftentimes, it's synthetic diamond.  So diamond can be formed by taking carbon, which we commonly call graphite, squeezing it to pressures of 50,000 atmospheres and raising the temperature to several thousand Kelvin, and it converts to diamond.  You take this, this black graphite, you squeeze it and you form diamond.  There, there are metric tons of this produced in the world every year for abrasive cutting applications.  So understanding what materials do at high pressure is important for a broad range of, of topics.  It's important for geosciences.  So if we wanna understand how the dynamics of the earth system work, understanding what materials do under high pressure is very important.  It's also important for, for example, meteoritic impacts, you know.  If an asteroid hits the planet, you have a lot of processes there that are dynamic.  If it hits it very fast, you raise pressures very high, you raise temperatures very high, and being able to model all those processes are important.  So it's, it's got a very broad application.
Story_ID: 24893
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and so what have been like some of your, I guess, finest--now, you started off as a research, I guess, scientist with--now, did you do a post-doctoral--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, no, I didn't do a post-doc.  So I, I finished at Harvard [University] and came to Livermore and immediately had a staff position.  And so I've been at Livermore now for sixteen or seventeen years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a staff scientist for about ten years, and for about the last five, five years I've been a group leader.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you lead the high-pressure--
Speaker 2: High-pressure physics group, yes.
Speaker 1: --physics group, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, well, just give us an example of what, what you use or what you do every day?
Speaker 2: So, so I'll tell you what I did when I was, when I was a staff scientist, then most of my time was spent in the lab.  We would take various materials, for example, Beryllium was a material that we studied quite a bit.  Beryllium, it's a toxic material.  It can be very dangerous if the dust gets in your lungs.  But it's, also an important technological material.  It's used commonly in golf clubs.  It's a very lightweight metal, but it's got, it's got good strength properties.  It's also used a lot in the aircraft industry, again, because it's a lightweight metal.  So it's lightweight.  You don't have the heavy, the weight that you'd have associated with, say, iron, but you have the strength of the metal.  So we studied what Beryllium did at high pressure.  There was some work done back in '65' [1965] that predicted that Beryllium would under--underwent a phase transition.  So, as I said with diamond, you know, you can squeeze something and it goes from graphite to diamond.  And what's happened there is you've changed the way the atoms bond to each other.  The same thing, and as atoms bond together, they can also rearrange the way they sit relative to one another.  So, for example, you can think of atoms sitting on a square grid when they're in a material.  You can also think of them sitting on a triangular grid.  And a lot of that has to do with the way the atoms are bonded and their interacting with the atoms in their environment.  And that's what happens at high pressure.  An example, is water.  You know, we know of water as just liquid, but if you squeeze on water, water goes from a liquid where the atoms, I'm sorry, the molecules can move around very easily to sitting in very fixed points relative to one another.  And as you squeeze on it, the relative, the orientation of those, the orientation of those models--molecules relative to one another changes.  And so what we call--those are phase transitions.  So you're, you're making phase transitions between different structures.  I'm, with the Beryllium, there was a prediction that Beryllium would transform to, from what's called a hexagonal clothes pack, hexagonal clothes pack phase, hexagonal phase, to a body-centered cubic phase.  So those are, those are length--those are references to different structures, but basically, one is kind of sitting on a triangular grid versus on a, kind of a square grid.  And so we pressurize the system to look for that transition.  We ultimately never found it.  It looks like those measurements might have been in '65' [1965], I mean it, they're actually very impressive measurements, but they might have been obscured by, by impurities in material.  But the way we do those experiments, there are two ways of doing it.  One is, we can shine a laser on the material and the laser interacts with the atoms, and the atom vibrates at a certain characteristic frequency.  And that, and exciting that atom at that frequency causes that laser beam to lose some energy.  So you look at the energy loss of that laser beam.  So that's one way we can do the measurements in the lab.  So, so we've got these two diamonds pushing on the material.  The diamonds are transparent.  We could shoot a laser in, laser comes out.  We see how that vibration changes.  Another way of doing the experiment is to use x-rays.  So x-rays now are still, they're like photons, they're like light, but they have much shorter wavelengths.  And the laser comes in, and it scatters, so the laser beam comes in, and it hits these atoms that are sitting in the material, and another, and it scatters that laser, that--I'm sorry, the x-ray radiation off at a particular angle that's a function of the separation of those atoms in the solid and the kind of structure they're sitting in.  And so by using x-rays, we can actually directly measure what the structure is under pressure.
Speaker 1: And that's an x-ray scattering, you call it?
Speaker 2: It's x-ray scattering.  So it's actually x-ray diffraction, the name is x-ray diffraction.  Our samples are very small, so where you, talking about samples here that are ten microns.  So for reference, your, if you take a human hair, cut it and look at how wide the human hair is, that's about a hundred microns.  So we're looking at samples that are fractions of what a human hair is in diameter.  So, we need very specialized sources to do this.  And so we go to, there are several specialized sources in the U.S.  They're called synchrotrons.  So it's a big ring, huge ring, maybe the size of a football field or so.  And electrons are circulating in this ring, and as the electrons are bent around in this pathway, they, they kick off x-rays.  And so this is a facility that's engineered to generate x-rays that we can then have hit our sample, and we can study how they scatter off.  So we use several sources.   The primary source we use is the advanced photon source at Argonne National Laboratory.  There're also sources at, there's also synchrotron sources at Brookhaven National Laboratory used in the past, and [background voices] Sanford Linear Accelerator.  So, this is our cleaning crew.
Speaker 1: Hold on a second, yeah. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, speed.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So (unclear) fractions are one of the primary tools we use right now because it gives us the most direct information on crystal structures and materials at high pressures.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: One, one detail of this is that, so everything I've told you by now is just static.  So we take a material up to pressure.  We hold it at that pressure, and we can measure, we can hold it at pressure for literally years.  So we have forever basically to understand, to, to poke at the sample and understand what it's doing.  There are other, there're other instances where you actually want to see what something does dynamically.  So rather than take it to pressure and holding it, you wanna slap it and propagate pressure through it.  Now, you'd have much less time to do that kind of measurement.  And so we've been developing tools now to understand similar properties, like crystal structure, but doing it on a very short time scale, order nanosecond.  So ten to the minus nine seconds to get the same data out, because, in fact, materials behave very differently, depending on how you compress them.  If you compress something, so let's say we had a liquid and we very rapidly compressed it?  Those atoms might not have time to get into the places they wanna be in, in a solid.  They could actually freeze.  And that's what you get when you get a glass.  So a glass has no long-range order, no long-range order.  And, and so that, understanding, you know, how rapidly you have to hit something to make it form a glass phase versus a crystalline phase is very important also technologically.  So, for example, if I wanna make diamonds, I want all those atoms to get to their lattice sites and be in the crystal structure of diamond as opposed to just forming what we call a Morpheus graphite where the, where there's no long-range order.  And that's important, for example, in the semiconductor industry.  These silicon wafers they use have extremely high, extremely high quality, extremely, extremely well-defined, long-range order.  And they're a single crystal.  A lot of the materials that you and I see in our common, every day experience, they're crystal lights, but those crystal lights are not, it's one small region that's a crystal light, and adjacent to it can be another crystal with that, with that specific atomic arrangement.  But it doesn't, it's not a single crystal for very long distances.  And the single crystals are actually very important like in the semiconductor industry.
Story_ID: 24894
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so you were a tenured, staff scientist at, working at--
Speaker 2: So, I've been at Livermore [Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory] for sixteen or seventeen years, so '95' [1995], so seventeen years now, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, but the last five, you were, you've been group leader.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now how did that, I mean, well, you were just the logical person at that point to do it or what (laughter)?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, you know, the previous group leader went off to a job in academia.  And I was the best qualified for the job.  You know, our research requires a certain amount of knowledge of the systems we study.  And so, yeah, I, I certainly, I had to apply.  But the managers told me that it wasn't a difficult decision at all, that it was a clear decision.
Speaker 1: Now, as a workplace, how has Lawrence Livermore been?
Speaker 2: It's been, actually, a very good workplace.  The hay days of the nuclear weapons complex are gone.  Before I got there, so I started in '95' [1995].  They said that in earlier days, you know, very sophisticated instruments, like a silliscope, you wouldn't pay for those things.  You'd go into a room, and they'd have them stacked up on shelves and you'd just pull off what you need.  Nowadays, we're, you know, we're very, our budgets are very tight.  Everything we do, you know, has to be justified, relative to this programmatic mission.  There's nothing wrong with that.  It just, sometimes it takes longer to get experiments done when you have to, when you don't have resources in place to do those experiments.  I spent a lot more time in the laboratory dealing with safety issues, writing proposals, performing management functions.  I still get involved with experiments.  In fact, I'm going off to Germany next week to do some experiments at a synchrotron in Germany.  But my direct science work has, has decreased and a larger management component has come up.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, since you've been there, has there, what's the, I guess, what groundbreaking work have you done or do you think has a potential of being groundbreaking at a certain point?
Speaker 2: So our study of materials at high pressure and the dynamics are very important.  There are things that I can't talk about (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So, I mean we've had, we've had pretty good programmatic impact across the board, but the nature of the work is such that some things have to stay behind the fence.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, it's a security facility.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 24895
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you, now, you're a member of the American Physical Society.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a, this is a milestone in the career of a physicist, right, to be a member of the American Physical Society?
Speaker 2: No, no, I mean, so it's--
Speaker 1: Oh, not a fellow of it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I'm not, yeah, I'm not a fellow, no, I'm not a fellow, not a fellow.  I did serve on the APS [American Physical Society] Committee of Minorities.  I was the chair of the APS Committee of Minorities last year.  And I kind of feel like that's my give-back.  I mean I actually got a scholarship from that same organization about twenty years ago.  And so it's, it's meaningful to me to be able to serve the role that others served ahead of me in supporting underrepresented groups in physics.  Unfortunately, as a, as a scientific profession, I think physics really has, has really poor numbers in regard to underrepresented groups, not just African Americans, but Latino, Hispanics, Latinos, I think there's a tremendously underutilized resource in our, in our nation in terms of training people in these areas and having them excel and contribute to the enterprise that needs to be addressed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Do you see any of the efforts in STEM education as having, as making any dent in the problem?
Speaker 2: Short answer, no (laughter).  I, there are a lot of efforts, I think going forward.  I think physics has maybe lost some of its attractiveness.  I think the biosciences are certainly coming up, and, and if biosciences are, are consuming the resource--the pool, then fantastic.  But I don't think that's really the case.  I think we're still under training large portions of our society.  I think my background, you know, I had a--my parents were very involved.  It would be nice if there was a way that we could develop, to extend those same opportunities to others, I'm not sure exactly how I would do it.  But you can do it one person at a time.  I mean I've, I've made a, I've been trying very hard to hire people from underrepresented groups and bring them as summer hires.  But I could certainly do much more and I will continue to strive in that direction.
Story_ID: 24896
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Livermore [Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory] is actually, Livermore won an award, I think last year for being one of the best employers for African Americans.  I find Livermore very supportive, but I'm, I'm kind of saddened that Livermore is, is--I think Livermore is doing a solid job.  I would have hoped there were people doing even better job than Livermore is doing at, at engaging, encouraging, utilizing underrepresented groups.  So I'm, it's kind of, kind of--I'm glad Livermore got an award, but I wish the bar were a lot higher.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the general landscape is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  You know, and there are little things.  I mean when I went to Livermore [California], when I first went there, I was coming from the East Coast. East Coast people wore a tie and coat to work.  And, you know, there was, one told, a bus driver, told me, you know, what are you doing wearing that stuff?  You don't wear, you don't need to wear that here, as if, you know, I mean I was a staff scientist.  Early on in the, within the first year I was at Livermore, we have rooms where we store supplies, like, you know, pens, binders and things.  And I was in there getting, I had just started so I was getting stuff for my office, and one of the scientist walks by and says, you know, we, we're running out of pens.  Can you get some more pens?  You'd think that if you're wearing a tie and coat, it's kind of a sign that you're not part of the support staff.  But, you know, these little comments, for me it didn't, it didn't--I would like to think that in my case, it doesn't bother me.  But I have little doubt that for someone who's much more junior, let's say a graduate student, who's working at the lab, if someone comes in and treats them like they're a maintenance person, they're not gonna be, you know, it's not the kind of environment that is conducive to keeping people there and advancing their careers.  Now, none of this came from the management.  The management's always very constructive.  And it has been always very supportive.  But I think it's really more an indication of kind of societal prejudices and biases that we need to work on.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you've been there your whole career, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you really don't have another place, I guess, to compare it to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in terms of that, but you said, Livermore [Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory], according to reports--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is--
Speaker 2: And they had been very supportive.  I mean, you know, when I, when I served on the APS Committee on Minorities, there had to be an account to pay for my time when I was doing that work.  And the management was, it wasn't even an issue for them.  They were, definitely do it, you know.  They've always been very supportive of hiring underrepresented staff members.  So the management at Livermore has been very, very supportive, but I think there are, there're, you know, our society still isn't where we think it is (laughter), where we'd like for it to be.
Story_ID: 24897
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, I guess in that regard, we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I mean my hope is that, that African Americans become more integrated into the fabric of the United States.  I mean I, you know, I go to a meeting at Livermore [Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory], and let's say there're twenty people in the room.  So I'll be the only African American, and there might be two women.  I don't think that that's healthy for our society because it gives us a skewed perspective on issues.  And we're, I mean there's a large part of our workforce that we're not engaging.  So I would like to see things change.  I, it's, it's coming back, so, so, you know, now, maybe fifty--fifty years ago my father [Billy Joe Evans] was at U-C Berkley [University of California], and he left.  And I think that part of the reason he left U-C Berkley was someone--I don't know if he wanted a key to get to the lab to work at night, but someone said to him, you know, you're not setting the world on fire.  That attitude has not entirely disappeared.  So when I first started at Harvard [University], I was, I had been there maybe two weeks, and I was going to find the library.  And I was stopped by a faculty member who's actually a very nice guy, and he asked me what I was doing in the building.  And then, you know, when I'm at Livermore, and people are asking me to restock the supply room.  I mean these are recurring themes that need to end at some point, (laughter) and I would hope they would end, that, that stereotypes would start to go away, and we actually would see the country utilizing the resources it has.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the implication too is that, that a black physicist is so rare with--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're more likely to see a black stockman than a--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, that, I mean--
Speaker 1: --physicist.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, unfortunately, that, I mean that's true, but at the same time, this isn't a hydrogen experiment where you're doing statistical physics, (laughter), you know.  These are individual people and you evaluate each one as you encounter them.  So, I would, I'm hopeful, I mean we've elected a black president, I'm hopeful that these stereotypes will start shifting, but along with the stereotype, we need to actually start producing people in, in these various professions in the country.  And I don't think, I personally don't think it's, it's an issue of intellectual capacity.  I think it's an issue of investment in developing people.
Story_ID: 24898
Speaker 1: Okay, just go back to science for a minute, do you think that we'll ever be able to metalize hydrogen?
Speaker 2: Ooh, I believe that we will metalize hydrogen.  So one obligation I, I didn't touch on is, you know, there--several years ago when there was a big push for the hydrogen fuel initiative.  We were gonna be driving hydrogen cars and all.  From my perspective as a scientist, that was kind of misplaced investment because nowhere on earth can you go dig up a mine of hydrogen.  The hydrogen we have on earth is all, is all bound up with other materials.  You've gotta put energy in to get the hydrogen out.  And then you put your hydro, the hydrogen into your hydrogen-fueled car or whatever, and perhaps, it higher efficiency, but the efficiency of extracting hydrogen from existing materials is not, is by no means gonna be a perfect process.  You're gonna have some wasted energy there.  So I think that we probably, I mean hydrogen's great--if I give you a bucket of hydrogen, it's fantastic.  You put it in your car.  You can burn it, and you have no fossil fuel.  You just produce water.  It's all fantastic, but the fact is that you can't buy a bucket of hydrogen anywhere.  You have to always produce it, and there are losses associated with any conversion process.  So, so a pipedream.  If metalize hydrogen, you could have a wire of hydrogen.  You could have a wire of, so oxygen undergoes similar processes.  If you press on oxygen very hard, you can form it into a solid and that, in fact, metalizes.  The difficulty with these problems is that they won't always--so diamond is very unique.  You push diamond up, I mean you push graphite, you squeeze it up, you form diamond.  When you release the pressure, it stays as diamond.  Most materials don't do that.  If hydrogen did that, it'd be fantastic.  You would have this wire of very density hydrogen that you could use to drive a car.  I think realistically, that's not gonna happen in my lifetime.  It might be that, you know, thousands of years from now, they go to Jupiter, and they're mining hydrogen where it is, in fact, unbound in Jupiter.  But I don't think we're gonna, we, we probably will metalize hydrogen scientifically, but it won't have the technological impact that was predicted with the hydrogen fuel initiative.  Now, there are other systems though that actually may be useful.  Nitrogen, for example--this is what we worked a lot on, Nitrogen, Nitrogen's in the gas.  It's like 80 percent of the atmosphere.  You can compress Nitrogen and form a high-density solid, and if it stays in the solid phase, and you can find a way to gradually release that energy, that could be an energy, energetic material.  So I think there's a lot of opportunity in energetic materials.  I think studying hydrogen is important in going down that path, but the ultimate end point that really impacts our lives, I'm not sure about that yet.  But there's little doubt that energy, advances in energy technology and energy policy are gonna be really important to our lives in the next 50 years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, have you thought about going to the university environment and teaching?
Speaker 2: I have thought about it.  I have made some forays into trying to secure an academic appointment.  So far, there haven't been, there hasn't been much luck.  And I'm actually very, very happy with where I am at Livermore.  So it's something that I certainly entertain, but as yet, it hasn't materialized.
Story_ID: 24899
Speaker 1: All right, so do you see yourself, you know, retired from Lawrence Livermore [National Laboratory], I mean where (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I certainly could see myself retiring from Lawrence Livermore.  I certainly can see other scenarios.  I enjoy the work I do at Lawrence Livermore.  One, one area that I, that I, that bothers me is that, you know, I don't interact with students as, very much.  We do have graduate students that come through, but my ability to support graduate students and support their careers and help them advance is somewhat limited.  So I only see what we see through our collaborators.  And that's why a university position would be valuable.  I mean I would certainly like to at least replace myself in the talent pool, if not having broader impact, it's like, someone like Dr. [Henry] McBay did.  So that, that is one aspect of my current career that, that gives me some pause.  But I still feel like I'm relatively young (laughter), and have some time to enhance my impact in regard to supporting the underrepresented communities.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that's a consistent theme in all the scientists we've interviewed--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they wanna replicate what they're doing to bring along some young--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --people.
Speaker 2: And, you know, I think my father [Billy Joe Evans] probably can speak more eloquently about this.  But you know, it's, even beyond being, replicating, a lot of times being a successful scientist has to do with confidence.  It has to do with confidence in your abilities to do science.  So, you know, if, if I'm unable to train other physicists, I'm fine.  But if I'm able to help move forward some careers in chemistry and engineering and instill people with the, not the feeling, but the understanding that they can make significant contributions to science, that's, that would be the greatest impact.  You know, not replicating myself, but at least passing on the experience, so that someone else can, can pursue a career and make their mark, would be the, you know, a tremendous accomplishment.
Story_ID: 24900
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you think about everything you've done to this point--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is there any major career move or, that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No, I don't believe so.  I mean, you know, a lot of things worked out for, seemingly fortuitously, my association with the Hertz Foundation and then Livermore, you know, all those, that cumulative experience rolled up and got me where I am now.  I didn't have a conscious, I didn't consciously make a plan like, I'm gonna get associated with the Hertz Foundation and then meet Livermore and then get a job at Lawrence Livermore [National Laboratory].  But a lot of that was perhaps serendipitous.  So, yeah, I, I enjoyed the career as it developed.  I think at times, maybe I should--I don't take as many risks as I would like to, but I think scientists, by their nature, are not risk takers.  When I talk about risks, I'm talking about maybe going out to try a, a start-up venture or, you know, starting companies.  But again, I'm, I'm not in my twenties, but I'm not in my seventies yet either.  So there's still time for things to develop.
Story_ID: 24901
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you have a particular guide or mentor at Livermore {Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory] when you started that stepped up and helped you?
Speaker 2: So, again, this is, things work out, I think, when you--oftentimes, things will work out.  The person who hired me at Livermore was actually a graduate student that had preceded me in [Issac] Silvara's group at Harvard [University].  He, he and I had overlapped for about a year or two at Harvard, and then when he was looking to, when he got--he was at Livermore and established.  He was looking to hire people, and we made contact, and he actually, he was instrumental in getting me the position that I was offered at Livermore.  His name is Hector Lorenzano.  We still, his office is right across the hall from mine.  We still chat and work together on projects.  So, I think I would characterize that as less as a mentoring role as more of a very strong colleague.  I still, you know, I still talk with my father [Billy Joe Evans] quite a bit about career issues.  So that he certainly serves a mentor role.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's, once again, is good, you know.  We interviewed him, and he' really a dedicated man--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, yeah--
Speaker 2: I mean, I guess, also there's the relationships I formed as an undergraduate at Caltech [California Institute of Technology], I still--a lot of those guys, in fact, don't work in physics anymore.  Actually, the majority of them don't work in physics.  The majority of them work in finance.  They work in Wall Street in New York as traders or in, in hedge funds.  But I think that community of friends I developed back then has served me well.  In school, you know, it was someone to work on problem sets with and talk about physics with.  Later in life, it's been people just to bounce ideas off of.  So I think those relationships are probably of great importance.
Story_ID: 24902
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back again at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider your major accomplishments or legacy?
Speaker 2: So, the work I did in hydrogen certainly is important.  I mean that work is, has been cited quite a bit.  The measurements of high-pressure materials, behaviors at high pressure has been important.  I think that this work we're developing on looking at dynamic high pressure will have great impact in the coming years.  I think I've, you know, I can't talk about it, but I think the work in the national security realm has also been important.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a, so I've, I have not been successful in hiring African American physicists at Livermore.  I've tried on two occasions, but the persons got different offers.  But that is one thing I would like to, like to achieve.  I mean it's not really like a notch on a bedpost or ticking off a checkmark in a box, but that's an area that I really would like to have some achievement in.
Story_ID: 24903
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything that you can talk about scientifically that you wanna achieve before--now, you've written quite--how many papers have you authored as a--do you have any idea?
Speaker 2: You know, I, at least sixty, probably more.  So scientifically, it would be really nice--so one of the areas, so I talked about this high-pressure hydrogen, high-pressure nitrogen.  It would be very nice to actually get a material that we take the high pressure that starts as a gas, that we compress the high pressure and we recovered ambient conditions.  So that would be what we call an energetic material, just to emphasize that point.  So if I have a gas, if I get gas and put it in a gas cylinder, right, that gas cylinder is pretty energetic.  If I pop a hole in that gas cylinder, and the thing explodes, right, well, that's still a gas.  If I've squeezed that gas down even further to a solid, you know, a solid material, that's a lot of energy in that material.  And that could have important impact on fuels.  So, this is something you could put in your car engine, for example, to drive it.  It would be a tremendous achievement if we, and we've had some success, for example, in particular, with carbon monoxide.  We've compressed carbon monoxide to high pressure and formed a solid material that was energetic.  The carbon monoxide, unfortunately, didn't persist in the solid phase.  It slowly decomposed over time.  An achievement that I would like to see us get to is to make one of these materials at high pressure that we can recover the ambient conditions, stabilize it and then use it for energy applications.  I think that would have a dramatic transformational effect on energy applications, be it cars, rocket propulsion.  It all depends on how fast the energy comes out, you know, with gasoline, it comes out relatively slowly.  With explosives, it comes out fast.  But, you know, a lot of the propellants that are used for rockets are actually explosives.  So, that would be one scientific achievement that I would like to see us get to.  It may be several, several years off, and it's gonna be a multi-step process.  Once we know it exists--we're using these very small samples to make it.  We then have to scale it up to get larger volumes, but I think that would be a tremendous, I think, achievement.
Story_ID: 24904
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we didn't talk about how you met your wife and your family yet.  So, tell us about how you met your wife and when and a little bit about your family?
Speaker 2: So I met my wife in the Bay area [San Francisco Bay area in California].  My wife's, excuse me [clearing throat] a psycho-therapist with a specialization in child psycho-therapy.  I met her in the Bay area.  We met at kind of a high-tech mixer, that gave, you fill out a short questionnaire, and you could, you could compare your questionnaire results using these little, like fobs, you know, wireless transmitting devices.  We were actually kind of a mediocre match (laughter).  But, we met at, we got together, married.  I've got two, I've got two children, a son and a daughter.  They're two and five, going on three and six.  They are, by far, the most challenging job I will ever have (laughter) 'cause any job this challenging I would probably quit (laughter).  But we live in Oakland [California], in the Bay area.
Speaker 1: Did you find yourself using some of the same rules that your parents had for you in terms of, no TV and that sort of things?
Speaker 2: So my children don't watch TV, yeah, we, they don't watch TV.  They're still relatively young.  We do have a, we do have a different--we are pursuing a different parenting philosophy than my parents.  My parents are Southerners.  They, they grew up in the South in the '60's [1960s].  Their approach to discipline is very different from our approach.  Both of my children go to a Montessori school.  So the goal is to have them empowered, to make them capable of doing for themselves and appreciating their position in society and also being assertive.  So when they don't like something, they need to let somebody know, you know.  So, it's going well.  They, they amaze me in the things they acquire so quickly.  For example, they're in a Spanish emersion program, and so well, they're not studying Spanish out of a textbook, they have teachers that speak to them only in Spanish, and they are learning that very quickly.  Certainly, I've served on that--and the National Science Foundation graduate research fellowship panels for, for evaluating applications and awarding graduate research fellowships.  And certainly, the, the standard of expectation for students now, is frightening.  I mean there are students that, that are on these panels that I, that I reviewed, that don't get awards, who, you know, have started up their own nonprofit to help people in inner cities.  So I believe that, that students nowadays, there're much higher expectations for performance, and so our hope is to give our children the opportunities to, to make these achievements.  And, and they're doing well, so.  But I'm not sure how I would compete nowadays to get some of these applications I see because students, you know, you have a high school student publishing in top-flight, peer-review journals, starting up, you know, a meals for homeless people on the side and getting straight A's at school.  I mean the level of achievement is really fantastic nowadays.  So.
Story_ID: 24905
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything I have not asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I think we've been, we've covered everything pretty thoroughly.  I'm sure there, you know, I probably--if I had a photographic memory, we could talk for as long as I've been alive (laughter), but--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --I think we've covered most of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, maybe we'll come back in forty years and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --pick up.  But, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Wow, again, I think of myself as being young, so I feel I haven't, I may not have yet done the thing I can be remembered for, but I would like to be remembered as someone who was fair, who did quality science, was an honest scientist and showed a genuine interest and concern for other scientists and people.
