Story_ID: 399471
Speaker 1: Okay Reverend. I want to start by asking you, what person has influenced you the most in your life?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I could not just name one person.  I would have to say a number of people have influenced me.  As it relates to Civil Rights, I suppose it would be [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King and the [HM] Reverend Jesse Louis Jackson [Sr.].  When it comes to the ministry--and that is my profession, if you want to call it a profession--that is my life.  In my book I have, 'From Plough Handle to Pulpit,' I name about five ministers that have influenced me so much.  And I think that we kind of became role models.  It was my pastor, Dr. Louis Rawls, who had a lot of influence on me.  That's the reason why I built the church, because he built something back then.  There was Reverend Louis Boddie, who was a Baptist... but not a Baptist... you could not confine him into that, or whatever.  He broke out of it.  And if you notice my ministry, I'm more than just Baptist.  There was Reverend Clarence [H.] Cobbs, who had a very, very, very sophisticated kind of church movement.  And then there was a minister here in Chicago [Illinois]... because I started my ministry here--Reverend C.J. Rogers.  He was the most militant, in a sense, and would attack the power structure.  He was never really satisfied with it, and so forth.  So, all of that had its impact upon me.  So in my civil rights or whatever I do along that line... fighting... it came from Reverend C.J. Rogers.  There was... then [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King came along, and now [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson [Sr.].  When it comes to building a church... that was from Reverend [Louis] Rawls.  When it comes to really control of a body and so forth, I guess I got that from Reverend [Clarence H,] Cobbs.  So, any number of people.  And I think that's what even young people have to do today.  I know you didn't ask me that.  We need to pick out some role models... some role models.  And you need to have more than one.  You get some qualities, some attributes, and what not from this person, then you get some from that person.  And whether it's reading a book or whether it's observing them... and you begin to apply that to your life.  And that's what we are made of.  That's what we are made of, those kind of experiences, and the people that we've been exposed to, that have had a great impact on your life.  So, you get a little bit from here and a little bit from there.  And I don't think you want to ever just accept anybody carte blanche... or absolutely.  Pick out the best part of this, and do away with the rest of them, and keep on stepping.  So, there are a number of people that have had an impact upon my life.  And that impact really took place, to me, after I got grown just about.  Because I came to Chicago [Illinois] looking for better opportunities, like most black people did who left the South going North or to the Midwest.  And I wanted to be a mortician.  Because the most prominent person, in my view, in that little town [Brownsville, Tennessee] who was making money... because they only had one undertaker and one doctor.  And I knew I couldn't be a doctor, so I wanted to be an undertaker.  And dead business is good business with them.  (Laughter).  So, but after I got here, I was called to the ministry.
Speaker 1: Okay, Reverend.
Story_ID: 399472
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, the other question, since you talked about the church, I want to ask this question.  What, what role do you think the church has played--?
Speaker 2: The church, before you even finish the question, I want to say to you is most important, especially for African Americans.  It's the greatest institution.  And I'd rather talk about that than try to name some individual who made contributions to freedom and liberation, and what have you.  It's been an institution, which is the church, which is the church.  It's greater than the home.  Now, no- nothing take the place of the home and a family 'cause we could talk about that all night, and how important it is for family life.  And we used to have good family life, but we didn't have, you know, much of a house to live in; we had a home.  But now, we don't have a home, and we just got a house.  But it's played a very, very important part.  But the church, out of the five institutions that we were saying that kind of control or run our country, the other one's the family, the church, education, business, and government as far as black people are concerned.  It has always been that church that has motivated them, that has encouraged them.  And some of our greatest leaders, whether it be politicians, whether it be businesspeople or whether it be schoolteachers, theatrical people, come right from the church.  That'll be your second society.  Home was first.  Then your mother brought you to church, and then sent you to school.  And some people have never entered into business recently in the last, '50s [1950s], and that kind of thing.  We've gotten into the--so, the church plays a most important part when you're talking about the moral aspect, and teaching us principles and bringing the best out of us, or what the Lord would really have us to be, especially if there's a minister there that has what I would call a holistic ministry.  See, the church is no longer just a pie in the sky.  It has inspired people and kept us together, and gave us hope through slavery and all kinds of other problems we've gone through.  If we could to church and get our spiritual bearings, it kept us in all the other walks of life.  It kept families together, kept you from killing somebody.  It kept you from, you know, other people that have mistreated you.  You kind of hold your peace, and let the Lord fight your battles.  We've always had hope to believe that tomorrow is going to be better than today.  So, it just kept us, as Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] would say, "Not only hoping, but hopping," moving along.  And there is no substitute for the church.  Like I said, there's no substitute for really a family.  And sometimes we expect the church to raise our children, or the school to do it.  That's the family's job to do it; we just assist, we're agents.  Trace it back.  All of the civil rights leaders, most of them, whether it was Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] or whether it was, whoever it was, they came out of the church setting.  So, in one sense or another, we are very religious people, very religious people.  Because man is trichotomy, and we believe in that--that he's body, soul, and mind.  And I don't care how healthy your body and how good your education is, if your inner man, the soul, is messed up, then it affects the rest of that individual.  So, in a holistic kind of gospel, not only do we come to church to worship on Sunday, but we go out to serve at other times.  So, I've got to be interested in where my kids go to school.  I've got to be interested in where people live, where people work.  Their whole life somehow or another become my ministry, and not just over yonder.  And as much as I believe in over yonder, but I've got to be concerned about people every day in life, how they get along.  And most ministers, when they're really committed--and it comes out of that kind of setting.  That's the reason why the church is so, so, so, so important, and will always be.  It's not perfect, it's made up out of human beings, and we're not perfect.  But it's the best institution.  See, we have not always had doctors.  We have not always had lawyers.  We have not always had mayors and governors.  And one day the Lord is going to give us a president who is African American, and is going to give us a woman.  All of that is coming.  But lest we forget our legacy and forget where we came from, you'll find their best people coming right from the church, and interested in liberation of our people.
Story_ID: 399473
Speaker 1: Let me ask you.  What, what importance do you believe the Civil Rights Movement has had here in this country?
Speaker 2: Oh, the most significant thing... it comes out of... because most of them are led by ministers as such.  And the non-violent movement that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King headed up, and what he did... and mobilized and organized, and strategized... and the people to bring to us--and it wasn't just for black people, because white folks needed to be liberated as well--their way of thinking about us and so forth, and it freed them up.  But if it had not been for the [Civil Rights] Movement, you wouldn't be where you are today, neither would I.  They wouldn't have given you a chance.  He was concerned about education, concerned about jobs, concerned about... just what I said, about a holistic gospel--where we live, being able to vote.  So, we have black people now holding office all the way up.  And it never was because we were not qualified.  They used that for a long time--we were not qualified.  Oh, and they were judging us from our color. And Dr. [Martin Luther] King said, "And not our character, but our content."  You are great today, but I hate to tell you, it's no telling where you'd be if you were a white woman.  That's right.  Got as much brains and intelligence as anybody.  But we live in a racist society.  It's just unfortunate, and you can't help it.  I say you can't help it.  And as long as that is there, it's a problem.  But Dr. [Martin Luther] King helped to... and thanks to God we had a [President] Lyndon [B.] Johnson and President [John F.] Kennedy at that time, to kind of bring about some laws that would keep us from going to the back door... that we could get in a restaurant and eat, and go to school in certain places.  That whole thing... and the pressure is going to have to be kept on in order for them to do it.  We thought that we had really got... and for the last fifteen or twenty years since [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King has been gone, I don't know whether we've held our own or not; we're slipping back.
Story_ID: 399474
Speaker 1: Because racism is so prevalent now, more dominant than it was.  It's more blatant now.  It's unfortunate.  And you can't escape it, I can't escape it.  I get along well, and so do you.  But there's a whole lot of... a whole generation, a race of folks that are feeling the effects of it.  And to get above these "isms" which is just very, very, very, very important.  Racism is everywhere.  We must rise above the denomination of "ism."  I'm a Baptist; there's another over at Pentecostal; there's a Church of God; there's a Catholic.  And sometime we thought that our denomination held a monopoly on God and the Bible and Heaven, and what not.  But it's not so.  Racists think that they hold a monopoly on ability, on talent, on gifts.  It ain't so.  We must rise above that, where we can look straight across each other and not look down nor look up, and respect the person for what they are.  We must rise above sexism.  That's the reason why I'm so proud of you and other black women, and women that are doing things.  Because that's a chauvinistic type of thing, to put a woman down.  And that's what Christ Jesus I think, and the church...  Rise above denominationalism, racism, sexism, and party-ism.  God is bigger than all of that.  I don't have no problem with other races; don't have no problem with women, with respecting them.  I have no problem with other denominations.  I believe what I believe, and keep on stepping.  Civil Rights Movement... it would be a fine thing if we could just hang it up and forget about it.  And thank God for organizations that are still out there fighting, and many other ethnic groups who have been trying to get some freedom and what not.  They've been using the philosophy of Dr. [Martin Luther] King, you know what I mean?  Non-violent, but you've got to demonstrate, got to negotiate, and all of that.  And you hear them now singing, "We shall overcome," you know.  We started singing that.  So, it's just very, very important.  And I just hope and pray that the young people that are coming along will somehow or another take the time.  And that's the thing that bothers me.  I was in the Civil Rights Movement before [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King was there, with some others and so forth.  And I marched, and I negotiated, and I demonstrated.  But there are a group of young people now that don't even know [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King, and know nothing about the days of slavery and Jim Crow-ism... racism--when you couldn't go in certain hotels, and couldn't sit at certain lunch counters, and couldn't go to certain schools.  And so, they just take a lot of this for granted.  And it bothers me, because when we become complacent, relaxed, we lose.  And you have to keep the heat on, unfortunately... unfortunately, but it is true.
Story_ID: 399475
Speaker 1: Very good, very good.  Okay, what, what would you say contributed to your success as a black person?
Speaker 2: Being very committed to my calling, if I've been successful.  First of all, I love the Lord God with all of my heart, soul, mind and strength.  I came out of a Christian environment, a Christian home, a Christian mother.  "Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he gets old, he will not depart" [Proverbs 22:6].  I came up in a big family, and those principles have helped me more, I think, than anything else.  From my home life, is to know how to pray.  See, I learned how to pray before I was a Christian.  "Now I lay me down to sleep.  I pray the Lord..."  I had to say a Bible verse.  Respect old people.  Just, just, just respect.  Don't lie, don't steal.  Don't be afraid of work.  Those are characteristics that will certainly help you.  And that came from home training, to stay with the Lord.  Love people, treat everybody right, don't kill, don't lie... don't steal.  Trust the Lord with all your heart.  Lean not to your own understanding.  So, part of that... so when I became a Christian, and when the Lord called me to preach, some of those principles were already instilled within me.  And since I, quote unquote, "didn't have a lot of formal academic training," it taught me to observe.  And observation is a great teacher, great opportunity.  After the Lord called me into the ministry, I wanted to be as successful as some of those pastors... and I called their names... who were doing well.  So, I observed them.  What did they do?  If you want to be good at something, watch what the others are doing.  Observe, then go after it.  But I think you have to be totally committed.  Make up your mind.  Get you some goals.  While you're young, get you some goals, long range and short range goals, and you can work through all of it.  So, my motto is, "It's no secret what God can do.  What he's done for others, he'll do for you."  And that's really a part of me.  If he did it for those preachers, I... this is my vocation, this is my life.  If he did it for them, he will do it for me.  Pick out your field that you think you've got a gift in.  I used to try sing a little bit.  And I was singing before I went into the ministry, you know.  And use all of the gifts that the Lord has given you.
Story_ID: 399476
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Reverend Evans, what would you like to be remembered for?
Speaker 1: Well, I don't have no money.  As I said again, and humbly, I said I don't have degrees or any of that... as a great educator.  But I suppose I'm a man, a man with a word, a man with honesty, a man with integrity... that if I tell you something, you can count on that.  A man who has integrity... that you can trust, and who's tried to help somebody other than myself... in trying to help others in any way that I possibly could.  Remember me for that; and that I tried to make a contribution while I was here.  I think I would like to be remembered that I was honest, not a crook, has integrity... and if he tells you something, you can count on that... and committed to his calling.  And that's about the best way that I can put it.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: Thanks.
Story_ID: 399477
Speaker 1: Sir, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Clay Evans.  C-L-A-Y, E-V-A-N-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Brownsville, Tennessee, the place; June 23rd, 1925.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired pastor at this time.  Yeah, at this time I'm a retired pastor.
Speaker 1: What's the name of your church?
Speaker 2: It was Fellowship Baptist Church.  And I say 'was,' now that's past.  I don't claim to be the pastor of it now.  They still run my name as the Founder, because I'm the founder, and sometimes as senior pastor.  But this is the Fellowship Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Yes, Sir.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today, what is it?  The 26th, I believe it is.
Speaker 1: It's the, I think it's the 30th of January [01/30/2003].
Speaker 2: Is it January 30th?  See there, I'm off on even the... I don't know.  I'm just glad to be alive, you know. (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And the year?
Speaker 2: Two Thousand and Three [2003].
Speaker 1: Yes.  Okay, and where are at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're sitting in the sanctuary of the Fellowship Baptist Church at 45th Place and Princeton Avenue, Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 399478
Speaker 1: All right.  Can you give us the names of your mother and father, and their birthdates, please?
Speaker 2: I don't know their birthdates.  Both of them are deceased now.  But my mother's name was Estanuly, E-S-T-A-N-U-L-Y, Estes, E-S-T-E-S; that was her maiden name.  And I'm really, in a sense, a junior, because my father's name was Clay.  His name was Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Clay Evans.  They dropped the Henry and just called me Clay, yeah.
Speaker 1: And when were they, roughly when were they born?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I would have to possibly look up some documents on that.  But I have it in a book.  But they both are deceased at this time.
Speaker 1: Yes, Sir.  Do you think it was in the latter part of the 19th century, the 1890's, or after the turn of the century?
Speaker 2: I would say before.
Speaker 1: Before?
Speaker 2: The turn of the century.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have five brothers and got three sisters.
Speaker 1: And where do you fall in the-
Speaker 2: I'm about the third or fourth [sic, fourth from oldest] from the oldest.
Story_ID: 399479
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, before we get into depth, there are five People Magazinish-type questions we ask.  And we always ask them, and they just require a short answer.  And the first question is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, I like all food.  (Laughter).  I'm a Southerner.  And I don't know if I really have any favorite food.  I love to eat.  That's one thing you'll never have any trouble out of me about, is my diet.  So, I make it very easy for whoever is fixing, preparing dinner, you know, unless you go strictly soul food--like pig feet, chitterlings, and greens and cornbread and all of that kind of stuff.  Yeah, I love food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you don't have any dietary restrictions?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  And that is surprising, to be my age, and what I've gone through as... with a sickness.  I'm not restricted to a diet as such.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, sir, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't have a favorite color.  I used to try to stay with the conservative, because of my profession as a minister.  It would be blue, black, grey; in that family.  Most of my suits are black, blue, grey... a few others, but not necessarily a favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like the spring and the fall, the change of the seasons.  But tropical is alright with me.  Spring, summer, fall and winter.  But it seems that after spring when summer is coming in, or when summer is leaving out, and the fall... going into the winter, that I enjoy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Sir, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.  You know, because out of the number of years that I was pastoring, believe it or not, I never took a vacation.  I was quite committed, dedicated to my work, and got joy out of doing it.  And the joy of the Lord is my strength.  So therefore, no favorite place for vacation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm going to try to enjoy some of that now.
Speaker 1: Now, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I have that.  In my religious area I always adopted the theme, "It's no secret what God can do," you know.  And I've always believed in that.  But as far as a favorite, if so, it would be biblical, you know, "Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and lean not to your own understanding.  But in all your ways acknowledge Him, and let Him direct your path."  Yeah.
Story_ID: 399480
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  Now, sir, I would like to ask you about you about what you know about your family.  Tell me as much as you know about where your family came from, what they were doing, you know.  I don't know how far you can go back, but go back as far as you can.  And if you have any stories about some of your ancestors or what they were doing, you know, prior to the Civil War maybe, or--
Speaker 2: Ah, we were Tennesseans and crop sharers as such.  My father and my mother lived on the farm.  And... a religious background.  My mother and father was quite involved in the church.  My mother worked with the choir.  I don't know if my daddy ever had a position or what not in the church, but they were religious people.  And I came up in that kind of environment, that kind of setting, that we were taught religiously.  They believed in that.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  Now, I was asking like what... if you had any information about where your... what your people were doing way back... way back, you know.
Speaker 2: I know they were...
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't have that information.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's no talk about like, if they were-
Speaker 2: Slavery time...
Speaker 1: --if they were in slavery, or not?  Or if they--
Speaker 2: Ah-
Speaker 1: Were your ancestors-
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you see, I was born in... what, '25' [1925].
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: You know, they were just kind of in slavery time, coming out from there as such.  And being sharecroppers working on the farm, they wound up always in debt, never completely going out of debt.  And they were only three-fifths human beings in that day... not really considered as being human beings... and were treated as slaves, and treated as second or third class citizenship.  And I remember they came to take everything... like they would do in the fall... because you never paid out.  They kept the books, you didn't keep books for what you owed.  And if they said you owed them, you owed them.  And they came there to clean us out, to take the little stuff that we had.  And my mother took some peas and hid them under the tick.  It wasn't a mattress... we didn't have mattresses... on the bed... and said that Mr. Benford would never take that.  If he took the old wagon or buggy or an old plug mule, or plows... she was saving that for her children to eat.  And to think about... that your parents had to do something like that... that white folks were just that mean and that cruel and inhuman that they would take everything that you had.
Speaker 1: Now, do you suspect that your ancestors were slaves?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Did your grandparents or anybody pass down any stories about where they were, and things like that-
Speaker 2: No, if so, I didn't hear it-
Speaker 1: From slavery-
Speaker 2: --not in my presence.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they didn't... there's no...  Were your ancestors from that same part of Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, there's no story about them moving to any other place?
Speaker 2: No, not that I know of.
Story_ID: 399481
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell me, do you know the name... well, who are your grandparents?  Can you tell me something about them?
Speaker 2: Tom Evans on my father's side, and on my mother's side was General Estes.  I think that's what they called him, I don't know.
Speaker 1: E-S-T-E-S?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But that's all that I know about them.
Speaker 1: Did they, I mean did you know them when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: I remember them slightly, yeah.
Speaker 1: What were they like?  I mean, that you remember?
Speaker 2: I was too young to really tell, other than... the grandparents were always great-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to grandchildren.
Speaker 1: Did they play with you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  You know, grandparents are always nicer than you're your parents, you know.  No, just seeing them occasionally, yeah.  They were on the farm-
Speaker 1: Did they live with you?
Speaker 2: --in their section.  And we were on the farm in our section.  And you didn't have transportation-- no, we didn't live in the same house with them--that you have now.  So, you might see them once or twice a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or something like that.
Story_ID: 399482
Speaker 1: Sir, tell us about your father.  He's Clay Evans, his name was Henry Clay Evans?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was it, Henry?
Speaker 2: They called him Clay Evans, but he was Henry Clay Evans, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Do you, do you know where he got his name from?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Now, Henry Clay sounds like, suspiciously, like [Senator and Secretary of State] Henry Clay, the old-time politician in the 1800's.
Speaker 2: All right, all right, all right.  (Laughter).  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Henry Clay Evans... and what was he like?  I mean, what did he do?  And you know, what kind of person was he?
Speaker 2: He was a provider, and did I think a marvelous job with us, and provided for the family such as he could, but limited in what he...  When you're a sharecropper, you're limited.  And he had a little side occupation where he dug wells, and picked up a little something on the side.  He was a wonderful man, a wonderful man.
Speaker 1: It sounds like hard work, you know.
Speaker 2: The man provided for his family, doing the best that he could under those circumstances, yes.
Speaker 1: Had, did he have the opportunity to go to school, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No, uh-uh.  I don't know how far my father got in school, but not any... My mother got I think to the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, he was a sharecropper, basically.  And did he have to move around a lot?  Or was he-
Speaker 2: During my coming up, I think I remember we lived in three different houses, yeah.  They was trying to, you know, to better their condition, and move here or move there.  But it was the same type house, although it wasn't up...
Speaker 1: Now, were you and your father very close?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you remember specific things he told you about life, or-
Speaker 2: No.  Well, they... together, you know, told us how to... as children to love each other and help each other and respect each other... respect old people.  That was their strong philosophy, you know what I mean; that you respect older people, whether they were your parents or not; you obeyed them like you did your parents.  And he did tell me a story once that his dad [Tom Evans] had told them when his daddy was on his sick bed.  He called all of them around, his sisters and brothers, and did this [folds his hands together].  And he said, "Do you all know what that means?"  And they said, "No."  He said, "That means stick together."  He cherished that; that his father told him that the family ought to always stick together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they brought us up that way.  I have a very closely knit family... my sisters and brothers... based upon that same philosophy.
Story_ID: 399483
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you tell us anything else about your father?
Speaker 2: Not that I can think of, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever work with him?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, we plowed.  They started the children out early doing what they were doing when we were living on the farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you ever help him with the well work, digging wells?
Speaker 2: No, not digging wells, but plowing and chopping and picking cotton, and all of that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Do you remember, now digging wells seemed like a specialized task.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he and his brothers, yeah.
Speaker 1: You've got to know where to dig, first of all.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You'd have to... it was hard work, it seemed like.
Speaker 2: I would think that it is, but I never did do it.  I don't...
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's an art to it.  You just said, you know, first of all you've got to know where to dig, as much as possible, from a scientific point of view.  And they didn't have science to tell them.  You know, they had a forked stick that they'd walk along a piece of ground.  And if that stick seemed to be pulling down, it meant there was water there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, sometimes it was right, and sometimes it was wrong.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just like any other scientific, you know... sometimes they hit it and sometimes they didn't.  But if you walk along-
Speaker 1: Kind of hit and miss?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And if you felt that stick pulling down, there was water there somewhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you ever, you know, do fun things with him, like go fishing and stuff like that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Was there any recreation time for you?
Speaker 2: In later years when he came to Chicago [Illinois], me and my other brother... they liked to hunt.  So that's what we did sometime in the South in the fall, was hunt.  So, we started hunting here, and sometimes he would go with us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have dogs?
Speaker 2: No.  On the farm over there, he had one or two dogs, but they weren't hunting dogs.  They were just d-o-g-s.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Laughter) Just plain dogs, huh.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Who loved to eat; they were just there at the house.
Story_ID: 399484
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your mother.  Now, what was her name again?
Speaker 2: Estanuly, E-S-T-A-N-U-L-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a great cook, like most children think their parents... mother was a great cook.  And trying to raise all of us in two or three rooms, you know, doing the best she possibly could... and worked with her choir.  She was the musician there for I think... the best she could do and so forth.
Speaker 1: She could play the piano?
Speaker 2: A little bit, yeah.  But back then at that time, it didn't take much.  Like, it didn't take much of an education.  She even taught school I think for a little bit.  Eighth grade, in the country.  White folks didn't care about who you had over here.  And she possibly was the most educated at that time.  They were hard to find, you know.
Speaker 1: There weren't very many people... very few... many adults around that could read or write when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they couldn't read and write, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your mother like?  I mean, what, what, what did she like to do?  And you know, what...  Did she have a job other than working at home?
Speaker 2: She had a garden.  It was housework and gardening... all kinds of vegetables, and one thing or another.  And really, that's how we survived.  Because we didn't survive off of what Daddy [Henry Clay Evans] made in the field and so forth.  But man, she could take a little garden, a little plot of land, and put a fence around it and raise carrots, beans, peas, beets, everything in that little garden and, and, and canned it, oh yes.  She used to raise enough that she could take to town and peddle on the street as a livelihood.  But really, our main support to a great extent came from Mama, and what she did with that little plot of ground.  My mother raised vegetables, took it to town, peddled it on the street, and that kind of thing.  A great woman.
Speaker 1: She sounds resourceful.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she sew, too?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have any other memories of your mother that you could share?  Anything that she may have told you, to help you in your development?
Speaker 2: Since we never owned a farm, she, through selling vegetables and being creative and being a genius almost, bought an acre... a half-acre of land.  But that's all we have ever owned.  And she said to us, "If I left you wealth or money, white folks can take that from you.  But if I leave you with some principles, nobody can take that away from you.  Be honest, don't be afraid to work, treat people like you want to be treated.  Nobody can take that from you.  If I leave you money or I leave you wealth, they can take it."
Story_ID: 399485
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  Now, could you reflect back on your days of growing up?  And you grew up in Brownsville, Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Number one, to grow up in a big family is quite an experience.  Because you're short on everything--food, clothing... you have to wear hand-me-downs.  Shoes with cardboards for the sole and shucks in them in the wintertime.  Christmastime... maybe getting some candy, an apple or orange, no toys that would do any good.  So, at home it was sacrificial, and with three and four in the same bed.  And when you got that many, you've got to be careful how you turn and everything, sleeping with three and four.  It's so much different from today, but you asked me about back then.  Having to walk to school, miles sometimes down the muddy road.  You'd go to school for three or four months, and you're out... using secondhand books that's been transferred from white schools to black schools.  Two, sometimes three, teachers in the same classroom.  So, the whole thing was difficult; difficult, difficult, difficult.  And the racial thing was very obvious.  There was a lot of hate, bigotry, in growing up in the South and in a community like that.  It was more difficult in some instances for me, because I was a late bloomer.  It was difficult... a slow learner.  But not only having been a slow learner and a late bloomer, I was very sickly.  I had double pneumonia when I was a baby.  I didn't talk until I was two.  So, all of these things had an effect on me.  My future was looking very dark, not promising at all.  They thought that I would never be able to take care of myself; that my sisters and brothers would have to take care of me.  I could not do the manual labor, like my even younger brother than me could do, because I did not have the physical strength and what not to do it.  So, within my own family, it was negative.  Not everybody, not everybody.  My mother and father was good.  And people have a way of comparing you.  They don't mean no harm.  "You can't do what your younger sister or younger brother can do."  They didn't encourage me, and I was doing the best that I could.
Story_ID: 399486
Speaker 1: (Unclear). Then I had to face the hostility in the South that we did.  It, it, it, it was rough.  I'll never forget one day walking down the street, my cousin and I.  When we got ready to go to high school... I barely made it out of elementary school... my mama wasn't able to send us... Mama and Papa.  I had to work my way through there, and get little jobs.  And I'm from the country.  City boys, after school, they'd go the show... get their girls.  I had found a little job, so I worked in the morning sometimes and the evening.  But my story that I was getting to...  An old white man on a stick, about sixty or seventy years old... my cousin and I was on the street.  And when he got from here to there, he told us to get off the sidewalk.  Anytime you'd see a white man coming... when you see a white man, he'd tell you to get off the street.  "Yes, sir, yes, sir."  So, to take that kind of humiliation... I don't care who you are, you've got some feelings in you.  I don't want to jump ahead, but that's the reason why I felt the segregation and racism before I came to Chicago [Illinois].  That's the reason why it wasn't difficult for me to get with [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King once I got out.  But in the South, the South... and Brownsville [Tennessee] is about seventy miles east of Memphis [Tennessee].  It was the most hostile place.  And when you go around the square to City Hall... that's about the size of the city.  But they did not allow foreigners.  When I say foreigners... a black person, to come through there driving a car without stopping them.  If you were out of state, you could expect... either you're driving too fast or driving too slow.
Speaker 2: And they'd stop you?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: And give you a ticket?
Speaker 1: Oh, they'd make you pay.  You didn't get no ticket at that time... or lock you up.  That's how they got their revenue.  You talking about profiling... that ain't something just started... no.  Anybody will tell you... in fact, if you came through Brownsville [Tennessee] driving a car... a nigger had to be stopped.  And whatever they said... if they said you were guilty, that was it, and they fined you for it.  They didn't give you tickets back then.
Speaker 2: We're going to change tapes right here.
Story_ID: 399487
Speaker 1: Now, I was going to ask you about... well, I was asking you about violence, racial violence, in that part of Tennessee.  Did you witness any, or did you know anybody that was subject to that kind of violence?
Speaker 2: I'll tell you how hostile and tense the segregation and bigotry and racism was in Brownsville, Brownsville, Brownsville [Tennessee].  I remember back in the forties [1940s]... I left there in '45' [1945].  But we were trying to get the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Brownsville [Tennessee].  They didn't allow Jet Magazine to be in Brownsville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: In Brownsville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: I ain't talking about the Ebony [Magazine].  But even... that was a magazine you could not have.
Speaker 1: Oh, you couldn't get a copy of it?
Speaker 2: No, it didn't exist in Brownsville [Tennessee].  You better not be caught with one.  But my story is that there was some who advocated the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and they wanted to get a chapter started in Brownsville [Tennessee].  They took that man and lynched him and killed him [Elbert Williams, 1940].  They didn't hang him up; they killed him and threw him in the Hatcher River.  The Hatchie River is right outside of Brownsville [Tennessee] going towards Memphis [Tennessee].  And they told the black undertaker to "go down there and get that nigger right where he was."  But they had killed him because he was advocating the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: Now, this is in the 1940's?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yes, in the 1940's.  So, you know what that did; and that's what they always did.  That's the first... and it scared everybody else who would even think about belonging to an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], an organization that advocated something for black folks.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were small, did the [Ku Klux] Klan parade through town?
Speaker 2: I never saw them.  I never saw... I never witnessed.
Speaker 1: I know in some communities they actually did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they actually did.  I'm sure that they did in Brownsville [Tennessee], but I didn't see it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, it wasn't as much concealed and hid.  It was to be expected, and to be... frighten off... or feared.  And that's what they always did, was planted fear.  And they'd take on black person and make an example out of him, and that would put fear in everybody else.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any exceptions to this in Brownsville [Tennessee] that you ran across?  Were there any white people who had--?
Speaker 2: You've always got some good, you know, that looked like it did not exist with them, and they were kind.  But always that kind of... that was dormant.
Speaker 1: They didn't run things.
Speaker 2: No.  If they did, you know, behind the scenes.  Mr. so-and-so was just all right, was just all right... yeah.
Story_ID: 399488
Speaker 1: Now, when you were a little boy, you said you were a slow learner and-
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --had to kind of catch up.  But was there any particular figure, or teacher, or minister, or someone in the community that helped you catch up?
Speaker 2: Not from an academic point of view, no.  I just had to struggle through that... the mental thing, and try to maintain pretty good health.  This is funny, but yet it can be looked at from a very positive view, when you think of where I am today.  I never made A's and B's in school.  Mine was C average.  I couldn't do no better.  I'll make it as a real joke.  Sometimes the only 'B' I saw on my card was when I was bad, and the 'A' was when I was absent.  But the point is that if you can live through that kind of thing, you can be successful.  There may not be a lot of A's and B's out here in society, but they're doing well.  Now the downside of that is that if you excel all the way through, the moment you hit some problems out here, you don't know how to deal with it.  Let me repeat that.  A person that has made A's and B's, and get out in society and can't make them, they become very frustrated.  It's not frustration to me, because that's in my life.  That's been my survival.  It's not first, but second.  You'll find that kind of spirit and personality in a person that knows how to endure, knows how to stay with it.  But that's the downside of a person who's always excelled.  When they do meet some storm of life, or hit the valley, they go to pieces.
Story_ID: 399489
Speaker 1: Sir, did you have any things that you liked to do for fun when you were coming up?  Was there any particular activity that you enjoyed, things that you enjoyed?
Speaker 2: Music, always.  And I loved to dance, but never could dance.  And I was always in the church.
Speaker 1: So was the church a big part of your life?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  That was an outlet for me.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Woodlawn Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, who?
Speaker 2: Woodlawn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: W-O-O-D-L-A-W-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that--?
Speaker 2: In Brownsville, Tennessee, out in the country, about seven or nine miles from the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: From the town.
Speaker 1: How many little churches were out there?  Was that--?
Speaker 2: Oh, you'd find churches in, black churches in every community, yeah. But in that particular community of Brownsville [Tennessee], was that the only Baptist church?
Speaker 1: No, we was out in the country.  Up in the city we had to go Brownsville [Tennessee].  I guess there were four or five churches--Methodist Church, Church of God in Christ, Baptist church and so forth, yeah, in the little town area.
Speaker 2: So, and Woodlawn [Baptist Church, Brownsville, Tennessee], who was the pastor there?
Speaker 1: We had two or three.  See, remember the church is in a rural... never... I shouldn't say never, but they often changed leadership.  Because in the rural... at that time they only operated... way back it was one Sunday a month.  Then they got to two Sundays... the first and third or second and fourth Sunday.  But not every Sunday, like we have now.  So, consequently, the deacons was in charge all the rest of the week, because the pastor was somewhere else--maybe didn't even live there--lived in another little community.  So, they had to take charge of the business.  So, in a large sense, they were the pastors.  The preacher was just a preacher.  And if it looked like he gained too much influence, or one thing or another... because they weren't going nowhere.  They got rid of him and got another one.  So, when I came up during my lifetime, what did we have?  About three different pastors-- McCargle, Grafton, and [Reverend J.A.] Caldwell.
Speaker 2: Caldwell, I've heard that name before.  Caldwell, Grafton, and who was the other one?
Speaker 1: Caldwell.
Speaker 2: [Reverend J.A.] Caldwell, okay.  Any... well, did you have a favorite pastor?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Grafton, the man that I was converted under when I was ten years old.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Tell us about that.  I mean, what was conversion like?  I mean did you-
Speaker 1: It just meant simply accepting the Lord as your personal Savior, believing that He died for your sin and he rose again... He's in heaven... and confessing your faith in Him... He does the saving, you can't save yourself.  They made it sometime a little more dramatic than that--that being converted was falling out on the floor, and on the ground.  But the Bible says, "He that believeth with their heart and confess it with their mouth, the Lord Jesus, and believe God has raised him from dead, is saved."  It's a belief, it's a faith that we put in Him for our salvation... that we don't save ourselves.  And that wasn't no problem for me to accept it during the revival.  Because they always had revivals once a year.  And when the preacher said, "Can you accept Him?"  "Yes."  Why?  Because I'd been taught at home.  My mother had laid the groundwork, and told us how to pray before we eat our meal and before we go to bed.  "Now I lay me down to sleep, I pray the Lord my soul to keep.  If I die before I wake, I pray the Lord my soul to take."  We couldn't eat our food until we said "Jesus wept."  So, those rituals were done even before I was converted, or before I said yes to the Lord.  So, that wasn't difficult; I had heard about the Lord in my home.
Speaker 2: Now, Sir, was there ever an opportunity... and I've often wondered this, you know, observing the church.  Was there ever a time when a young man or woman said "No?"
Speaker 1: You could tell by your action.  You didn't move... you didn't accept the Lord.  So, that decision not to go was a decision to say "I don't want to," you know.
Speaker 2: Because I know I've never heard anybody say "No."
Speaker 1: No, oh no.
Speaker 2: So, it's the same time... that they don't move-
Speaker 1: If they don't move, that is the "no."
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 399490
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, your household already was-
Speaker 2: Pretty much a religious household.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't have to... it wasn't a stretch for you to get involved with the church, because you-
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  I never heard a lot of cussing, and swearing, and drinking, and one thing or another.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have specific jobs to do in the church?  Did they give you responsibilities?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  No, I was trying to sing some.  You'd sing in the choir, or something like that.
Speaker 1: So, they didn't ask you to do anything around the church to help out or anything?  Did you have to make recitations on certain Sundays?
Speaker 2: Oh, you'd bring your children up to say Easter speeches... and Children's Day, that kind of thing.  And you'd have to have some talent.  It's the same, you know, as it is... you know... Children's Day and on Easter Sunday they have a little program, and children get involved in doing something like that.  I think it's more extensive now than it was at that time.
Speaker 1: And did, did you have the Baptist Training Union then?
Speaker 2: I don't even know if we had it in the country at that time.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they, did they let the children help teach Sunday School, and that sort of thing?  Did you help?
Speaker 2: No, I don't recall.  Not at Brown... not at Woodlawn [Baptist Church, Brownsville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  But the church was a positive experience for you?
Speaker 2: It still is for the black community, very positive.
Speaker 1: In your particular case, what was the most attractive thing about the church?
Speaker 2: The preaching and the singing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, do you think the community would have been just as--I mean, did it make the community better than it would have been otherwise?
Speaker 2: That's always true anywhere at any time. The church is the... whatever... for the community.
Speaker 1: Now did it, did it provide a meeting place for the community, too?  I mean, I'm just trying to get in all the things the church was doing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, most of our great colleges and schools and one thing or another came out of the church, which was headed up by the religious thing for us in the black community, the stabilizing force in our faith in God.  And our church is the most effective, influential institution that we have.  There's the home, there's the church, there's education, there's business, there's government--those five... for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's the home and the church.
Speaker 1: Do you think the church is as important to the white community as it is to-
Speaker 2: I don't know.  It ought to be.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 399491
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about school.  Now, what school did you go to, and how did you like it?
Speaker 2: Well, because I was slow learner, it never impressed me too much about school.  So, it's like anything else--that which you did not grasp too well, you don't enjoy it.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Carver [High School, Brownsville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: And that was like from grade school all the way through high school?
Speaker 2: No, that was a little school in the country.  I don't know if it even had a name.  Woodlawn School, I guess.
Speaker 1: Was it in the church, held in the church?
Speaker 2: No, right down from the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in that community it was the only one?
Speaker 2: Let's see, yeah, that's right.  Back in those days, the one thing I know you always found was a schoolhouse not too far from the church house.  They were closely related.
Speaker 1: I know in some instances they were in the same building.
Speaker 2: Yeah, same building, that's true.  That's true, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you said you didn't... you know, you didn't make real great grades in school, but you were there; you were consistent, you know.  And by the time you got to high school, I mean, what did you...  Did you...
Speaker 2: It wasn't no better.  That's what I'm talking about mostly.  I realized that in school I was just hanging in there.  To show you how slow I was... and this is unbelievable.  To the other part... about joking about the 'B' on the card when I was bad, and 'A' when I was absent...  When I came out of high school, I was twenty-one.  You're out of college then.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to school all that time until you were twenty-one?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And was that unusual in that community?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: To be in school that long?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, well-
Speaker 2: I must have gotten there...  I don't remember the age.  I must have gotten there late, though, to high school.  Because I was possibly held back in grammar school.  To be twenty-one years old, you're almost more than grown.
Speaker 1: And did most teenagers finish high school when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, quite a few, yes, yes.  Most of them did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was wondering if they... if the majority finished high school, or went on and did something else.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, when you graduated from high school, I mean... well, when you were in high school were you involved in any high school activities?  And how big was your school?
Speaker 2: Our school had about nine rooms in the high school.  I was involved in the Glee Club, singing again.  That was about the size of it, very small.
Speaker 1: Was that about-
Speaker 2: That was in '45' [1945].  Yeah, in '45' [1945].
Speaker 1: Were you involved in sports or anything when you were in school?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 399492
Speaker 1: Now, when you graduated, you were twenty-one.  And, I mean did, I mean what were you... what were your prospects when you graduated?  What did you think you would do next?
Speaker 2: Get out of Brownsville [Tennessee], "get out of Dodge" just as soon as I could.  I graduated in June and came right here [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  You graduated in what, 19-
Speaker 2: Nineteen Forty Five [1945].
Speaker 1: Forty Five [1945], okay.  And so, you came to Chicago [Illinois] right away?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a month afterwards, something like that.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, did you already have relatives here?
Speaker 2: No, I had some acquaintances, my family did.  And even being a grown man, I had to ask my mother and father.  And I chose between St. Louis [Missouri] and Chicago [Illinois].  I had relatives in St. Louis [Missouri].  My mother and all of her people had migrated to St. Louis [Missouri].  But I didn't want to go to St. Louis [Missouri]... St. Louis...  Thank you Lord.  I wanted to come to Chicago [Illinois], and that's what I did.  And I stayed with an acquaintance of my parents at 31st and State Street.  And they were turning storefronts into...  That was not... that was kitchenettes, they called them kitchenettes.  But they had turned stores and cut them up... and sometimes a community kitchen, community bathroom... right under the "L" at 31st and State.  I slept in the hallway, and rats was all around.  I woke up with rats running across my feet.  I stayed there with them.
Speaker 1: So, what kind of employment did you find in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Uh, he was working--a boy by the name of Barnes--at a pickup company called Cole Smith, and he got me a job there.
Story_ID: 399493
Speaker 1: That brings up an interesting question because I came here, really, as most people who migrated to the North, looking for better opportunities.  I not only wanted to get away from the hostility of racism and bigotry and all of that kind of thing but looking for better opportunities.  Knew it wasn't no opportunities from there, and the greatest thing to me was, I came here to be an undertaker, a mortician.
Speaker 2: Now, why did you, I mean how did you (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because the most prosperous person in Brownsville [Tennessee], a black man, was a mortician.  I remember dead business is good business for a mortician.  (Laughter) It ain't funny. It's funny, but it's true.  If nobody dies, you got no business.  So, don't tell me all dead business is bad business.  Dead business is good business.  Now you don't go around wishing people would die, but if they don't, you ain't got no business.  A man by the name of Al Rawls in Brownsville, Tennessee was the most prominent.  White folks and all respected him.
Speaker 2: His last name is spelled how?
Speaker 1: Rawls, R-A-W-L-S.
Speaker 2: Just like Lou Rawls?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And he was respected by all, because he was part of the status quo.  He didn't go against--.  But that was the man they also told to go down and get that man out of Hatcher River.  But this undertaker, but Rawls had that town sewed up with business, with cars and houses and--.  So I wanted to be an undertaker, mortician.  Never thought about no preaching.
Speaker 2: Now, this raises an interesting question.  You know, a lot of people that you talk to from small towns in the South say that the undertakers were the most prosperous person in town.  Why do you--I mean, black person in town.  Why do you suppose that's true?  Do you have any thoughts on that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because they get to bury all the blacks.  The whites wasn't going to bury them there.  They weren't liberal enough.  Now, I have gone to some cities down there near Cairo [Illinois] so on, whites buried black folks.  And that was so strange to me when I saw that.  Went down there to a person's funeral, and here they come up ushering in our folks, handling the women and all.  That upset me.  But in Brownsville they had to have somebody to bury them.  It wasn't but two of them.  It was Rawls, and I forget the other one's name.  But he was the man.  So, if you're burying all the dead, you've got to do all right.  So when I came here and inquired about it, and at that time it would cost you a thousand dollars to complete mortuary school, and I didn't have a dime.  So, I thought I would work until I did get it.  And that's a long story, started to work trying to save up some money, go to mortuary school.  I met my wife in there.  But that's the reason why I came to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, if you want to be successful and success meant making money.
Story_ID: 399494
Speaker 1: Now, did Chicago [Illinois] meet your expectations?  You had never been out of Brownsville [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I had.
Speaker 1: You had?
Speaker 2: And that's one of the reasons why...  During the summer months of high school, I used to come here.  And that's how I knew them... and work a month or two making money, and go back to go to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were familiar with Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: To a great extent, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Had you spent the summers in St. Louis [Missouri], too?
Speaker 2: No, thank God.  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Now, you say that.  Now what is the-
Speaker 2: I don't like St. Louis [Missouri], and I like Chicago [Illinois]; that's it, you know.  So, I don't have to go no further.  If you don't like something-
Speaker 1: Yes, Sir.  (Laughter). Alright.
Story_ID: 399495
Speaker 1: So, so, you--now you met your wife [Lutha Mae Evans] about this time, when you first got here?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  A year or two after I got here, I met her.  Also, the second thing that I did when I came to Chicago [Illinois], was to get in church.  That's my background, that's my roots.  So, I joined Tabernacle [Missionary] Baptist Church at 4130 Indiana [Chicago, Illinois] under Dr. Louis Rawls... Lou Rawls again.
Speaker 1: Was he related to--?
Speaker 2: Supposed to be, yeah.  And I started going to church and I met my wife in the choir.  That's my background, a singer.  And we got married, and I started to raise my family.  Right after I got married then we... I got what we call the call, the call.
Speaker 1: Now, how was-
Speaker 2: To be a preacher.  It's just a personal thing.  It happened for me.  It may not happen for you.  It's just like, you know that you know that you know certain things.  It's an impulse, it's an urge; you're not satisfied doing anything else but that.  That's my advice to young preachers today.  If you can do anything else but preach, please don't preach.  It's not optional, it's not professional.  "If I flunk at being a scientist or being a lawyer, I'll preach."  No, it's... to me, it doesn't work that way.  It's a calling on your life.  It's a compelling... it's an urge--that you don't find happiness or satisfaction in doing anything else.  That way I think that you know, just like you know you're saved.  Some people think they're saved because they fall out... they fall on the floor, they slobber.  There are others...  Because of Christ being in my life, I've accepted Him by faith.  I have a certain relationship with God that I did not have otherwise.  So, that happened, that we did get married.  But I got called into the ministry.  So, knowing that academically I was not prepared because of my background, then here comes another burden; that I got to do something, because I never wanted to be mediocre.  If I'm going to do it, at least give it the best shot that I got.  I didn't want to be just another... I wanted to be exceptional.  So, He told me that you need to get in school.  That's the first calling, so to speak, is to prepare yourself.  So I enrolled in school here, a seminary, the Chicago Baptist Institute, and got my seminary work from there.  I went to two or three other little schools for summer for brush-up courses, that kind of thing... but to prepare myself to be a leader.  And I suppose I had another complex kind of thing, because of my slowness, and not being apt.  I've always had the inferiority complex; people don't know that.  But I, I, I, I, I say all these negative things to say to young people, "If Clay Evans has made it, so to speak..." quote unquote, (unclear) "...with these things against you, you can do it."
Speaker 1: Okay. We have to pause here again.
Story_ID: 399496
Speaker 1: Okay, we're ready again.  Sir, I want to know what was seminary like, and what did you learn?
Speaker 2: You know, and I'm saying that I think the calling to anything, first of all, calls us to prepare ourselves--if you're going to be a doctor, or be a lawyer, or an engineer.  And that's one of the fallacies, one of the weaknesses--that many times you won't do it.  And that's what I want young ministers to know about that.  Now, I'll get back to answer your question.  If you think the Lord has called you to preach in this day and time, which we call it the enlightenment time, you can't get by on what we used to get by on--just a voice, just emotion.  Your emotion and your intellect ought to balance, so go to school.  And I face... and we face it more in the Baptist church than you do in other denominations.   Other denominations demand... otherwise they would not license you or ordain you.  We in the Baptist don't have that part of the curriculum; you can do a license without doing it.  So, I feel like at least a school does not make preachers.  But it certainly helps you to equip, better equip yourself to do the job.  That's what it does.  So, you don't go to school and think that they're going to make you a preacher.  If you weren't one when you went there, you won't be one when you come out.  But if you've already got that calling, that deep inner urge, desire... compulsive.  Paul said, "I must preach, or perish" [sic].  That's a must, must, must... got to, got to... can't get out of it... can't eat, can't sleep, and so on.  So, then you get exposed to theology, to God, man, sin, and the relationship of man and God, and how sin separated you.  It depends on what you're in need of most.  So, that's number one.  But also, the Bible... you are theology dealing with God and man.  But I can't think of the word that I want to use right now.  But the word of God, pastoral theology, how to pastor people... yes.  I would have never... because, let me go back.  I was an introvert, I told you, and I had to come out of that.  And you would never know it today, sitting up here, unless I just wanted to be...  I had to pray to the Lord would help me to be an extrovert.  Because I would have never been able to relate to people, and that's my greatest commodity--people.  And if I can't relate to them, that means I would never be able to help them.
Story_ID: 399497
Speaker 1: Now, sir, had you ever made a presentation before a large group of people before you decided you had been called?  Had you ever been in that situation before, when you were--?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I-
Speaker 1: Or did you have-
Speaker 2: Yeah, working with the choir and one thing or another, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wondered if you had had any experience.
Speaker 2: I mean, you experience with folks every day, and you know your basics--when you feel that you're comfortable--that you can really do that or not.  You know your shortcomings without anybody telling you.
Speaker 1: Were you responsible for directing the choir or anything?
Speaker 2: Yes, at Tabernacle Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you had moved up to where you were directing the choir?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was before you got the call?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you did have some experience in front of people?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And as a leader-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the church, I see.
Speaker 2: That's different from homiletics, as such.  Hermeneutics is what I was trying to think of.  Hermeneutics is the interpretation of scripture.  Homiletics is the arrangement of a sermon--your introduction, your content, da, da, da, da, da.  Pedagogical teaching... I mean all of those different subjects as it relates to each church and leadership.  And a preacher, you're exposed to... so, you spend some years there going through this and going through that, and so forth.  The doctrines... you want to be sound, you want to be solid, and teach truth.  And there's so many doctrines out here now as such, until sometimes it's confusing.  But you need to know where you stand, and be very solid on it.  And I think in a sense kind of very ecumenical, along that line.  And sometimes I've been misunderstood, but I know where I stand.  And if you have a good footage and a good foundation and a strong background, it doesn't move me.  I mean, I need not become frustrated or contaminated or corrupted.
Story_ID: 399498
Speaker 1: I have a fellowship with all denominations.  I'll be... this is off the record.  I'll possibly be talking to [HM Louis] Farrakhan today because he's sick, and I'm praying for him.  Muslims doesn't upset me, doesn't bother me.  The young man I met back there a while ago, I'm preaching at his church Sunday at his church in Aurora [Illinois]; they're Methodists.  I'm Baptist, always will be Baptist, glad to be a Baptist.  I can defend myself as a Baptist.  I don't have to shut myself off from Apostolic.  I don't have to shut myself off from anybody.
Speaker 2: Do you think that Christians and Muslims and Hindus and Buddhists all basically worship in the same way?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 2: So-
Speaker 1: But if a man... you know, I respect [HM Louis] Farrakhan, I love him... marvelous.  He's on a different page from me.  I got no problems with white folks.  They might have a problem with me.  But when it comes to theology, we apostles separate at the cross.  I believe Jesus died for my sins, and he rose again.  He was the Christ, the Son of the living God.  They believe that Muhammad or somebody else...  Did he die for your sins, and so forth and so on?  We ain't going to argue, if that is what you believe.  So, I just mentioned it.  But school, it's very important.  So, I decided to go to school for that, in order that I might be more effective.  What is the old cliche?  "You can cut more wood with a sharp ax than you can with a dull ax."
Speaker 2: So, you were trying to sharpen yourself up?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's all.  And I don't believe a person's been truly called if they don't prepare.  This is your vocation, this is your profession.  So, why ain't you...?
Speaker 2: So, you're-
Speaker 1: So, what you're doing now, you had to have some training to run that far.  So, from the beginning... I mean, taking up my time and messing up... you don't know what you're doing.  You can't mess up people's time on Sunday morning.  If I stand up there... thirty or forty people... and got a thousand folks in here... a thousand times thirty is what?  I got to give an account of-
Speaker 2: So, you're saying that when God calls you, he's calling you to sharpen up, as well as-
Speaker 1: Yes, I got the divine call.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 399499
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, how did things progress, you know, after you went to the school?  I mean-
Speaker 2: I also felt the same...  I guess you're leading up to maybe how did I get started in pastoring a church?  I was called.  After I went to school I felt that same urge, that the Lord wanted me to organize a church.  And there's always opposition against whatever you do.  Because many of the ministers at that time, "Clay Evans, you don't know what you're doing.  You're foolish, in the first place.  Don't you know you can't start no church in Chicago [Illinois]?  Why don't you just wait until somebody...?  One of these preachers will die, and you can get called to that church."  And I accuse people like that as being vultures.  We used to call them buzzards... waiting on something to die.  Brother, you don't have to wait on nobody to die.  If the Lord is with you and has called you, you can make your own niche, your own mark, rather than waiting on somebody to give you something.  So, I decided to do that.  And I talked to a few friends of mine and what not and set a date for it, and went on and did it, and organized Fellowship Baptist Church with five people.  That's fifty-two years ago now, fifty-three.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's like 19-
Speaker 2: That was 1950.
Speaker 1: Fifty? [1950].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, how does one organize a church?  You say you got five people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I just called the council, together and some other ministers.  That's how we do it in the Baptist Church.  Now, I don't know how others do it.  But they come in and they counsel you, or set up a council, and perform the ceremony.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They question your accreditation, and one thing or another, "Why do you think you ought to do it?"  "Where did you all come from?"  "You all want to be a part of this new body?"  "What's the name going to be...?" just the whole works.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, there's a ceremony associated with the start?
Speaker 2: That is the ceremony, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At the time, did you have a venue for it?
Speaker 2: What we did, we got organized and held service in a funeral home for two or three months.  I left from there and went to Canaan Center, and stayed there two years, 20 East 45th Street [Chicago, Illinois].  And then we bought an old garage over here on 4621 State and turned it into, modernized it into a church building.  And from then, '49' [1949], to '59' [1959], I came here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you all were in the garage, the remodeled garage, what year was that?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: That had to be from '52' [1952] to '59' [1959], something like that.
Speaker 1: And when you came here, it was 1959?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But this building wasn't here?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no, I built all this.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was here?
Speaker 2: A Lutheran church next door, is where the (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you bought a Lutheran church?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you were able to start there, and with a real church building?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 399500
Speaker 1: And how big was your congregation?  I mean, how fast did it grow from the time you started?
Speaker 2: Well, two years after I got the church started, I started a broadcast, and I've been broadcasting ever since.  We got a half an hour, then an hour.
Speaker 1: Now, Sir, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: Man, just doing it, that's all.  I wanted to broadcast.  So, I called the station and said "Can I be on your station?"  They said, "Yes, okay."  I started Sunday night.
Speaker 1: What station was it that you called?
Speaker 2: It was WYCA, out of Gary [Indiana].
Speaker 1: WYCA, okay.  They're still in existence.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  About a half an hour.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I went from a half an hour to an hour.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you called them and they told you...  I mean did-
Speaker 2: No.  There was a fellow who was kind of an agent for the station.  He heard about I wanted to be on the air, and came by.  He was a broker or something for the station, and we took it from there.
Speaker 1: Now, did he... did you all broadcast live from the church?
Speaker 2: Always did, always did.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Always did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, they would come down and set up-
Speaker 2: That is right.
Speaker 1: --the equipment and-
Speaker 2: And you'd do it remote.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And it was always on Sunday?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  How big was your congregation?
Speaker 2: Oh, I guess maybe a thousand folks at that time.
Speaker 1: And did it, I mean was it a thousand when you started broadcasting, or did it grow to-
Speaker 2: Oh, it grew to that, maybe four or five hundred, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, I mean the broadcast helped?
Speaker 2: It did everything for me.  I'm a media man.  I don't like this, but I'm a media man.  And I knew that it would help.  And if a tobacco company and other commercial companies used the air, why couldn't we use my commodity, which is Jesus Christ?  And if they sold their merchandise on the air--and that's the reason why they're on there--they wouldn't be on the air if it didn't help.  So, why couldn't I do it?  And people heard me, and they came to see.
Story_ID: 399501
Speaker 1: Now, were you inspired by--or did you have model for what you wanted to do, that you saw someplace else?  I mean was there-
Speaker 2: There were two or three churches--you'll find it in the book that you're going to read later--that was my model... that was my example.  My pastor... that's the reason why I built this.  He inspired me to build a church, a new building, rather than buying some dilapidated building when I finally built.  But there was several churches that was very strong.  Reverend [Clarence H.] Cobbs, First Church of Deliverance [Chicago, Illinois] spiritual church that goes back to my ecumenical-istic kind of thing.  There was the Reverend [C.J.] Rogers, who was quite involved in Civil Rights.  So that appealed to me... from where I came from.  Then there was Reverend [Louis] Boddie, and just several ministers like that.  I kept on-
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, the last one you said was Reverend-
Speaker 2: Reverend [Louis] Boddie of Greater Harvest Baptist Church here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: B-O-D-D-I-E, I believe, yeah.  Since I was slow in books, my greatest education came from observation... observing, watching others that have done it.  And you always separate the vice from the virtue-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the good from the bad.  Don't swallow anybody hook, sink, and line.  So there's some I got from Reverend [Louis] Rawls, some that I got from Reverend [Clarence H.] Cobbs, some that I got from...  And you take it and make it your own.  But they all was successful in their day.
Speaker 1: There are some things you leave behind, though--that you don't want to take.
Speaker 2: That's the vice.
Speaker 1: Now, you've kind of opened the door of discussion. Now, I've heard people say... ministers say... that being a minister opens one up to a lot of temptation in terms of money.  Women are attracted to the pastor, and not all of them have spiritual issues, you know.  How do you deal with all of that?
Speaker 2: Prayerful.  That's the only way you can handle it, with God on your side.  And those are great temptations, every one of them.  And if ain't that, it's something else.  Everybody has temptations, certainly in our position.  We're exposed to women, pretty women, pretty women... and much money, fame, and popularity.  And if the Lord doesn't keep you--that is, if you're human at all-- you will become drenched... drowned in some of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You've been married now for fifty-four years?
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven.
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven.  And is a good relationship and a good marriage the key to this?
Speaker 2: I think that's very personal, that you're asking that.  You know that, don't you?  For us to stay together... let's leave it like that.  Anytime you stay with somebody fifty-seven years, it is workable.
Speaker 1: Yes, Sir.
Speaker 2: That's all you can ask for.  I don't think there are no perfect... yeah.
Story_ID: 399502
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you have been involved in... well, your ministry always includes a lot of music.  And the music that's associated with your ministry has been popular.  People like it, they like the music, and they're attracted to the church because of... you know, the music is an attraction.  I mean, how did that start?  You were a choir director when you were called.  And is that, I mean--?
Speaker 2: I think that all of your talents and your gifts, you can make room for them in whatever profession it is, if the Lord gave you that, you know.  So, it's very comfortable and confident in this situation, with the pastor in a church where there's featured singing and any minister that can sing, I'd like to say.  So, you use that along with your teaching and preaching.  But you have to decide what you want to major in.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm sure you've heard there are Christians who consider themselves very serious Christians, who do not sing and do not dance.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They think it's sinful.
Speaker 2: They what?
Speaker 1: They do not sing, and they do not dance.
Speaker 2: So?
Speaker 1: And some of them consider singing and dancing sinful.  And I'm just, I'm just asking what you thought of that.  I mean, do you have a-
Speaker 2: I don't fully get that question.  There's some Christians, they don't sing or dance?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And those who sing and dance, they consider them not Christians?  Is that what you're saying? Or, that's it wrong?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There are some that feel that way.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, that's their feeling, you know.  You can't control other people's feelings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But I guess I'm asking you, what's your philosophy about that?
Speaker 2: If it's in the name of the Lord, sing, dance, hop, jump, do anything along with it.  And if it's not...  If it's done in the spirit of the Lord, why not?  I don't think it's un-Biblical.  And if they don't, that's them.  Some people don't say "Amen," some don't shout, some don't do nothing--just sit up and look.  If that's their religion and that's all they want to do, then do it well.
Speaker 1: Now, you had mentioned shouting a couple of times as well.  And I just wondered what you, what your philosophy-
Speaker 2: "Hallelujah, praise the Lord."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very good.
Speaker 1: The Baptist church is, I mean some churches look down on-
Speaker 2: Yes, that's what they do.
Speaker 1: And some churches, everybody at some time shouts.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think it's very Biblical, I think it's Biblical to praise the Lord.  It's Bible, that's the way I feel.
Speaker 1: There's no, you don't have any particular philosophy about whether you should or shouldn't do that?
Speaker 2: It's left up to that individual and their God.
Story_ID: 399503
Speaker 1: Now, you've been involved in Civil Rights, as well as what could be called, like, traditional ministry.  And Chicago [Illinois] is a place where, especially during the height of the Civil Rights Movement, there was the Baptist church here in Chicago [Illinois]--the body of Baptist... the National Baptist Convention under [Reverend] Joseph Jackson, who condemned involvement in Civil Rights.  And he said that one should only be concerned about his soul and not about, you know, this world, and at least the black Baptist minister especially should stay away from Civil Rights activities.  And there was a rift in the church because of that.  You know, what were... you were active during that time?  What was your position then?  And how did you, how did you see that conflict?
Speaker 2: I think it's biblically unsound to not have a holistic gospel, to not be concerned about the whole man.  I think there is a time to pray, there is a time for shouting... there's a time on Sunday.  But then there's a time to be concerned about where kids go to school, where people live, where they work... that whole arena.  And that was my philosophy of theology, and thinking that the church should take the lead and be concerned about the whole man, not just the soul of the man.
Speaker 1: Now, did that put you in conflict with [Reverend] Joseph Jackson?
Speaker 2: Certainly it did, certainly.
Speaker 1: Were you in Kansas City [Missouri] in 1961?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When there was a split within the National Baptist Convention?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that, what happened?
Speaker 2: I remember very little about that.  I know that there was some demonstrations.  I think that even one man that lived there in Kansas City [Missouri] fell off the stage or something, fell off a-
Speaker 1: And was killed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's basically when the split came.  There were others on the other side who did believe in [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King and what his philosophy was, and the Civil Rights Movement.  And that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, did you join the new Progressive Baptist-
Speaker 2: No, I stayed with the old one.  I stayed with the original, yes.
Speaker 1: But you were, you didn't, you didn't have the same philosophy as the leader?
Speaker 2: No.  It was the same philosophy that it ought to be, if that's what they believed in.  But I didn't see any need in moving, or staying there trying to straighten that out, as much as possible.  Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, were you a member of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] in those days?
Speaker 2: Not directly, no.  No, I really got... went through [Operation] Breadbasket, you know, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So-
Speaker 2: Also through [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when, when the Freedom Rides were going on, and...  You didn't get directly involved in any of that down South until-
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Breadbasket basically started here in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 399504
Speaker 1: Now, when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King came to Chicago [Illinois] in '68' [1968], how did you feel about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, great, marvelous.  I was excited, because he was doing on a national level what I had been doing on a local level.  I had done some marching and boycotting of the milk company and the bread company, but not before [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King got to town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, what he was doing--and he took it to another level that I could have never taken it to.  And I was just happy to be a part of a man of that stature, who was being effective and affecting the nation.
Speaker 1: Now when he came, I know Reverend Jackson, Joseph Jackson, and some others--some other black ministers--got together and made a statement that they didn't want him to come to Chicago [Illinois], I believe, something to that effect.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There was a public statement in the press.  Did that statement... being a member of the National Baptist Convention, did that put pressure on you not to work with him?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how did you handle that?
Speaker 2: Man, just... (Laughter).  I tell you... you got to use to this toughness, and not really being accepted.  But when you have a strong conviction... and maybe I ought to put it that way.  I believe [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King said, "You'll either stand for something, or die for nothing."  When I have a strong conviction...  I had a strong conviction when the Lord called me to preach; a strong conviction that the Lord wanted me to organize a church; a strong conviction about [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King coming to Chicago [Illinois]; a strong conviction about being one of the first to ordain a woman; just things like that.  I just stand on it.  I believe if the Lord told me to do it, and gave me that conviction, He's going to stand with me.  He's going to see me through, yes.  And I've always had that.  It doesn't make any difference.  You've got the right to feel like that, but I have a right to feel and think like I think.
Story_ID: 399505
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, sir, how did you get involved with Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition]?  You were already doing things, you said.  And-
Speaker 2: So, when [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.] came to town, that wasn't a difficult task at all, because it really appealed to me.  It was something I was trying to do along with some other local ministers.  And by him being affiliated with [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King, I'd never seen [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.].  And one Sunday morning he stumbled into the [Fellowship Baptist] church, into my office, and introduced himself to me.  And he began to tell me what his mission was, and what he was trying to do here.  So, I was glad.  I had discovered in him a great spirit, a great personality... and that he knew what he was doing and how to do it... and to have a young man like that that I could link up with. Because I knew that there was segregation, prejudice, and all of those things that I had found in Tennessee right here in Chicago [Illinois], even though the political structure and religious arena said that there was not.  It was very subtle, underhanded--like schools, housing, jobs, and so forth and so on.  So, that's how I got involved.
Speaker 1: Now, sir, prior to [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.] arriving here, what was your relationship with city government like?  I mean did you, did the city [Chicago, Illinois] help your church at all?  I mean, did you have a good relationship with the aldermen here and all that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes, I thought that I did.  I thought that I did, until I really got involved.  Because what you see up there now, that still stood...  Now, you think we're having a hard winter now.  But it used to snow so that snow would be six feet high up over the cars.  That stood from '65' [1965], I believe it was '65' [1965] to '66' [1966] until '70' [1970], yeah, '73' [1973].  That was when my structure was stopped because of my conviction.
Speaker 1: Construction?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I couldn't get any money.  We were building it in stages.  And the man told me, the broker who was working with me... [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.], myself, and I'm trying to think... I think it was Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy... on North LaSalle Street up on the 22nd Floor when...  If I continued to support [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King... endorse his coming to Chicago [Illinois]... that they would not go along with me to finance it.  And I made up my mind that if the structure never got built, I stood for a principle, and whatever politics had to do, they could do it.  And my principle was to stay with [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King, and that he should bring his mission to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now, when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King arrived in Chicago [Illinois], did you work closely with him?  Or did you-
Speaker 2: Pretty close with him, yes.  You'll see several photos where we were together and so forth, yes.
Speaker 1: He spent most of his time, I know, on the West Side.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But he did come south, though?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he preached here at another church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I wasn't, I was not the only minister.  There were several others, but it was a scarce few.  Because back during that time, if you did things contrary to these... the power structure, status quo, so to speak, they could shut you down.  They would come out and find something wrong with the plumbing... with the light, and the...
Speaker 1: The city inspectors?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.  And many churches were victims of that.  And the guys were afraid; they couldn't blame them that their building was being condemned or they didn't come up to city code.  And so, therefore, they stayed away from it.
Story_ID: 399506
Speaker 1: Now, sir, this is something that's interesting to me.  And I have heard and, you know, observed on some level that the Chicago [Illinois] building code is very malleable.  I mean, you can use it to condemn-
Speaker 2: Or to... yeah, to improve.  That is true.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And in the hands of... depending on what you're doing.
Speaker 2: That is right.  If you're alright with City Hall, with the structure... status quo... they don't care what you did, it's alright.  That's the way politics work, man.
Speaker 1: So, it's a liberal interpretation?
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, you had a rough time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was quite humiliating, quite embarrassing... quite a shame.  I was in the old building next door.  And with this standing... I mean all this steel you see around here.  And they had the foundation and the walls.  And I mean people would come by here, even some preachers, and say "Look what old Clay done started, and can't finish it."  To live under that kind of atmosphere, it can almost take you under.  Plus, members get disgusted.  Some of them walk away and leave you, you know.  And we have to learn that, well, every delay is not a denial.
Speaker 1: Did you ever think that, you know, well, I can take the easy way out?  I mean-
Speaker 2: Certainly, you could.  Daniel could have... Daniel could have took the easiest way out of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego.  He could have took the easy way out and said "We'll just go on and bow.  We don't have to be cast in the fiery furnace.  We don't have to be cast in the lion's den."  But Daniel didn't take the easy way out.  Shadrach, Meshach, and Paul didn't take... Jesus didn't take the easy way out.  You can't always take the easy way.  It's a cost, and it's left up to you whether you want to pay the cost.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a struggle.  We're sitting here in a beautiful structure here, but you said it's still-
Speaker 2: And I was surprised after seven years... it stood for seven years, yeah--that the engineers came back when we finally got some money to build it.  And they tested it, and they said it was still strong.  It was suitable.  And being exposed to the weather didn't deteriorate it.  The Lord knows how to preserve.
Story_ID: 399507
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  Now, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King was here in '65' [1965], was it?  Or was it '64' [1964]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '64' [1964].
Speaker 1: And what was the... what was the, I guess the residual effect of Dr. [Martin Luther] King coming to Chicago [Illinois]?  Do you think it did a lot of good for this city?
Speaker 2: Oh, it did a lot of good everywhere he went, man.  It didn't do what he wanted it to do, and so forth.  But [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King's presence was very positive, and started to open some doors and so forth.  His movement was very positive.  When you look at the way things are now, sometimes people will wonder.  But it's a fact.
Speaker 1: Did he shake things up a little bit?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: When he was around, did his movement like gain allies, or did people shrink back more because of the opposition of the mayor [Richard J. Daley]?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a certain group that galvanized and came close, and others stayed back; you always find that.  But he had very good support, I would think in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you part of that Soldier Field rally [July 10, 1966]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I introduced him at Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Well, you were definitely part of it.
Speaker 2: No, I was just there and what not, because King and I were not that close.  But I was president of the Conference at that time, I think it was.  And I'm the one that introduced him.
Speaker 1: How did that feel, in front of all those people? And-
Speaker 2: Frightening, you know, nervous.  And I think about that, man.  That was forty years ago, yeah.  Quite exciting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when Dr. King left... I mean, how did the movement progress after he left?  He left in-
Speaker 2: Well, with him leaving we had [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.] and Operation Breadbasket and what not to carry on and so forth, and continue to galvanize and organize... strategize, and to enforce the things that he was all about.  So, I think we maintained a pretty good posture here in Chicago [Illinois] on [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King's movement.
Speaker 1: What was the biggest issue that you all faced, you know?
Speaker 2: Going to Gage Park [Housing March, August 5, 1966].  I didn't go there with him that day that they were stoned so bad... and cursing and called all kinds of names and so forth, yeah.  But out in Gage Park, I think was-
Speaker 1: Did it surprise you and shock you?
Speaker 2: No, that's what I said in the beginning.  I knew that it was here all the time, but in a very subtle kind of way.  But the same kind of prejudice, racism, and what not that was in the South was here in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 399508
Speaker 1: What about the beginning of Operation PUSH?  Now, PUSH sort of was a result of a split with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], I think, with [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson [Sr.].
Speaker 2: It came out of [Operation] Breadbasket; he already had [Operation] Breadbasket going.
Speaker 1: And so, Reverend [HM Jesse] Jackson [Sr.] had already started Operation PUSH?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  And so, [Operation] PUSH came out of there.
Speaker 1: Give me the history of that.
Speaker 2: I don't even know myself.  But, because there was some dissention with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  And I think that it really all came from envy and jealousy, and one thing or another.  Some of the old-guards... and here's [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.], a young one, very articulate and one thing or another, gaining a lot of power, a lot of influence, doing a lot of things... that they kind of wanted to stop him or kill him, and so, therefore, kill [Operation] Breadbasket.  Because that's what caused the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]... [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.]... to go on and do his own thing.
Speaker 1: So, they made an attempt to stop [Operation] Breadbasket?
Speaker 2: [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.]... when you stop Jesse... that was their baby.  So, that kills off the whole thing.  And so, you have to almost break the lines, you know, and get your thing going... that they won't be governing from Atlanta [Georgia]... you know, controlling.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were never a member of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] as such?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But you were an ally of Reverend [HM Jesse] Jackson [Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So like this church and what not, we've always supported the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Urban League, and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], you know, from the church itself... organizations that are involved in this kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So, can you tell us about the beginnings of Operation PUSH and how you, what your role was?
Speaker 2: Well, Operation Breadbasket was organized right here in the basement of the church with a few ministers and so forth.  That's when [HM] Tom Todd was around, and whatever the other lawyer's name is, who used to be partners... I forget... and so forth.  And so, it was just a restructuring of the thing, and for [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.] to get his own board with [Operation] PUSH and keep on stepping.
Speaker 1: So, were you on the original board?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Of Operation PUSH?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And one time you became, didn't you become the president of the board?
Speaker 2: Chairman of the Board [1971-1976].
Speaker 1: Chairman of the Board.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, are you still a part of-
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --[Operation] PUSH?
Speaker 2: I'll always be a part of whatever [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.]'s got going on.  That's the other part of it.  To get this going again after we were held up so long, [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.] called bankers and ecumenical religious groups together--Presbyterian, Methodist...  I can't... I think it was five or six groups, and said, "You know what Reverend Evans and Fellowship [Baptist Church] have gone through, and that was because of his support of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King.  You all ought to come together and underwrite at least a half million dollars or something so he can get going."  And he convinced them of the fact.  This was completely because of [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson [Sr.].  It was five or seven... what was it... other major religious denominations that said, "Yes, we know, and we're sympathetic towards it."  And so, they told the bank, said, "I'll take fifty..."  And the other one said, you know, "I'll guarantee it... guarantee it... guarantee it."  Well, that was because of Jesse calling them together and getting them to consent; to tell Amalgamated Bank that they would guarantee it.  That's how I got the building.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 399509
Speaker 1: So, you have a very strong relationship with Reverend [HM Jesse] Jackson [Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I ordained him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you ordained Reverend [HM Jesse] Jackson [Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's important to know.
Speaker 2: Considering that I was his pastor... and I have to make a joke out of that:  Nobody pastored [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson Sr.], Jesse pastored everybody else.  But certainly Jesse is a member of this church.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I made him my co-pastor.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what year is this?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I know... what year was it, I'm asking?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember now what year it was [1968].  But [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.] was co-pastor.
Speaker 1: Was it prior to, was this in the sixties, late sixties?
Speaker 2: Somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Was it before [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King came, or after?
Speaker 2: After, I think.
Story_ID: 399510
Speaker 1: All right.  Tell me about the death of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King.  I mean, where were you when you found out?  And what were your thoughts about it?
Speaker 2: Another tragedy.  You know, he and the Kennedys [President John F. Kennedy, Senator Robert F. Kennedy] and all got assassinated along about the same time and so forth.  Knowing that we'd lost a great leader is a hurting thing.  It was a shock to know that it had happened.  But, a hurting thing.  And we recognized the fact that as "his disciples," quote unquote, we must continue to carry that gospel of the Civil Rights Movement and help his dream to become a reality, yeah.
Speaker 1: In terms of the reaction to [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King's death, I mean, were you involved in trying to keep the lid on some of that?  Because I mean, people were-
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had started rioting and everything else.  And naturally, I wasn't for that kind of thing.  But people just went haywire, berserk, berserk, berserk at that point.  We had religious services here and there and everywhere, to try to keep things calm as much as possible.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you go to Atlanta [Georgia] for the funeral?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you'll see the picture back there.  I was in the parade.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Since I was a country boy, and they had mules drawing the carriage, that meant I could speak mule language, "Gee, haw, get up."  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  And for those who don't understand that who're watching this tape, what does "gee" and "haw" mean?
Speaker 2: "Gee" means to the right, "haw" to the left.  "Whoa" means stop. And mules understand that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they understand that.
Speaker 2: And those who were on the sidelines-
Speaker 1: And [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.] had me out there in the front. And during all the multitude of people, the mules were about to get frightened.  He said, "Let Clay do it."  "Whoa, gee, get up, stop."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  The mules were-
Speaker 1: Seeing that I was a country boy, you know, my experience came in handy.
Story_ID: 399511
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  Now, shortly after that time was when the split took place at SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  And the old guard at SCLC and [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson [Sr.] began to split away and move away from each other.  That was during the Poor People's Campaign.  Were you involved in that, down in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was Resurrection City [Poor People's Campaign, Washington D.C., 1968] and-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What were those days like?  I mean-
Speaker 2: Oh, man, those were struggling days, very tense; trying to get us to recognize that there were poor people... a lot of hungry folks... and people out of jobs and couldn't pay their rent, and losing their houses and one thing or another... to get the government sensitive to that.  It's always a problem, always a struggle, always a great task, a great responsibility, yeah.
Speaker 1: People actually in the movement actually camped out in [Washington] D.C., right?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tent City [Washington D.C.].  How long did you all stay there?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I know I wasn't there very long.  You see, it was difficult also...  Now, this is a joke on the side... that I came from Brownsville, Tennessee wearing overalls and any kind of shoes.  I was glad to get out of that predicament.  Now, [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.] and them wanted me to wear some overalls.  I'm glad to have a suit, man.  I wore overalls long enough, and high-top shoes, and all of that kind of thing.  So, to get me to dress back into that, was a problem.  I'd help anybody out, but I prayed to the Lord to help me to pull off them tennis shoes. (Laughter).  And he did, and he did.  So-
Speaker 1: So, you weren't thrilled about that?
Speaker 2: No, uh-uh, uh-uh.  Now, plus, the other side of it... you know, they were trying to convince somebody...  You know, they had a little boy up there from Mississippi that... telling about how hungry they were, you know, and went to bed at night with nothing to eat, and in the morning they were starving.  The little boy's jaws was sticking out like this... grease.  I said, "[HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.]..."  (Laughter).  And he couldn't talk... "I don't know what to do."  Boy, and he was so fat.  I said, "[HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.], y'all couldn't pick somebody, you know, that was skinny?"  (Laughter).  He had grease...  And we laughed about that.  But he was a speaker, though, you know.  He could get his story going.  But he looked like... to look at him, looked like he was overweight.  (Laughter).  All right, man, I got to go now, I got to go.
Story_ID: 399512
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you answer a couple of other questions before you go?
Speaker 2: Alright, make it brief.
Speaker 1: All right.  I want to ask you, what is your theology, your personal theology?
Speaker 2: About what?
Speaker 1: Of religion.  What is your, what's your philosophy of religion?
Speaker 2: Well, there are many, many kinds of religion.  I understand that there are two hundred and something.  Because one of the simple definitions is the sum total of one's beliefs, sentiment, and practice of a religion; the sum total of one's feeling... one's thinking, one's feeling, and action.  My theology is there's one God, but manifests himself in three different personalities--the Son, and then the Holy Spirit.  My thinking and my theology is man was made in the image and likeness of God.  But through Adam, the head of the human race, we all failed.  My theology is that Jesus Christ came here as a man, a hundred percent man and a hundred percent God, but born in a manger and came to save us, to redeem us.  And those of us who put our faith in Him we are redeemed, we are saved.  He re-stamped the image in our spirit and in our soul of what we originally was before we fell in the Garden of Eden through Adam.  I believe that there is a heaven and there is a hell, just like there's a right and there's a wrong.  There's an up, there's a down.  There's an in, and there's an out.  There's a right, there is wrong.  And that when life is over, and it will be for the physical body, that I have the privilege of living on in His presence through His son, Christ Jesus.  But while we're on the stage of life, that we have an opportunity to glorify God and to do good for mankind.
Story_ID: 399513
Speaker 1: Sir, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to make this world a better place to live because I came this way.  And if I can pass that on, of a man who tried to help make this a better world with my honesty, my integrity, and my love for God and humanity, I want to be remembered as that.  My legacy... of making a contribution for the betterment of mankind.
Speaker 1: Did your parents get a chance to see you become a successful pastor?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I brought them to Chicago [Illinois] and they were members of the church.
Speaker 1: Were they proud of you?
Speaker 2: I think so, hope so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 399514
Speaker 1: And what advice would you give to young people who are seeking spirituality in today's world?
Speaker 2: First of all, accept Christ as your Savior and your Lord, and make Him Lord of your life.  And let Him so lead, guide, and monitor your life as you can become the best of all of your potential.  I don't think you can ever be all that you ought to be without Christ being in your life.  I'm a firm believer in Jesus Christ.  And whatever your lot or your calling may be--whether you're a politician or you're a businessperson, husband, wife--whatever you become, life goes better with Christ.
Story_ID: 399515
Speaker 1: And there's one final question.  What are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: I hope and pray that we can come to the realization, as [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.] says all the time, that we are somebody... we are important.  I would like to see us come to that, and make the best out of life that it has to offer, and not become destructive, but constructive.  We destroy ourselves.  Not other folks are destroying us, we're destroying ourselves.  It looks like we've given up all hope.  You need not give up all hope.  And that's what I think religious does, especially the Christian religion does for us, is to give us hope beyond despair, beyond the horrors of oppression, racism, and one thing or another.  That's what I think He does for us.  And I'd like to see every person rise to the fullest of their potential.
Speaker 1: Thank you, sir.
Story_ID: 399516
Speaker 1: That's a good picture, a historical photo.  Okay, go ahead, sir.  Just tell us when this was taken.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was taken sometime last year.  Evidently, I was posing for some kind of affair that we were going to have, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Boy, that was in my younger days.  I have to say that that was pretty handsome there, yes it was.  And I was sitting at my desk there in the office.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  These are all pictures kind of in my early ministry.  And as you can see there, that's my main textbook, which is the Bible.
Speaker 1: I was going to ask you which one it was.
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: Is this while you were at the Baptist School [Chicago Baptist Institute]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at the [Chicago Baptist Institute] church--while I was there--but I mean in my office, not at school.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.  Okay, go ahead with this one.
Speaker 2: Yes, again.  Most of the time when you'd see me, I'm getting ready for a message.  And this one will tell you it's a soul-stirring message, which is one of the covers that goes on one of the backs of my sermons that I'm delivering.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Well, that's the front of the church that took me so long to build, about eight or nine years, because it was held up for seven years because I couldn't get a mortgage on it.  But that's the kind of the entrance of the church there, with the cross on the top.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This looks similar to the first one that we did.  Evidently, that was a good pose that they just kept around that they could use for various, you know, for PR [public relations] work, public relations work.
Speaker 1: That's just the color version of the first one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it is, yes.
Speaker 1: Had I'd seen this first, I would have used this one.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Yeah, [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson] there.  Where are we?  I'm trying to figure out where we were at that time.  And there's somebody in the background, and I don't know who that is.  But that's [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson, my member, and the founder and president of Operation PUSH and [Operation] Breadbasket.
Speaker 2: You don't know who either of the other two people are?
Speaker 1: Ain't but one, I know myself.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you see two more in there?
Speaker 2: Well, there's one guy really far in the background.
Speaker 1: Now, you can't even see him or what not.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Jesse was interested and most helpful in getting the money to finance this church.  And so, when we finally burned the mortgage on it, he is there along with one of my other sons in the ministry, [Reverend] Henry Hardy.
Speaker 2: This is Henry [Hardy]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, [Reverend] Henry Hardy there, yeah.
Speaker 2: On the left?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and there are some other people witnessing and standing around, yeah.  That looks like my brother there on the side, Estes [Evans, Sr.], looks like.  Yeah, but that's the size of it.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That is when we broke ground for this place, this edifice that we're in now.  You will see me standing there getting the shovel for the dirt.  And there are other ministers around who's witnessing the occasion, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Story_ID: 399517
Speaker 1: Charles once upon a time was my musician.  But right now he is pastoring in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at the 19th Street Baptist Church.
Speaker 2: Can you describe-are you ready, Scott? ... from left to right, just name them.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Charles Walker, myself... and the other minister, I can't make out who that is right now.
Speaker 2: About what year is that?
Speaker 1: I don't remember.
Speaker 2: In the sixties [1960s]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the sixties [1960s].
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: I think all of us would know that that is [President Nelson] Mandela.  And it looks like [HM] Jesse [Jackson], Jr. in the background, and some other people standing around; and all of us were together.  I don't know where that was taken right now.  But that's [Nelson] Mandela, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, very good, next.
Speaker 1: Oh, what a celebration, with [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson] again.  You'll see him on quite a few.  All of that had to do with the mortgage burning, I think, that we did.  And that had to be in the eighties sometime, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to do this.  I'll do one more, and I got to go... got to go.  Y'all can get enough out of that.  You can take all the pictures you want in the back, also.  Let me see here.  I don't know what the occasion was there.  But you did one on him, didn't we?
Speaker 2: Can you tell me about this photo one more time, you and [Mayor Richard J.] Daley?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were at something, and I don't even know what that was at this time.  But that's Ford, myself, and Mayor [Richard J.] Daley there.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay, un-wire me now, let me go.
Speaker 2: Do you want to get this last one in?
Speaker 1: And then I'll show you...  Is that [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson] again in the background?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You and [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson] and Nelson Mandela.
Speaker 1: And Nelson Mandela, yeah.
Speaker 2: When was that?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I forgot the...
Speaker 2: Maybe '95' [1995].
Speaker 1: Was it that late?
Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry, '92' [1992], '93' [1993].
Speaker 1: Yeah, something like that, whenever he came to Chicago, yeah [sic, 1993].
Speaker 2: I remember, over at [Operation] PUSH right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was there, I shot pictures of him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's who that is.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  And I'm describing this photo that belongs to Reverend Clay Evans.  This is the Poor People's Campaign [1968], and I think this is in Washington, D.C., I believe.  No, no, I'm sorry.  This is the funeral of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King.  That's [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King's casket.  This is in Atlanta, Georgia in 1968.  And Reverend Evans is somewhere near the mule, because he was, he knew how to talk to the mules.  And that's what he was doing, he was directing the activities of the mules in 1968, April of 1968.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Did he point himself out in that?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but he's somewhere near those mules.  And if you zoom in, we might be able to find him.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Can you just look through there, and-
Speaker 2: Well, let me put my glasses on.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Does that look like him to you? (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, I think that's Reverend Evans right next to the mule, in the white shirt... the one who's whispering to the mules pretty much.  That's, I think that's Reverend Evans.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: All right.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Alright, next.
Speaker 2: Okay, there he is.  He's sitting right here, right behind [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson.  This may be the founding of Operation PUSH.  It looks like the cast of characters, you know.  This is Father George Clements, [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson, and Bill Berry.  (Unclear).  Yes, in this photo, this photo looks a gathering of the early, the pioneers of Operation PUSH.  Reverend Clay Evans is sitting directly behind [HM] Reverend Jesse Jackson, who's sitting in front of the mic.  To [HM] Reverend [Jesse] Jackson's left is Father George Clements.  All the way over here to the right is Bill Berry who is a community activist [Urban League] and Civil Rights leader.  And there are other individuals there that I cannot name at the present time.  I don't know who all the rest of them are.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.
