Story_ID: 17722
Speaker 1: I want you to state your name and spell it for us and state your birth date and today's date and we'll go from there.
Speaker 2: I'm Russ Ewing, R-U-S-S-E-L-L.  Russell, I use sometimes, E-W-I-N-G.  Today's date is--.
Speaker 1: Today's date is May 27--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) May 27--
Speaker 1: --2001.
Speaker 2: (simultaneoulsy) --2001.
Speaker 1: And my birthday is 12/28/23.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And I want the location we're at.  So, if you give the address of your home.
Speaker 1: I was born in Chicago.
Speaker 2: No.  I want the address that we're at right now.
Speaker 1: Oh, my home here is 69138 Palmer Drive in Paw Paw, Michigan.
Speaker 2: And Paw Paw is spelled P-A-W, P-A-W.
Speaker 1: P-A-W.  It's an old Indian name.
Speaker 2: (tape cuts off)
Speaker 1: Well, I was investigative reporter for NBC [National Broadcasting Company] News for fifteen years and investigative reporter for ABC [American Broadcasting Company] News for approximately seventeen years.
Story_ID: 17723
Speaker 1: Now, we, I ask five sort of People magazine-ish questions for the beginning of the interview, whether you have answers for them or not, but, anyway, I would like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: My favorite fruit?
Speaker 1: Food.
Speaker 2: Oh, food.  That's a hard one.  I like fish.  We eat a great deal of fish and, of course, I like prime rib.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Right here, where I am.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Usually spring and fall.  Summer is either too hot or uncomfortable, but spring and fall is the favorite time.  My wife likes winter.
Speaker 1: (laughing) That's not fun--well, never mind. I've found a few people who like winter in these interviews.  I just want to say, just a few.  And favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I usually say, "I do the best I can do with what I've got."
Story_ID: 17724
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're gonna get started, and I'd like to start out by asking people what they know about their family.  You know, their mother and father.
Speaker 2: Well, my parents died when I was very young.  I barely remember my mother.  I don't remember my father at all hardly, but I barely remembered my mother.  She was an Indian-looking woman and, well, I love her just like everybody loves their mother.
Speaker 1: How old was she?  How old was she when she died?
Speaker 2: She was about thirty-something when she died.  I was about seven years old when she died.  I was about four years old when my father died.
Speaker 1: What are some of your early memories of growing up, like your earliest memory, do you have one?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember that when my parents died, I had--my mother had a sister who lived in California, and her sister came to Chicago [Illinois] indicating that she wanted to adopt me and at that age when they mentioned California, that was like saying China.  I just didn't want to leave where I was, so I thought about that. And I remember finally that she agreed to let my aunt, who lived here in Chicago, adopt me instead.  And then I remember, the only time I can remember being in a courtroom, a judge asked me "Did I want to stay with this lady?" And, of course, I--looking up at him, he looked like God to me, you know, I said, "Yes, fine.  I want to live him--live with her."
Speaker 1: Now what was your aunt's name?
Speaker 2: Elizabeth Johnson.
Speaker 1: Had she lived on the same block at the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She lived on 42nd and Champlain [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about just some remembrances that you want to share of growing up, you know, past your parents.  I assume that your parents' death was traumatic for you as a young person.
Speaker 2: No.  No.  It really wasn't.  It really wasn't.  All I knew is that they went away, and it wasn't traumatic at all 'cause I was so young. I thought--looking back at it--I just realized that people die and they had died.
Speaker 1: Did you have any brothers or sisters?
Speaker 2: I had a brother who had died when he was about three years old, and I had only heard about him.  I don't remember anything about him.
Story_ID: 17725
Speaker 1: So, share with us some of your--you know, early, you know--like from seven on, you know, the things that happened or who, what it was like to grow up on that block.  You know, who were some of your neighbors?
Speaker 2: Well, there was something that was interesting about that block.  My wife [Ruth Ewing] lived right around the corner, so we went to kindergarten together.  So, I always felt that I was married before I was born.  That's the way it worked out and, of course, I--we're still here, at least as of now, I think.
Speaker 1: So, was this a childhood--(laughs and points off camera)--she, was it a childhood romance or were you just friends?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I used to throw snowballs at her.  I hit her in the head.  And we've known each other since we were kids. And it just happened that way.
Speaker 1: That's amazing.  Not many people could say that and especially nowadays.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, now most of my friends stay married at least a month or two before they decide not to.
Speaker 1: Now what other, I mean, who else was on the block and what are your memories of growing up on that block?
Speaker 2: Well, we had a good block.  42nd and Champlain was a good block.  I took music lessons, piano, and Nathaniel Jones, a man who played in Duke Ellington's band, lived on that block. And he used to sit out on the porch with us kids and teach us harmony and counterpoint and music.  Along with Nathaniel Jones, Weather Sykes who was instrumental in hospital work in Chicago [Illinois], he lived on that block and he was very, very in-.  We were together.  We were kids.  Also, as I said before, Gus Savage, who you've had experience with, he lived around the corner.  So, we all played together. And let's see, who else?  Oh, Johnnie Griffin, the very famous saxophone player who went to France and stayed there for many, many years, he lived on the block, so we all knew each other and we were all together there.
Story_ID: 17726
Speaker 1: And what would you say you were like as a child, Mr. Ewing?  Were you, you know, were you quiet?  Were you mischievous?  Were you rambunctious?  Were you well-behaved?
Speaker 2: Well, to be honest, any time you try to evaluate yourself, you're always wrong.  And I feel that I'm wrong when I try to evaluate myself.  But I must admit I was sneaky.  I've always been sneaky.  And that's one way I managed to get by because I was sneaky.
Speaker 1: And let's go through your schooling.  You went where to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to Fuller [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois] which was a block away from both our houses.  And I remember elementary there was--the teachers seemed to care about the kids.  Most of the teachers were white.  Most of the kids were black during that time.  And the teachers really cared about kids.  I think there's a different breed of teachers now.  I think they care more about their checks now than they do the kids.  I took piano lessons from the time I was about five years old.  And I learned to play pretty good then and every time we had a little program, I played the piano and did things like that and that made me halfway popular in school.  And I enjoyed that throughout.
Speaker 1: Was music what you enjoyed the most or were there any other subjects or teachers that you liked?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to fly from the day I was born.  I always wanted to fly.  I broke my ankle years later, of course, doing a parachute jump just to show that I could do it. And I got a pilot's license, oh, forty-five, fifty years ago, and I flew my own airplane until I had a stroke. And once you have a stroke, they take your license.  You can't fly anymore.  So, I make, as you can see, model airplanes now and enjoy that sort of thing.  But music was important during that time, and I earned my living playing music for many years there.
Story_ID: 17727
Speaker 1: Now what about flying?  Why do you think you have that fascination with flying?  Was it something you had read or, I mean, what was the--?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was a kid, my uncle used to take me out to the airport, and we'd watch the planes take off.  And I just had a fascination to fly.  I wanted to fly all the time.  And I read and studied about flying for many years before I ever got a license and I never will forget the flight instructor that I had was an old Irish fellow.  His name was Tim O'Halloran.  And in later years, he became one of the executive directors of American Airlines, but when they were teaching us how to fly, we were in these tandem planes, and sometimes the students would, well, they would get frightened and grab the stick and hold it. So every time he got in the airplane, he would show me a pool cue and he said, "Now if you freeze on this stick, I'm going to have to hit you over the head with this pool cue."  Well, he had to do it because I could end up killing him and myself too, but I learned how to fly that way.  So after only about only four hours of instruction, he got out of the plane and told me to go ahead and go.  So from that, I've been flying ever since that day.
Story_ID: 17728
Speaker 1: Now, let me also ask where you went to junior high school and then high school too.
Speaker 2: I went to high school at Englewood High School in Chicago [Illinois].  All public schools, I've been in public schools all my life, and I had a great music instructor in high school.  His name was, I'll never forget his name, Joe Slatnek(?).  And I played in the band for awhile.  I played tuba.  Now, during that time, we had these great big old heavy tubas, and I could hardly carry the thing.  So, I played that for a year or so.  And then we had an organ instructor, Esprin Shade(?).  I remember those names just as if it was yesterday.  And he taught the kids music. And, of course, you know now the public schools, they forgot about music.  They call themselves saving money.  And I think they're, they're really short-changing the kids for that. But I had a good solid music education as I was coming up.
Speaker 1: And why do you think they're short-changing the kids?  Tell me what you think.
Speaker 2: Well, I think music is important for mathematics.  You learn mathematics in music.  It's very important.  It's also, it's a discipline.  It teaches you discipline.  It makes you develop.  You learn to practice, and you enjoy seeing yourself develop as you do develop. And, of course, anybody who plays music as a kid, a teenager, is popular.  Unlike the kids of today who learn four chords on a guitar and right away they're making records.  But during that day, the kids who took music and as they developed, they really knew music.  They could read.  They knew it and they came up that way.  But again, I had that advantage of having a man in Duke Ellington's band right there on the same block with us and I set out as early as the time I was a teenager to learn almost every song that Duke Ellington had written. And, of course, buy all the records, but I learned all the songs.
Speaker 1: Well, that was Nathaniel Jones?  That was his name?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Would he spend a lot of times with you guys?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: And what kind of stories would he share with you?  Would he share any stories?
Speaker 2: Oh, well.  He would teach us music and teach us counterpoint and teach us harmony. And he would tell us how important it is to learn music and play music and he would demonstrate it right out on his front porch to all the kids and several of the kids got interested in music just because of him.  I remember a time I was in high school, we had a program, and I was able to have Nat Jones, a man from Duke Ellington, come to our high school.  Now when that happened, I was king for a day.  I was really king for a day because nobody had ever heard of anything like that before. And I will never forget that day.
Story_ID: 17729
Speaker 1: Were you also, you know, it's interesting you would say the whole connection between math and music.  I just saw someone put together a CD-ROM and they had music and it was a way of teaching math.  I never thought of it that way.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah? Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, were you good at math also?
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't say I was good at it, but I managed to pass a few algebra courses and a little geometry courses.  I wasn't necessarily interested in it, so maybe that's the reason I wasn't good at it, but you can't learn music without having a feeling for math.  They come together and you can't avoid it.
Speaker 1: Now, at that time, people either went to DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois] or Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Those were the two, two high schools?  What were those environments, you know, like there?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time DuSable was an excellent school.  Phillips High School was also an excellent school.  And they were both schools in black communities.  I wanted to go to Englewood  because I heard about the music and what they did there.  So, what I did was, during that time you had to live in the neighborhood where your school was.  So, I told you I was sneaky.  I went to Englewood and wrote out my own transfer and when the lady asked me to put down my address, I just thought of the address of--I can remember that very clearly too--6230 State Street.  Now 6230 State Street is now, and has been, for fifty years, a junkyard and the truant officers didn't check you unless you got in trouble.  So, I never got in trouble, so I used that junkyard address at Englewood High School, and she knows that [looks off camera].  I used that address for four years in high school.
Speaker 1: So, you wanted, you went, you chose Englewood because you wanted to go there for the music?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, okay.
Speaker 2: But now at that time, there was a man named, what was his name [speaks to someone off camera]? Walter Dyett.He was a music instructor at DuSable, one of the best in the country.  And it was a toss-up between those two.  He had a great jazz band among high school students.  They were known nationwide. And [Nat] King Cole came out of that band, and I'm trying to think of some of the others, Albert Ammons. Two more people with Duke Ellington, I can't think of their names now, but they had some of the greatest jazz bands in the world.
Speaker 1: So, now, your music is your thing then is what you're saying in high school.  Is that the only thing--but it is your thing?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed music in high school.
Speaker 1: And were you--? What were you wanting to be with it?  Were you wanting to do something professionally with it?  Was that what you were thinking you wanted to do when you graduated?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was young, I kind of felt that way, but as you get older, you do what you have to do, as opposed to what you want to do. So when I got a little older, I joined the fire department.  That was to have a job.  But I played music for many years before that.  But you must remember a musician is constantly looking for a job. And a lot of folks don't realize it, but musicians have the worse credit in the world.  Nobody will finance a musician, a local musician.  But I joined the fire department and stayed there for eight years.  And then I got in trouble when I joined the navy.  My goal then was to, well, just live out the war and come out alive. But when I went there and told them that I was a musician and I knew music, they wanted musicians as radiomen.  Because they had an ear and they could hear signals that a lot of other people couldn't pick up. So they made me a radioman and put me on a ship right away which made me very unhappy.
Story_ID: 17730
Speaker 1: Let me go back though.  I want to go back to high school just a little bit and just find out who else would we know that you went to school with or who were your friends at the time, you know, people that were sort of--who else was sort of instrumental in your life at that point in time?  Were you dating your wife then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We were--we'd go to dances and things every once in awhile and her mother would be sitting out in the car waiting for her to come out at 10:00 sharp and stuff like that.  But to mention names in high school, I don't remember anybody who was, that comes to mind.  There were just run-of-the-mill kids.
Speaker 1: Were there people besides Mr. Jones, Nathaniel Jones, that you looked up to that were older or, you know, who you wanted to model yourself after to be, or who were influencing you?
Speaker 2: Well, not really, just most of the local musicians and those people.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe Chicago [Illinois] at that time or the community that, you know, you were growing up in?
Speaker 2: Chicago, at that time was, in my opinion, a decent and liberal city.  As a teenager, if you wanted a job, you could buy a copy of the [Chicago] Tribune, look in the want ads and have a job that evening.  There was no problem with hiring.  You could get a job any time you wanted to.  And me and some of the friends of mine that were raised on the same block,  we'd decide to get a job, we'd buy aTribune and look at the want ad section and that evening we'd have a job somewhere.  There was no problem.  I remember one job that me and a friend of mine named Weather Sykes, we got while we were teenagers.  I was about sixteen.  He was about the same.  We got a job in a photo processing plant, and we were in charge of the drying machine where you would dry the photographs. And we ended up burning up about $1,000 worth of photographs.  That was the end of that job. But we had another one the next day.  We were decent teenagers and we had a good life as teenagers.
Story_ID: 17731
Speaker 1: So when you graduated, is that when you immediately got with the fire--I mean the--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Tell me what happened when you graduated or what your thoughts were at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, when I graduated high school, I went to the navy.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's when you went. Okay, you went right after--.
Speaker 2: That's the main thing.  I wanted to go to the navy and I stayed there for awhile and I tried my best to get away from the radio department because those ships were being sunk by the dozens. So I ended up in Seattle [Washington], and I manipulated my way into playing the piano for the Catholic chaplain, so I stayed there for a year.
Speaker 1: Now how long were you in the navy total?
Speaker 2: Just one year.
Speaker 1: Just one year?  And you did that all in one year?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You didn't do two years? Usually the tour of duty is--.
Speaker 2: No.  Just one year.
Speaker 1: Wow, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, the war was just ending then, see.
Speaker 1: But were you, were you ever on a ship?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was on a ship.
Speaker 1: You were on a ship?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I was on a ship for about six months.
Speaker 1: And did you find that--because a lot of times people say it's very claustrophobic or, you know, it gets a little bit much being with the same people every day?
Speaker 2: Well, you are with the same people all the time, and I never had any claustrophobic problems. But I didn't enjoy it.  I didn't like it.
Story_ID: 17732
Speaker 1: So, when you came back, then what did you do at that point?  When you came back--you left Seattle [Washington]--you were the pianist for the chaplain in Seattle and then you come back and then?
Speaker 2: Well, I lived with the lady who adopted me, my aunt.  I lived with her, and I played music around Chicago [Illinois] and developed a little bit in that way.
Speaker 1: Did you have a group that you played with or you just played alone?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't know if I have the pictures here or not, but we had a great group going in the Chicago area for a long time.  We were known.
Speaker 1: What was the name?
Speaker 2: We just called it the Russ Ewing Trio, that's all.  And I looked up one day, and I was married.  I don't know how that happened.  I got tricked into that. [laughs and asks someone off camera] Do you have to stay here?
Speaker 1: (interviewer, laughs, speaks to person off camera) He's like--you're affecting--here take a seat. You're listening to us.
Speaker 2: So, when you-- so you're basically, you've got this group, so, it's a trio?  You had what?  You played?
Speaker 1: Piano, bass and guitar.  We had a great singer.  And we played at--we stayed at--we would get in some lounges and during that time, there were a lot of local lounges around Chicago that were doing great business. And we stayed at some of the places where we played.  We stayed there for a year, a year and a half.
Speaker 2: But now who else was in the group with you and what were some of the lounges that you played in?
Speaker 1: Well, there was a place called Jimmy's Palm Gardens which was very important in Chicago during that time.  And we stayed there for about a year.  There was another place called the Archway Lounge: which was very important among the young people there. And we stayed there for six to eight months.  And we just went from one place to another. We never had trouble getting a job because we were well known during that time.  And, as I said, people like [Nat] King Cole, his father was a minister and he was playing around in the different lounges and everything, so I wanted to be a musician during that time. But as time passed, I did music just for my own pleasure.
Story_ID: 17733
Speaker 1: But let's go back.  Who were the members of your group?  That's what I--you didn't say.  Do you remember who they were?
Speaker 2: I wish I had a picture here.  And I might.  After we get through, I'll look and see.  One was named Alfred Elkins.  He was a great bass player, absolutely great, and he was a member. And the other one was Jim Buchanan we called him "Red Buchanan" because he was a very light skinned black person. And so we had this group going for a long time and we were quite famous in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And what were some of your favorite songs?  You didn't do a lot of composing, did you?
Speaker 2: No.  I did a lot of arranging, but no composing.  We followed the Duke Ellington line. And, oh, incidentally, I didn't tell you.  I was trying to think of her name.  This great singer, who died years ago, she used to come by and be with us a lot.  You know her name.  I just can't think of it right now.  It'll come.
Speaker 1: You said--. You know, the one place--I just want--. Jerry's--it wasn't Palm Tavern--but Jerry's, no Jimmy's?
Speaker 2: Jimmy's Palm Garden.
Speaker 1: And you said it was important in Chicago.  I want you just to talk about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was a very important gathering place for--well, they call them middle-class black people now--but that was a little upper-class lounge, and it went on for many years.  Everybody came there.  I remember one night, and some of the names escape me. Albert Hibbler, a Duke Ellington singer, came in the lounge and we played for him and he sang.  And you can't imagine, it's just like, it's just like heaven, you know.  A man like that, he's blind, of course, but for him to come in and sing with us and the place was packed.  The owner would have signed us for another year just after that one night.  But people were good.  We used to, it was at 39th and, near Cottage.  Its Oakwood now, it's near where that very famous school is, Father [George] Clements' School [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois].  We would play until 12:00 or 1:00 at night and then walk home, walk to 43rd Street and everybody would walk home.  No fear of anybody trying to mug you or anything.  It was just--it was a different world.  The world was just different.  As we grew up, I don't think there was a car in the neighborhood that had an alarm on it.  Now everybody's got an alarm.  My aunt would leave the door open for me at night.  Then we'd come in and sometimes if it was hot, there wasn't a lot of air conditioning around, we'd sleep on the porch. No problem.  It was a different world and as we look back at it, I think things are getting worse rather than getting better.
Story_ID: 17734
Speaker 1: Now, you know--. Before I go on with this, I wanted to talk--because we've not talked a lot about your aunt [Elizabeth Johnson]--but she had a great influence on you, right?  Your aunt and uncle?  Or your aunt mainly?
Speaker 2: My aunt, mainly.  My aunt was, she was a Christian lady.  I thought she was too Christian because she worked for different people doing housework. And as I got older, seventeen or eighteen, I used to get on her about giving so much of the money that she made to church.  I said, "As hard as you work, you shouldn't give your money away like that."  I told her all the time "You can't buy your way into heaven.  You may be trying, but you can't do it."  But she was a Christian person, and all she would say is that, "I don't understand."  But I think that she did a lot more for me than maybe my parents would have done if they lived.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Now what things, what lessons did she teach you or, you know, what lessons did she teach you that, you know, you kept with you the rest of your life?
Speaker 2: Well, I was having musicians--music lessons from a music teacher named Strayhorn during that time. The music lessons were fifty cents apiece, and I'll never forget that because I'd take the money as I go.  And a lot of times my aunt didn't have the fifty cents. But she managed to get it, and I took music from the time I was, oh, about five or six years old until I was eighteen or nineteen. And my uncle used to say, "Whatever you put up here, (points to head) nobody can ever take it away from you, but whatever you put in your pocket, anybody can come and get it."  And he used to preach that.  And I learned those sayings as I grew up.  I didn't know how important that was then, but I realize now how important it was.
Story_ID: 17735
Speaker 1: You know, when I was in New York someone was talking about the lessons that were taught by older people at that time. You know,  that there was a push for everyone to try and improve themselves.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  My uncle used to, we lived on the second floor of a two-flat building, my uncle owned and he used to pay me, oh, I think it was about fifty cents or sixty cents a week to bring the garbage down and put it in the can in the back by the alley. And he told me, he said, "Every time you make a dollar, make sure you save a dime. Always.  No matter what you want or what you want to do.  If you make a dollar, save a dime."  I have done that to this day.  And I got used to doing it.  I realize the more you get like that, then you get anxious to save more and more and more. And I did that.  And my wife, after I got married, she's the financier in the family.  The type of person who doesn't throw away a penny, and that's what I like about her.  I don't want to say that in front of her.
Speaker 1: So, the two of you shared that in many ways?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, you can build things with that philosophy.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We did it like that for years.  She tried to--when was a--when she got a job teaching, she tried to persuade me to stop working altogether and just go to school and finish and she'd pay all the bills. But I wouldn't do that because I was making too much and we were doing too good.  We bought a house in Glencoe [Illinois].  Now, if you're familiar with Glencoe, it's one of the richest suburbs in the Chicago area.  We bought a house in Glencoe a year after we got married.  We saved money and ended up getting the house, getting started there.
Speaker 1: So, now that's--. Okay, let me ask you about that then.  So, wait, you got married in what year?
Speaker 2: I don't know, really.
Speaker 1: But wait.  It's 19--, it had to be 1946.
Speaker 2: We've been married, we've been married, if she were here, I could ask her.  I think we've been married about fifty-three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--.
Speaker 2: It had to be in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Right, it was in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: So, let me ask, now that's--why would you think of moving to--. So you're making--. Wait, so you get married, you're playing music at this time?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you're making a decent living?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was saving money and making good.
Story_ID: 17736
Speaker 1: So you--. And then you moved to Glencoe [Illinois].  So what was the thought that you would go to Glencoe? Isn't that--? Wasn't that--?
Speaker 2: Well, she had seen some beautiful homes in Glencoe and we wanted to live in a good place, so that's what we did.  But now, I told you I was sneaky. During that time right after we got the house, I got a job. I had taken the exam before, but I got a job on the fire department.  Now the rule was to work on the Chicago Fire Department, you had to live in Chicago [Illinois]. And, of course, I didn't live in Chicago. So I lived out there for a year before the fire commissioner found out that I lived in, out of the city. But what happened was this. Fire Commissioner [Robert J.] Quinn was an old, decent man.  He was single.  He was one of these staunch Irish Catholics. And he was Mayor [Richard J.] Daley's good friend. But Commissioner Quinn was--well, let's see, how can I put that--he had been going with this black lady who lived in Lake Meadows [Illinois] for a long time.  Nobody knew it.  I discovered it quite by accident.  I just happened to be going by one morning about 1:00 when he was coming out of her house. And, of course, I investigated a little bit and found out that he had been going with this lady and taking care of her.  And they had a good relationship.  They were both single, so there was nothing wrong with it, of course. Only he could not let his Irish Catholic friends know he was doing this.  It would have been easier for him to let his wife know, if he was married. But he was so adamant about not letting any of those people know about it. And I had to let him know that I knew it. And it was quite a decision for me to tell him that I knew he was going with this black lady and they were fine and it was none of my business.  So, during that time the fire department was definitely segregated.  Blacks were at one station.  Whites were at another station.  And the rule was when any white fellow would end up being an alcoholic or being a problem, as punishment they would send him to a black station.  Now we knew this, and it was unfair to the person that they did it to, but they did it over and over and over. So, the fire department was, as I said, segregated. And me and a few others were trying to figure out a way to integrate the fire department, only so that blacks would be able to be promoted on the same playing field as whites would.  See, as long as there were only two black stations, there would only be room for two black captains. But if we were all over the city, when we took the exams, we'd have a decent chance. So, Commissioner Quinn was talking to us once when we had written several articles in newspapers, the '[Chicago] Defender' particularly, about the fire department being segregated.  He said that--he told us at a meeting in our firehouse when he was trying to keep us from doing this, he said that "There are certain white fellows who really would make it uncomfortable for you because they don't want to end up sleeping in the same bunk room with you and functioning with you." And so I said at that meeting, I said, "Commissioner, my understanding is that in the rule book it says that firemen should emulate their officers.  We should do the same thing that our officers do. And it came to my attention that since there are some officers who don't mind sleeping in the same bed with black people, then I don't think these white firemen should mind sleeping in the same room with blacks."  He knew then that I knew.  Now Quinn's mother lived in Skokie [Illinois], and I was right down the road in Glencoe. So, Quinn took me out of the station and put me into his office, so he could watch me. But it was in the wintertime and I didn't have to go to any fires.  I just had to go there and sit there in his office and type up whatever he wanted me to do, but he could watch me and I couldn't influence anybody else.  But his mother lived in Skokie and I lived in Glencoe, so from time to time he would have me, as I was going to work, stop and pick him up and bring him downtown. And we got to be real good friends. But he didn't like me at all because he knew that he would be embarrassed among his Irish Catholic friends if they knew that he was going with this black woman. So I used that all the way.
Speaker 1: That's an amazing story, really.  You have him blackmailed, but quietly.  So that's pretty bold of you, too.
Speaker 2: I blackmailed him without blackmailing him.  And I remember the day I quit the fire department, Quinn paid me for six months.  He kept sending my check to my house asking me to come back. And we got to be good friends.  I liked the guy.  He was really nice.  But, see, the situation of the fire department being segregated, he inherited all that.  He didn't do it.  He inherited it.  And little by little, he was trying to change it. But we had, as we always have now, the union, and all that. They were giving him trouble.  And some of the, even some of the black firemen used to say, "Well, Russ lives in Glencoe, and they have just fired a couple of guys from living out of the city.  Why don't they get him?"  And they couldn't understand why Quinn didn't bother me. And I never told them.
Story_ID: 17737
Speaker 1: So how many--? How many black firemen--? Has it really improved it that much? You know, you hear all the--.
Speaker 2: Well, now the fire department is integrated completely. So there are black firemen all over now.  But during that time, we had ninety black firemen, only ninety.  There were almost six thousand firemen, but only ninety were black.
Speaker 1: And they covered the black area?
Speaker 2: They stayed right in the black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Now the other question I have about that is were you given the same benefits and everything that everyone else was?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Salary was the same.  Everything else was the same, but the promotion policy was different.  They couldn't promote black lieutenants and captains because they had nowhere to put them.  And we had one guy.  His name is Clarence Brown.  I just talked to him about a week ago.  He moved to Florida.  Clarence Brown looked as if he was white.  They had no idea he was black. So when he first came on the fire department, they sent me to a white station.  And he went over there, and he stayed for awhile--for about a week--and he said, "I don't know why they sent me over here." And the guys got to like him and everything and they said, "What are you talking about?"  Sonny said, "I'm a negro."  And they looked at him and said, "You're what?"  And he said, "I'm a negro.  I'm black."  And they said, "You don't look black."  Sonny said, "I don't care how I look.  I'm black."  And they ended up sending him to a black station. And he used to laugh about it because he thought that was so funny.  It was a big joke to him.
Speaker 1: So what did you--? How long were you on the--part of the fire department?
Speaker 2: I was at the fire department for eight years.  And I caused trouble, a lot of trouble for them, not serious trouble, but annoying type trouble.  On the fire engine is CFD, Chicago Fire Department. So on our engine, I wrote Colored Fire Department. And we went to fires with that--with that on that. And these lieutenants would see that and say, "Who in the hell did this?"  And they would say, "I don't know," and nobody would know anything.  And the people, you know, when we went to a fire, the crowds would gather everywhere.  And these officers were always careful about what they said out there with all these people around.  And we came there with a big fire truck Colored Fire Department written on it.  It was so funny.  It was really funny.  We did that over and over and over.
Speaker 1: So, what other things were you doing?  You were a rebel rouser and you got away with things.
Speaker 2: Well, [Fire Commissioner Robert J.] Quinn liked me. Quinn knew I did it.  He wasn't sure, but he knew I did it.
Story_ID: 17738
Speaker 1: Now the other question I have about is living in Glencoe [Illinois].  I mean, why--? Because that's also the other thing, the North Shore [Illinois] tends to be--. I know they've always had a group of black people that were servants--.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] In Glencoe.  But you know how they got out there?
Speaker 1: They were servants.
Speaker 2: They were servants.  And the whites who wanted their servants to live near them, they bought a few houses for a few blacks. So there were about eight or nine black families in Glencoe when we moved out there. And we got along very well.  Everybody was fine.  But there was one thing that we did notice, the white and black kids got along wonderfully.  They were fine in grammar school and they came up together. But as they would get older, some of the white mothers would begin to think, "Well, my kid is getting to be twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen--maybe thinking about sex." Then they started pulling them away from their black friends, and that happened.  We noticed that happened.  They did it very quietly.  But some of the young kids used to be good friends, then the mothers would say, "Well, you can't go that party," or "you can't go out with so and so anymore."  That was traumatic for those kids, we knew that.
Speaker 1: Did people--your neighbors and things when you moved--did they think it was--?  Or your aunt [Elizabeth Johnson]--did they wonder why you were moving up to Glencoe? Because it's different, the community that existed up there. But you were a new type of black person coming up there.
Speaker 2: Well, I was a little different, but all the whites who lived out there were very nice to us when we moved there.  When we first moved there, there was one guy.  I'm trying to think of his name.  I can't remember him.  There was one guy who was kind of a bigot.  And he had said, "It's a bad thing that blacks are moving in this neighborhood area." Because there weren't many blacks who lived there.  So, I had about--I had collected guns. I had about three shotguns and a few others.  So, as we moved, after the house was built--we built the house.  After the house was built and we started moving in, all our furniture was there.  I came there with my car. Then I got my shotguns, parked the car way down at the end of the driveway and carried my shotguns in the house one at a time as the neighbors were watching. And they saw, saw me doing this. And they didn't say anything.  They just stood there and looked at it.  And it looked like I was carrying an arsenal into the house.  And they were all very, very nice after that.
Speaker 1: I can't get over you.  That's amazing.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We had no problems at all.
Story_ID: 17739
Speaker 1: So, was that a different experience though for you and your wife at the time?  Did you--? You didn't integrate the neighborhood--you sort of integrated the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Well, there was one more black family that lived in that, on that block for a long time.  But that family, they were servants.  He was a chauffeur and she was a maid.  Well, they put up with those people.  They liked them.  They get along with them.  But if you were not at that level, they kind of looked at you a little differently.
Speaker 1: But see, you know, the reason I'm asking these questions is you--. We're now in the 1950s, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In the 1950s you know, things that are happening. You know, the Brown v. Board of Education decision.  There's, you have--. I think it's even later that you have a contract buying case.  You know, where people were, you know, all the blacks getting ripped off by--.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well even in the 1950s, so many things were segregated.  Even the hotels didn't want the black clubs to come downtown during that time. So, it wasn't so good in the 1950s.  It started getting better after [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] came along, but prior to that time, it wasn't funny.
Speaker 1: And so, when you lived--? So, but you don't mind being in this environment? It's not, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  It didn't bother me at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And was it at that time more of a rural--I mean not a small to-- well, not a small town. I guess a suburb sort of, but wasn't Glencoe [Illinois] more like a small town at that time?
Speaker 1: Oh, it was, definitely a small town and it was practically all white.  Now, Glencoe was mostly Jewish at that time.  There were more Jews in Glencoe and Highland Park [Illinois] than anywhere.  And, of course, at that time, when I was working in Chicago [Illinois] and coming home on the train, I noticed every little thing that happened.  There was one thing that happened over and over and over, and I wrote about it in several books.  Coming on the train when I'd get on and sit down in a seat, the white men would never sit next to me. But the white women would.  Now, I don't know why that happened, but I made note of that. And I used to tell my wife all the time it happened. White women were not reluctant.  They'd come and sit right next to you.  White men never would.  Now that was, that was strange, you know. And I couldn't understand that.  And we'd talk about it, and I talked about it to some of the professors in school, when I was going to school.  And I went to night school for quite awhile, in sociology.  They couldn't believe that.  But it was something that no one has ever said to them before.
Story_ID: 17740
Speaker 1: Now, I'm still, I'm still sort of stuck on--.  You know, it's just that Chicago [Illinois]--. Most people from Chicago--. You were raised here.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They want to stay on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] because it was a comfortable enclave.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you and your wife, I'm just--. That's my only point, is that you chose to leave that enclave, that people were like, totally happy with.
Speaker 2: I didn't mind being in discomfortablem, uncomfortable situations.  Didn't bother me at all.  That was just a part of me.  I could go anywhere.  I wanted a nice house in a nice place.  So, oh--. When we built our house in Glencoe [Illinois], the construction company that built our house, he took his name off of all of his trucks.  His truck would come to our house and do work and build the house and everything.  They did a good job. But there was never a name on there.  He didn't want the whites to know that he was building a house for us.  Now that's how bad it was during that time.  And I used to ask him, I said, "What happened to your trucks?"  You know.  And he said, "Oh, that's a new one I just got.  I hadn't put my name on it yet."  But they used to rent trucks and do stuff like that.  But there were whites who would make it bad for him, if they knew he was building a house for me.
Speaker 1: Now how long did you live in that house?
Speaker 2: We stayed in Glencoe for twelve years.  Twelve years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We stayed there for twelve years. And I remember when I got ready to sell the house, the white fellow who lived next door to me, we had become such good friends.  And I liked him and he liked me and we got along fine.  And he said one thing that turned me off completely. When I got ready to move, he said, "you're not going sell your house to a Jew, are you?"  I said, "what do you mean?"  He said, "well, I just wondered, you know." But they were prejudiced against everybody, Jews, Arabs. I thought against us more than anybody else. But I never will forget that remark when he said that.
Story_ID: 17741
Speaker 1: [tape cuts in]--were saying that, you know, about a year before you moved from Glencoe [Illinois] you--I mean or sold your house--you resigned from the police force.
Speaker 2: I resigned from the fire department.
Speaker 1: I mean fire--I keep saying police. I don't know why I'm like, I got this police force--. Okay, you resigned from the fire department.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I resigned about a year before. And I took a job at Lyon and Healy which was the biggest piano company in Chicago [Illinois] and around the country. And the second piano I sold was a $5000 Steinway to John Johnson, the head of 'Ebony [Magazine].'  Mrs.[Eunice W.] Johnson had heard me play the piano before, and she made me promise that if I would come and play for a party at her house, she would buy a piano from me.  And she did.  And Mrs. Johnson was the nicest person in the world.  But the trouble I had with her, she wanted to buy this Steinway piano--a huge piano--one of the biggest Steinways, and she wanted it painted white.  And I kept telling her, when you put paint on a piano, it interferes with the sound.  It takes away from the sound to paint it. But she wanted it white.  So I kept saying, "Mrs. Johnson do you--? When do you play?" She said, "I don't play a note." She doesn't play at all, but she wanted it white, so we painted it white.  And I think they still have that white piano.
Speaker 1: That's a nice-- So you had--. So this was--. So this job represented a way to get back into music in a way, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They didn't have that many black salespeople then?
Speaker 2: They didn't have any.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They didn't have any.  No.  There were no black salesmen that I knew of selling pianos.  And a lot of people were giving their kids piano lessons during that time.  They're not doing it now, but they were then. And there were a lot of pianos sold. (unclear)
Speaker 1: So, you did okay there, too?
Speaker 2: I did pretty well there.  I did well there for a long time.
Speaker 1: So how long did you that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm trying to guess.  I don't really remember.  It must have been five or six years.  And I made pretty good money there.
Speaker 1: And so what did you learn out of that experience?  That's your first time in sales.
Speaker 2: Oh, dealing with people.  Being honest with people I dealt with.  Every once in awhile, I would agree to give their kids five or six music lessons to get them started.  I did everything to sell.  And I did very well.  There was another great musician named Ernie Harper who was around Chicago for many years.  He played and sang and he was great.  He passed on here about five or six years ago.  He bought a big Steinway from me, and our goal was to sell the Steinway piano, but all the little pianos, the Starks and all, didn't make much commission. But Steinway made a good commission. And, I guess, I don't know if I have any pictures of it now, my happiest moment came one day when Oscar Peterson came in. When he came to Chicago, Steinway Company would send a piano that he would pick, would send a piano out for him to play it. He would buy it just for him to play it.  And he came in and we played for a while together and he picked out a piano.  I had a chance to sit and play with Oscar Peterson.
Speaker 1: And really Chicago was a music hub then, too. This is the time--. It's not--.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Oh, yeah.  Chicago had jazz everywhere, jazz was great.  And jazz musicians made good money in Chicago for a long, long time.  It's not like now.  It's, little by little, these electronic machines begin to come in, and people were playing electronic machines at dances. So the musicians slowly went out and moved to California.
Story_ID: 17742
Speaker 1: Now when you, when you left Glencoe [Illinois] and you were working at--.
Speaker 2: Lyon and Healy [piano dealership].
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] Lyon and Healy. Where are you living now?
Speaker 2: Well, I came--. Then, then my wife--. Well, this is the funny part about it.  My wife bought a house, and I never saw it.  She came home one day.  We had decided to move out of Glencoe, and move back to Chicago [Illinois].  She'd came home.  I wish she were down here to tell you that story.  She found a house.  She arranged for the financing.  She bought the house and she said, "come on,  we're going to move in our new house." I said, "what new house?" I had never seen the house before. And she took me to it. And I moved in it.
Speaker 1: And so where was that house located?
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] She's got to tell you about it.
Speaker 1: Where was that house located?
Speaker 2: That was at 103rd and Rhodes.
Speaker 1: You went from one extreme to, you went from--.
Speaker 2: From one end of the city to all the way to the other end of the city.  And we lived there for about, oh, God, I don't know how long. We stayed there for about ten or twelve years.
Speaker 1: So that--. So, so you, you work, you work--. You're the only--. Were you the only black salesman for the whole time you worked there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're--. So you were treated okay by the company--.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you had, you had--. You went after the black market and this also--?
Speaker 2: No.  I sold to black and white.
Speaker 1: Oh, you did?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because, you see, I could play piano. And that helped me so much.  And some of the salesmen there couldn't play. And people who want to buy a piano, they want to hear how it sounds, you know. And that helped a lot, so it worked out like that.
Story_ID: 17743
Speaker 1: So you did--? What did you do after that? 'Cause none of this is reflected in your material. But what else--? When did you--? What did you do after you--?
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] Then I went to NBC [National Broadcasting Company, Inc.].
Speaker 1: But how--? No, I don't unders--. How did you just go to NBC? That's what--.
Speaker 2: Well, I think I was in New York [New York] once.  And the time I was in New York, Adam Clayton Powell [Jr., U.S. Congressman from New York] was having a press conference out in front of the Abyssinian [Baptist] Church. And I saw him, and I admired him so much. And I stood there and looked at the cameramen and the people and I said, "I want to get in that business." So, I started working toward that.  And I've been lucky.  I've been able to write all the time. So when I went to NBC, I was a writer for about six months for Len O'Connor [broadcast journalist].  Now, Len O'Connor was one of the chief commentators during that era. And I was a writer for him and an investigator for him. And then they put me on the air.
Speaker 1: But, okay.  First of all, let's--. Are you writing during--you say you were writing. You haven't mentioned writing.  You were writing where? Were you writing for news?
Speaker 2: I was writing--. In the fire department, I was writing secret messages to the '[Chicago] Defender' newspaper about the prejudice in the fire department. And I would write under pseudonym.  I'd pick out any name.  It didn't make a difference.  And they know, the Defender knows all about me.  And so I was able to write and Len started me. And the first story that I ever did after I got on the air for NBC News, I won an Emmy.  The first story. The first story was about a bank, Drexel Bank. And Drexel had a way of paying. Many poor people had bank accounts where they never had more than one hundred dollars or fifty dollars in that bank account. And Drexel was paying them less interest than they were paying people who had five thousand or six thousand dollars in it which was illegal for the bank to do it.  I discovered that quite by accident. And I stood out in front of the bank and as people would come out, I would identify myself and tell them the story.  I said, "You're not getting this much interest as these other people who got money.  Can I take a look at your bank account?  We'll film it." And we proved that the bank was illegally paying poor people less money, interest--I think it was about 1.5 percent--than they paid wealthier people.  So, Len O'Connor took that and that was a national story. And they almost closed Drexel Bank.  Now I remember one thing that was so funny.  Once the story hit the air and they put it on NBC, people had a run on the bank. Poor people were running there and taking their money out and everything. And there was one guy raising so much Cain there, and we had the camera crews out there to do a follow-up on the story.  And I asked him, I said, "How much money do you have in the bank?" He said, "Hell, I had ten dollars in the bank and I want it all." And we did things like that, and we would incorporate sound bites like that in the story. To show that there was a comedy angle to it also.  And people got to know me as I did things like that.
Story_ID: 17744
Speaker 1: But I want to go back to this one--. You said you wrote with--at the '[Chicago] Defender' under a pseudonym.  What was your pseudonym?
Speaker 2: I used any name.
Speaker 1: You used--okay.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I'd just come up with any name.
Speaker 1: Any name.  Okay.  Okay.  But then while you were, while you were--. I understand you were doing that when you were at the fire department, but when you were selling pianos, were you still writing?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Okay, but okay--.
Speaker 2: The only thing I wrote about in the 'Defender' was about the fire department being segregated.  That's all.
Speaker 1: But what I don't understand is how you--. Okay, you look and you say I want to do what they're gonna do. And how you end up getting hired.  That's what I'm trying to figure out. That doesn't--. I mean (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well, I just wrote them a letter and applied, and they hired me.
Speaker 1: And this is in what year?  1960--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I'm trying to remember the years.  That's hard for me.
Speaker 1: You said '70 [1970]--. Okay, well I'm sure it doesn't [unclear]--.
Speaker 2: It's hard to remember the years, but it was--.
Speaker 1: 1964.
Speaker 2: I think it was a little after that.
Speaker 1: It says you were--. Prior--. You were a news reporter, where you began as a courier in 1964.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's about right.
Speaker 1: [simultaneously] And you spent two years as a news writer and went on the air in 1966.
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] You know more about it than I do.
Speaker 1: [laughing] Well I just--okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: But any--. But see even the--.  But then the other dates aren't right.  Okay, but anyway. But so in 19--, so you go, you go there.  Now what is the--? What is, what is the--NBC [National Broadcasting Company, Inc.] like at that time? you know, I mean--.
Speaker 1: Well, it was me, a fellow named Fred Thomas [broadcast journalist], the window washer and a security guard.  There were four blacks at the station when I went there. And, little by little, more came in.
Speaker 2: You said there was the window washer, you--?
Speaker 1: A fellow named Fred Thomas.
Speaker 2: And what did Fred Thomas do?
Speaker 1: Fred Thomas was on the air. And I think there was also a lady who did the work around the commissary.  There were very few blacks in news business during that time. And then they had some riots in Chicago [Illinois] and they came up with--they wanted, like a red squad to infiltrate some of these organizations--the Black Panthers, and all of these organizations.  Well, all of the secret policemen were white.  Well, you know, damn well, the whites couldn't infiltrate the Black Panthers, so they had to assign some of the black policemen.  They didn't do it because they wanted to.  They did it because they had to.  So little by little as they would assign black policemen to jobs like that, then we started getting in.  Then, of course, some blacks started moving to the suburbs too during that time. And that's when they really had the big push for the fire department to be integrated.  I can remember--going back to the fire department--I can remember going to a house in Bridgeport [Illinois] where this--poor lady, I felt sorry for her because she was really distraught.  She was sick.  Her house was burning. Badly.  The fire department pulled up.  She would not allow a black fireman to go inside of her house.  We said, "lady, your house is burning down." She said, "I don't give a damn.  I don't want none of you niggers to go in the house." I said, "your house is burning down." And the captain pleaded with her and he called back to the commissioner's office and said, "this lady refused to let us go in her house." He said, "What are you going to do?" And her house really burned down.  Now I thought the lady was psychotic, of course.  And some of her neighbors tried to comfort her and all that, but that's a day I'll never forget.  And this was right there in Bridgeport where Mayor [Richard J.] Daley lived.  That was a bad day. 'Cause I was ready to go in anyway.  But I never will forget that.
Story_ID: 17745
Speaker 1: Now was NBC [National Broadcasting Company, Inc.], was it ahead of its time in hiring you?  Because I thought that after the riots, that was the push.  That's when Warner Saunders [Chicago news reporter] and [Holmes] 'Daddy-O' Daylie [Chicago disc jockey], I mean that, what--? They were with--.
Speaker 2: Well, Warner Saunders came in, they had--. They didn't mind having you on, like a talk show. And Warner came in with 'Daddy-O' on a talk show. It was Warner and 'Daddy-O' and somebody else.
Speaker 1: But they were with--. Where they with--? They weren't--. They were with AB--. Was it--?
Speaker 2: Warner started at ABC [American Broadcasting Company].
Speaker 1: ABC
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) He did something at ABC.  No, CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc.]
Speaker 1: CBS. Okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: (simulaneously) And then he came over to ABC.  But I was there for about three years before Warner came there.  I remember the day Warner came in there.
Speaker 1: So, that's why I'm asking, was NBC a little ahead of its time?  Were there other people like you at ABC and CBS ?
Speaker 2: I think that NBC had more blacks than anyone else did.  But there was pressure all the time because some of the white reporters couldn't get the black stories.  They just couldn't get it.  And, of course, I used to go in, if I got there first, I would tell the people I said, "now, since you have talked to me already, this is going to be on the air.  You don't have to talk to these other reporters who show up, if you don't want to." And sometimes they wouldn't.  They would agree not to.  But I had a system there, whenever a kid was killed or something--and there was a lot of that--I wouldn't go with the camera crew. I would go first by myself, and I would apologize to the family for even coming.  And I would ask them, I said, "now, there is nothing you can do here because your child unfortunately has been killed. But maybe you can give a message to some other mother or some other kids.  Could I bring my cameraman who is out in the car?" And if they said "yes," I'd go get him.  I got into a lot of houses that way where, when the reporter would run up there with a cameraman standing right behind him, knock on the door, he couldn't get near the people.  He just couldn't do it.
Speaker 1: So, this person Len--? You said Len O'Con--?
Speaker 2: Len O'Connor [broadcast journalist].
Speaker 1: (simultaneoulsy)--Connor.
Speaker 2: Was he a good person to work for at the begin--? I mean, was he, was he receptive to you or was he--?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, Len was good.  Len was probably the most unprejudiced white man I've ever met.  He, Len hated everybody we used to say.  And he was a commentator.  He used to stay on [Mayor Richard J.] Daley all the time.  And Floyd Kalber was there also.  I talked to Floyd about a week ago.  Floyd has now a bad case of emphysema.  But we were friends for many, many years.  And we worked together.  Floyd taught me more about writing than I ever knew.  I would write sometimes copy for him.  He would mark it all up and give it back to me, and I'd go over it again.  Of course, you know how that works.  That developed.
Story_ID: 17746
Speaker 1: So, you went on the air, you said 1967?
Speaker 2: I think.  I'm trying to remember.
Speaker 1: (simultaneoulsy) Yeah, that's what it says.  It says 1967 you were on--.
Speaker 2: September '87--[1987]
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Yeah, then you were on the air in 1967
Speaker 2: That's about right.
Speaker 1: (simulaneously) Okay.
Speaker 2: But now I didn't tell you about how I first got on the air.  A fellow named Ted Smart  [broadcast journalist] was doing the network news out of Chicago [Illinois].  He had a fifteen-minute segment.  I was writing the network news.  I was a writer.  I was writing the network news, and I would have to write it, take it into the studio and Ted would read it.  This day, something happened to Ted. Ted didn't show up. And I had written the news, walked in the studio and the clock was going. So when it got up to about thirty seconds before time, I told the engineer, I said, "what are we going to do?" And, you know, he just said--. And I said, "well, turn it on." I sat there and read the news.  And the, the news director, Bill Corley, he heard it. And he was coming down the hall and he didn't say anything and I saw him walk up in the studio behind the glass. And he listened to me until I finished. And he came out and said, "what did you do?  Did you kill Ted ?" I said, "No.  Ted didn't show up." So, I read the news and I didn't have any weather.  But, when I got to the weather, I remembered it was a nice day out, so I made up the weather.  And I read the news, came out fine.  I've been on the air ever since.
Speaker 1: That's an amazing story.  So, you put yourself on the air?
Speaker 2: Nobody else was there.
Speaker 1: (laughing) But wait a minute. But wait, but wait.  First of all, had you been--? I mean I guess you'd been soaking all this up anyway.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: You had, you had--at least you had been--. You had some music, performing in front of people.
Speaker 2: Oh, I was--. I had no stage fright at all.  Stage fright was no problem at all.
Speaker 1: But they make a big deal about being an on-air anchor and training and all of that.
Speaker 2: I used to always say, "I could almost train a pet monkey how to be an anchor if you give me enough time." I don't think it's a big thing to be an anchor.  It depends on who the news director likes.  You know, you can, you can do it with anybody.  Now I remember clearly, to digress and go a little forward, when Carol Marin [broadcast journalist] got mad and quit because she didn't want to get involved with Jerry Springer [television personality] and then the other fellow, what's his name?
Speaker 1: That was--that was the guy with the glasses--Ron Magers [broadcast journalist].
Speaker 2: Ron Magers.  When they both quit, they just quickly stuck Warner Saunders [broadcast journalist] in there.  Warner was one of the most surprised people in the world when he got the job.  And he told me, he said, "Russ, I didn't expect to be put in here." But he was the only one there.  It was between him and Art Norman.  Well, Art Norman is not mature enough. And Warner fit right into the spot.  He's been there ever since and he's doing a damn good job of it. And I think he's gonna stay there.
Speaker 1: So now this--? So, the question I have for you--.  So you put yourself on--. Now this--(laughing)--see that's--. He was put on there, but you put yourself on there.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well, I had no choice.
Speaker 1: Then the news director comes along, he thinks "not bad." But that doesn't mean you would stay on. So, I mean, what happen to the other guy when he comes back? How did you--?
Speaker 2: Bill Corley let me stay on.  I stayed on and then I got into tele--. This is radio.  Then I got into television.  And once I got into television, I had it made.  Because I knew all the gang bangers. I knew all the gang bangers and the Black Panthers were running rampart (sic) in Chicago.  I knew all of them and I could go into their clubhouses and things and the white reporters couldn't do that. And then as the Mexican and Puerto Rican group, they started with gangs. I got familiar with them and I used to go out on my day off and eat burritos with them and just be around them, you know. Because I knew that one of these days, I was gonna have to have them.
Story_ID: 17747
Speaker 1: But, okay.  Two questions.  It's not that easy always to transfer from radio into on air T.V. Or was it easier back then?  Because sometimes people, they pay attention to how you look.  You know, you may have the voice, but it doesn't work. I mean--.
Speaker 2: Well, you see, we have the, we have the executives now who choose people.  And they choose people they like.  Now, Warner Saunders [broadcast journalist] is bald-headed.  Back during that day, a man who was bald, he couldn't get on the air as a reporter.  But now all that has changed, and the news director will choose who he likes.  So, I don't think the transition was hard.  It just depended on who liked you.  If they liked you, fine, you could do it.  If they didn't like you, you couldn't do it.
Speaker 1: So, do you think it had to do with that you had developed a following on radio and that they liked you or that they thought you were a good journalist? I mean, what, what's--?
Speaker 2: Well, now I've got to tell you something that you haven't asked me yet.
Speaker 1: Well, good.  You could help me around--.
Speaker 2: I've never had a course in my life in journalism.
Speaker 1: I know you haven't. But that's what I'm--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, you know that.
Speaker 1: No, I mean, but what you're saying, I wrote a few articles. (laughing) Then you know, but--. I, I took a couple of sociology courses.  But I mean, I'm just trying to figure out--. Because this is totally atypical, you know, I'm trying to fig--. I, so I'm just trying to figure out how you're working your way through what is essentially the news business which became corporate America. But I'm just trying to figure out how you, you know, how you--. Because even then we're dealing in a racist society and I'm just saying you seemed to be just sort of moving along.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was definitely racist.  There's no problem about that.  But if the news director liked you, you could get in.  And that's the way it is now.  A lot of journalists that you see working, they think that they're the greatest in the world. But if you start tracing back, sometimes the mother knew the news director, was raised with somebody. The father, just like, this one guy in Chicago [Illinois] now, and maybe I shouldn't call too many names, but there's one guy in Chicago now, Jim Avila [broadcast journalist]. The worst thing that ever happened to Jim Avila  was one day when a Puerto Rican fellow had killed someone and I was the first one there.  Jim Avila showed up about twenty minutes after I got there.  The lady whose son was killed couldn't speak English. And I, of course, couldn't speak Spanish. But I had kind of tried to ingratiate myself to her. And I looked up and saw Jim Avila, and I said, "oh, here comes Jim Avila.  He can talk to you and he can tell us what you're saying.  We can talk together." It turns out that Jim Avila was Jewish, and he had been pretending to be Hispanic to get the job.  And when came and said, "Jim, would you translate for us?" He was so embarrassed and he was made at me because he thought I knew.  I didn't know anything about it.  That was another accident I fell into.  And me and Jim got to be good friends after.  But I didn't know Jim was Jewish. And Jim got into the business because his father was a news director at CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc.] at one time.  Now some of the old timers like Warner, and a few of the others won't tell you that story, most of them don't even know it.  And I didn't know it when it happened.  That's why I said, I lucked into a lot of things without knowing.
Speaker 1: But I know you lucked into it, but I'm still saying, how did you get the news director--? Then let me ask this question how did you get the news directors to like you?  Because you're black.  I mean, I don't understa--. You're black. I mean, and I know the times are changing and they needed people to go in, you know, in places, but how did--?
Speaker 2: Well, over the years I think I came up with stories that other people couldn't get.  I would come up with something that they would send their reporters out to try and get and they would come up with nothing.  And a day or two later, I would have it.  And that's how it happened when guys started surrendering to me.  We first went out, and there were about, oh, a hundred policemen standing out there with guns on this apartment. And this man was holding his--one of his kids and his mother-in-law at gunpoint--saying he was going to kill them.  And they had been out there three or four hours, you know.  So, the day I got there I said, "look it's cold out here, let's get this thing over with.  Let me go in." And the policeman said, "Well go ahead and get your head shot off." That's the way they talk to you, you know.  I said, "just let me go see what I can do." And one cop said, "well, we can't stop you." I walked on up and knocked on the door.  The guy saw me.  He knew me from television, so he let me come in.  And we sat down and talked. And the only message I gave him was that any kind of living is better than any kind of dying.  We talked for awhile.  Arm in arm, we came out.  And it started from there, and it never stopped. I think you're flashing a little bit there. But that was the first one and that was in the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago public housing project].  No, I'm sorry.  That was in Cabrini Green [Chicago public housing project], and Cabrini Green was notorious for drugs and whatever during that time.
Story_ID: 17748
Speaker 1: And then I also want to ask about this whole thing, you know, of what you call yourself, an investigative reporter. And I was wondering at what time, people started--. 'Cause investigate journalism is supposed to be a new, you know, a subset area. So I'm just wondering if you could answer, you know, those, those questions. What was sort of--?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll take the investigative journalism first.  What they call investigative reporting now is they have units.  They have units of maybe six or seven people. And they will take a topic and work with it until they get what they're looking for.  But when I first started, investigative journalism or investigative reporting was, if you discovered something, you work it up on your own.  Sometimes on your own time, until you get what you're looking for. And then you begin to put it together.  But the real problem with news business now as I see it, the news business is run by--we call them 'the bean counters.'  They have more to do with news than anything else.  They tell them how much you can spend to get a story and even how long a story should be. And they have consultants now. There's one in Chicago [Illinois], whose name I will not mention. He doesn't know any more about news business than that recorder does, but he advises people.  At one time, I used to tie my tie like this all the time (demonstrates with tie).  You know, when the first, these real thin ties came out?  He told the news director that I should tie my tie real thin.  Now what difference is that going to make?  I wouldn't do it.  I wouldn't change anything.  But we have people now advising and telling people in the news business what to do and how to do it. And, believe me, they don't know anymore. They don't know it.  Just like Channel 2 [WBBM-TV, Television station, Chicago Illinois]. Channel 2 has been at the bottom of the list in Chicago for many years. Ever since they let Bill Kurtis [broadcast journalist] do a job on Harry Porterfield [broadcast journalist]. And they have never, never been able to come back up in the ratings.  But see, people don't forget. And no matter what program they put on before or after the 10:00 news, people will turn away from Channel 2, and they won't look at it.
Speaker 1: So, what was the job that, that Bill Kurtis did on Harry Porterfield?  He was in line, or--?
Speaker 2: Bill Kurtis went to New York.  So immediately they moved Harry Porterfield up to the same position Warner Saunders [broadcast journalist] is in now.  Bill Kurtis failed miserably in New York. So New York was getting ready to get rid of Bill Kurtis.  So, Bill Kurtis came back to Chicago, kicked Harry Porterfield out of the position that they had promoted him to. So Harry, in our opinion, in most of our opinions, Harry is the nicest gentleman in the news business. So Harry came over to Channel 7 [WLS-TV, Television station, Chicago, Illinois], where I was. And people protested Channel 2, and they tried to make it look good and everything, but Channel 2 went down right then when Bill Kurtis came back. And Kurtis' wife was very sick at the time and she died of cancer. And it came out that Kurtis was interested in a girl named La Pietra.  I forgot what her real name is.
Speaker 1: Donna La Pietra.
Speaker 2: Donna La Pietra.  And he just got a lot of bad press during that time and Channel 2 never came back up.  Of course, he's away from Channel 2 now with his own thing. But they did a job on Harry Porterfield.  Now Harry was a gentleman.  He wouldn't say anything bad.  If it had been me, I had been out there screaming against them, but Harry never would say anything bad about the station.  He just quit and came over to another station.  Harry's nice.  We used to always say you could--. They used to say-- they had a little motto that said, "Harry Porterfield did stories about people you should know and Russ Ewing did stories about people you shouldn't know."  They said that for years.  That got to be a little slogan.
Story_ID: 17749
Speaker 1: (tape cuts in, laughing)--'Cause you were out in the streets and making contacts constantly.  But that's what I'm wondering, you said that you could choose, you could decide your own story.  You may get a lead or say, you know, I want to do a story on this, and you would work on that story. But how would you determine if the story would ever air?  Is that because of a good relationship with the news director?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No. I used my own judgment.  I used my own judgment, and I wouldn't tell the news director what I'm working on.  See, some reporters go to a news director and say--if they get the story--usually it comes from an assignment editor. But if they get it, they go and say, "I want to do this.  What about this?  Can you give me time to do this?"  And half the time they say, "no."  But if you go and come in with a story and it's a good one, you've got it.  Little by little, you could do your own thing.  The most interesting thing that I did when I was at Channel 7 [WLS-TV, Television station, Chicago, Illinois], I loved that. I had done several things in a very bad neighborhood of Chicago [Illinois], a rough neighborhood of Chicago. And there was a girl who lived there who was going with a guy and he was going to rob a bank.  He had talked to his girlfriend or boasted about it, whatever.  She called me and gave me a tip that he was going to rob this bank.  Told me exactly when and where.  Now, the average reporter would say, "uh, that's a bunch of bunk."  I went to the news director and asked for a camera crew.  They said, "what do you want a camera crew for?"  I said, "A bank is going to be robbed in Oak Lawn [Illinois] today at 12:00.  I want to go."  He said, "oh, get out of here.  Don't talk to us.  Get out."  I said, "seriously." So the assistant news director said, "you better give him a camera crew because you know what he's been doing.  You better give it to him."  They gave me the camera crew.  We went out there and sat across the street in an unmarked car, got the guy going into the bank.  He robbed the bank.  We got him coming out of the bank.  He jumped in the pickup truck--two guys--and got away.  And we had all the film.  And then after we got back and put in on the air, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] showed up and wanted to know how did we know and, you know, they wanted to know who knew about this?  What happened?  And they came to me and got me in the office "who told you?"  Well you know, I'm not going to tell anybody anything.  I told them the same thing that I've told them for years.  I said, "I was walking down Michigan Avenue, a little old lady, I think she's a Catholic sister, she's the one who told me."  I told that story over and over and over.
Speaker 1: So, so--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) They were so mad at me and then they wanted to--the FBI wanted to know if they could bug my phone to see if these people would call back.  They never caught the guys who did it.  We had the picture, but they still never got 'em.
Speaker 1: They never caught them?
Speaker 2: Never caught 'em.  That I know of, now maybe they did and I didn't know.  But we had the picture going into the bank, coming out of the bank and the guard running out.
Speaker 1: And the girlfriend never called you back or anything?
Speaker 2: I talked to her several times.
Speaker 1: You--several times--.
Speaker 2: I got to know her very well.
Story_ID: 17750
Speaker 1: So, do you think your success--? Well, see you're painting a whole--. This is like news in the vibrant--this is, this is the old days when it was vibrant and real and not packaged and canned.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well see now there's one thing.  They want to be first.  They want to be the first ones there.  You can go out to do an accident.  You don't know the name.  You don't know what happened.  You don't know who got killed.  You don't know anything.  As long as your camera crew gets there first and you have it on the air first.  Well, I don't consider that as reporting.  I like to delve into it and find out what's it all about.
Speaker 1: What were some other stories that you worked on that were memorable to you?  I mean you, you had this whole string of where you did the hostage thing, you were, you know, you were saying that you did. You know, the first one. Not--I mean--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the first, that was the beginning, I think.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I remember one thing, which my cameraman, who has moved to Las Vegas [Nevada], we were talking the other day.  He reminded me of this one thing that we did.  I'd forgotten about it.  There was a lady who was in a religious type organization of some kind.  Her daughter had a congenital heart disease and the doctors had recommended that she have a heart operation.  Well, this religious sect didn't believe in letting anybody give you blood, or couldn't do any kind of operation.  So this lady got her daughter out of the hospital and they were hiding out.  She wouldn't take the daughter back to the hospital.  And there was an all-points bulletin on the police network to maybe try to find this lady and bring this child in.  Well, a janitor knew where that, that they were staying.  He called me and we went out there and I got in and I sat and talked to the lady for two hours. And my cameraman was with me, not filming anything, he was just there.  And we persuaded this woman to get in our car and go with us to the hospital. And, "take your daughter back," I said, "You don't want this child to die just because you think there's a god somewhere that's gonna give you some wings and you're gonna be flying all over.  So, be realistic.  This child is only twelve years old."  And we pleaded with that woman and finally she got in the car.  We took her over to Children's Memorial Hospital [Chicago, Illinois]. And, of course, we let all the other channels know that we were coming, so that way I would be on all the television stations, not just one.  We let them know when we got out of the car and walked in with her.  The doctor met us right there.  And luckily, I was hero for a day that time.  Irv Kupcinet [newspaper columnist] wrote a big thing about it, Feeder [news service] wrote about it.  It was all over everywhere.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't remember the year.  It was maybe ten years ago.  Art Campbell, the cameraman, he would know, 'cause he was so elated that we talked this woman into saving this child. And the kid came out of the hosp--the operation perfectly, everything.  I got, I got all, I got some awards somewhere for that up here. But that was just a lucky thing.
Story_ID: 17751
Speaker 1: You think all of them were luck [getting people to turn themselves in]?  You talked all these other people out of doing things.  Do you think that was luck?
Speaker 2: Most of it was luck.  Oh, I had a funny thing happen once.  This one guy, see, you're reminding me of things that I had forgotten about.  This one guy, this was in Gary [Indiana], and he had killed two people. And he was hiding out and his girlfriend--he told his girlfriend and his mother to call me--and he didn't have any money, so he was going to get caught, he knew that. He couldn't run and called me to come get him and take him in. And he was hiding out in an abandoned building in Gary.  And if you've seen some of these old abandoned buildings in Gary they are nasty. They--you know, they just haven't been lived in years.  I went in there and he was sitting on an old couch inside of the a, this building.  He had half a bottle of Jack Daniel's [whiskey] and he had drank the rest of it, I guess, and a .357 Magnum [handgun] laying next to the thing.  So we talked for a few minutes and he said, "I know I'm going back to--." He had been in prison before so he knew the routine.  He said, "I'm going back to prison, but I got a good chance for self-defense." Because the people he killed, were shooting at him, they were shooting back and forth, he killed two of them.  So, he said, "I just want to shoot my gun once before I go back."  I said, "you got anybody in mind?"  And he said, "No."  He pulled out the gun and fired three shots up into the ceiling.  Now, an old house, water soaked, dirty, plaster was falling all over everything, and my suit was all dirty and filthy and everything.  And I looked at him, and I said, "That looks like fun."  He said, "Yeah."  I said, "let me try it."  He handed me the gun and I fired three shots up in the ceiling.  I was trying to get rid of the bullets.  I didn't care nothing about shooting up into the ceiling.  I just wanted to make sure he didn't have any more bullets.  And I said, "you got some more bullets?  We can do that some more."  He said, "No, that's all I had." Oh, boy, I felt so good I didn't know what to do [laughing].  So after talking awhile, we went on to the police station in Gary and he turned himself in.
Story_ID: 17752
Speaker 1: This is amazing.  So do you think what was happening--people were trusting you on air and you developed this reputation as this sort of kind--? What--?
Speaker 2: Well, I kept my word.  I didn't lie to anybody.  I kept my word.  When I promise something, I do it. Yeah. I remember once this guy named, what was his name?  I'll think of his name after awhile.  He was an Italian fellow.  He had took a two-carat diamond ring from a woman and killed her--a very elderly lady, out in the south suburbs. And he had escaped and got down to Florida.  He stayed down there for two or three days and probably sold the ring and lived it up, you know, and done everything and he had no more money so he called and talked with his family and they asked me to go get him.  And I said if he's willing to come in, I'll go down and get him.  So, I just went to the news director I wanted to go down to Florida and pick up a fugitive. And they had done a story about this woman being killed, so naturally they wanted to follow up with a surrender.  What was his name? Can't think of his name.  Anyway, I went to Florida--a little town in Florida--I can't think of the name of it.  And he was down there, he was about twenty-five years old.  He was down there in a motel with two teenagers, two teenage girls. And I got the room next to his and he said he would, we could get the plane back in the morning.  So he sent one of the girls in my room.  I said, "oh, no.  We can't have that.  I'm down here in Florida.  I don't want none of these girls in my room with me at all.  So, both of them have to be in your room."  He said, "No."  I said, "we can't do it.  We can't do it like that."  I wouldn't let the girl come in my room.  But he stayed overnight and he came back the next day.  But those are the things that you can get into.  You know, if the police down in Florida had caught me with a teenage girl in my room, I couldn't talk my way out of that.  But, I forgot his name.  I can't think of his name.
Speaker 1: But he came back with you?
Speaker 2: He came back with me. And he was one of the surrenders that I remember.
Story_ID: 17753
Speaker 1: Do you ever--? Did you ever, ever have any problems with the police feeling that you were overstepping your bounds?
Speaker 2: I had a lot of trouble with the police.  A lot of police didn't like it all for me to do that.  One particular.  There was one policeman who--well, this happened--. Judge [Earl Edward] Strayhorn, who was a very popular judge in Chicago [Illinois], called me to come in his office. And he handed me a police report and said, " read this." And I read it and I looked at it where this policeman had worked on his day off and finally caught this fugitive. But it was a fugitive who had surrendered to me. And, the policeman wrote it as a report for his sergeant's exam.  He was making himself look good. So the judge said, "what should we do with this?" Now if I had exposed him, the policeman would have been in big trouble for filing a false police report.  I said, "don't say anything about it.  Just let it go, but let me get the policeman's name and home address."  I went out to the guy's home address, knocked on his door. When he opened the door--I discovered the day he was going to be off first--when he opened the door, he almost fainted, because he knew what I wanted.  And we talked and he said, "man, don't mess me up."  I said, "you messed yourself up."  And I said, "where do you work?"  He said, "I work in the records department."  I said, "let's make a deal.  From this day forward, if there's anything I want out of the police department records, you're gonna get 'em for me.  If not,"--then I pulled out his report and I said-- "if not, I'm going to expose you."  That policeman got me anything I wanted from then on.  Never had any more trouble out of--. All I had to do was call him and tell him what I wanted. And he did it. Oh, you're back.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I decided to come back. (laughing) See what else was going on.
Speaker 2: So, did you--? So, were there other, were there things where they even harassed you or did anything?
Speaker 1: Well, they used to resent me bringing guys in.  Because, you know, a policeman's record is important to him. And if he captures a fugitive--good god--they get promoted to sergeants that way.  And when I'd--. They'd be out looking for guys and I'd walk in with them, they didn't like that.  They didn't do anything about it, but they didn't like it at all.
Speaker 2: And, and--. And the station management never complained about it that you were endangering the--you know, lives of--let's say, you know, the cameramen, or yourself--or if anything happened to you.  Was there any--? None of that?
Speaker 1: They  weren't worried about me at all.  They didn't care.  Whether I got shot or not, they didn't give a darn.  A couple of the cameramen wouldn't work with me, wouldn't go with me. And there was a couple I wouldn't take with me because they were nervous and didn't want to do it. But most of them got along fine.
Story_ID: 17754
Speaker 1: Now the John [Wayne] Gacy book, how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Gacy originally was--. When he, when they--. Well it started long before that.  I was doing stories in the Uptown area and that's where Gacy picked up most of his kids.  I was doing stories about kids who disappeared.  I didn't know anything about Gacy at all. And I talked to several people about kids who disappeared and everything.  I'd go to the mothers and do an interview and the mother would say, "my son didn't run away.  He's not gone.  He disappeared."  And so I had pictures of about five different kids. And when they caught Gacy and he went to trial--first went to trial. Gacy--. When you're in the criminal courts in Chicago [Illinois], all you get for lunch is a bologna sandwich and some Kool-Aid [beverage].  Gacy couldn't stand bologna.  I was secretly a deputy sheriff at that time, so I could go in and out of the jail as I wished to.  I think I have a deputy sheriff's badge over there somewhere. And so I used to run down to the corner and get a chicken sandwich for Gacy at lunch and bring it to him and give it to him in the jail.  Little by little, we got to be friends. And he talked to me. And then I met his mother and I met his sister, who was a waitress out at O'Hare Field [O'Hare International Airport]. And I got to know the whole family. So, little by little, I got Gacy's story.  And Gacy would talk to me when he wouldn't talk to other people.
Speaker 1: And as the story unraveled, what did you learn?  I mean, I haven't read the book, but what did--? I mean, because you're talking about the psychology of a person, too.
Speaker 2: Gacy was a man who was sick.  No question about him being sick.  Before I say that, let me say this. During the trial, it was almost like a joke.  I saw about nine different psychologists and psychiatrists testify as to what was wrong with Gacy.  Every one of them would have a different theory. And all of them were absolutely off base.  They were guessing. And the psychologist that testified for the defense would say things to aid Gacy. The ones who testified for the prosecution was just the opposite.  Gacy was a man who could not have an orgasm unless someone was dying. And that's why he killed those boys.  Gacy had a cross in his house, he would--.  Well, no, first let me go back.  He would pick up these kids.  He was a constructionist.  He had a construction company.  He would go in the Uptown [Chicago, Illinois] area and tell these kids, "I need somebody to help work for me, a laborer, and I'll pay you ten dollars an hour or six dollars an hour and these kids would jump in the car with him.  He kept--what is it--chloroform, down on the right side, on the left side of his car.  When he got these kids in the car, he would throw the chloroform on them, hold on for a few minutes, drive them to his house, tie them down, handcuff them, rape them and do all sorts of things.  I don't know what some of things was. And then he would kill them.  And over the time he did this, Gacy would sleep in the bed with these dead bodies.  That's the way he had an orgasm.  But none of that came out in the trial.  None of it.  Gacy was so smart as these psychiatrists and psychologists would interview him, he learned the tests.  He knew what to say and what not to say. And he used to play games with them.  And he would smile and laugh when they were up there testifying. But Gacy was a--. He was an animal.
Speaker 1: Did you, by meeting his family, did you not learn much about his family and why maybe he--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I learned--. I got pictures of me and Gacy's mother together. And I had to take those pictures because as we were trying to write the book, we were worried about a lawsuit.  So, I mean, I wanted to prove that, where I got some of the information from.  So, the best thing to do is to get a picture right quick.  But, anyway, Gacy's mother just never believed that he did that.  She just couldn't believe it.  She was a nice--.  She died while we were doing the story.  But she just was a nice, old Catholic lady, and she didn't believe that Gacy could do this.
Story_ID: 17755
Speaker 1: Do you think, you know, there's a? Serial killers primarily have been white men. You know, I mean except for that one guy in Atlanta, you know, that they was (unclear).
Speaker 2: Wayne Williams.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Wayne Williams.  But do you think that there is any pattern or did you see anything, I mean, in his childhood or is it just that he was sort of a sick person? But did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, I never tried to trace things back to childhood.  I never would say that his father didn't love him or something.  I thought (John Wayne) Gacy was just a freak, that's all.  He had orgasm when someone was dying.
Speaker 1: And did this, did this stuff come out as you were talking to him--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, over these things? And when you would--?
Speaker 2: [simultaneously] I've got tapes of Gacy talking.  I don't know that I have them here or not.  I got tapes of him talking.  I promised I would never let anybody hear 'em. But I taped him many times.  He used to call my--. I gave him permission to call my house anytime.  My wife would answer the phone, and she would throw the phone down.  She just didn't want to--didn't even want to hear him, you know, talking.  But he told me--now he lied all the time now--I didn't believe everything he said.  But some things were proof, with no question about it.  He was a sick man.
Speaker 1: Did he tell you that the bodies--? 'Cause they didn't know for a long time--. The bodies were buried in his back, back yard, right?
Speaker 2: No.  He didn't tell me where they were.  But we were there when they first found them and everything.  But that was how I really, really got important press, when--.  See, I had pictures of some of these kids, and the bodies had deteriorated and everything. ut I had the pictures of some of these kids, and there was a little girl that lived right down the street from where one of Gacy's people disappeared.  She had a little bracelet. And this little kid had an erecter set. And he made bracelets for all the little girls in the neighborhood. And when they got all the stuff out of Gacy's house, I saw a bracelet just like the one that he made. So, I was able to identify this body before Dr. [Robert] Stein could identify him.  And that was pretty important.
Speaker 1: But this was a body of a little girl?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, boy.
Speaker 2: The little girl had a bracelet--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously)--bracelet--
Speaker 2: --which she showed to me and then I saw it in and among all the things that they displayed that they got. Gacy kept what he called 'souvenirs.'  Everybody he killed, he kept a watch or a ring or something.  He kept wallets.  He kept caps, stuff like that.  He was, he was sick.  But I can't blame that on his father or his mother.  I don't know.
Story_ID: 17756
Speaker 1: Okay. We were talking about [John Wayne] Gacy, and I was saying was there ever a time that you were afraid about anything?
Speaker 2: No.  Gacy never--.  He was--. Well, most of the time that I was dealing with him, he was in prison. And he was shackled.  And we were in the cell together.  Now, I can't remember.  He was, he was kind of a comedian.  He liked to talk.  And once he got started-- His nickname in jail was motor mouth.  Once he started talking, he never stopped.  I remember we were in a little cell, and when they let me go in there, what the prison officials did--which was a mistake--you couldn't take a tape recorder in the cell with him. They wouldn't allow that.  But I found, through a friend of mine, a plastic tape recorder, a little bitty one. And I put it in my mouth. And when you walk through the metal detector, it didn't do anything. So I got it in the cell with Gacy, and he told me a lot of things, and I got the miniature tape, a lot of things that he said over the years.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) That's an amazing story. Wow, that's--(unclear).
Speaker 2: (cameraman speaks) Mr. Ewing, you told me about how you first got him to talk too. Remember that?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Gacy--.  When I used to take him the chicken sandwiches, Gacy didn't--. He wouldn't say too much.  He was leery, you know.  He knew he was going to be convicted.  He was worried about that.  He wouldn't talk too much.  But I told him, I said Gacy, you're a bigot, you're a real bigot.  You didn't kill any black kids.  All you got was these little white kids.  You're a real bigot.  What's wrong with you?"  You know what he said?  He said, "you get me out of here, and I'll get you some."  And from then on, he started talking to me.  He was as nice as he could be. And he would tell me different things.  He used to--. They loved him at the Catholic church out there where he lived--and what was the name of that suburb? I can't think of it now.  But they loved him because he would dress up in a clown suit and entertain the children. And the Catholic sisters just loved him.  They thought he was, thought he was great.
Speaker 2: Because he's still alive, right?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No.  He's dead?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: How did I--? He went to the--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) They gave him the shot.
Speaker 2: Oh they did. Okay. Oh, you know who was I thinking of?
Speaker 1: You're thinking of Richard Speck [notorious serial killer active in 1966].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Story_ID: 17757
Speaker 1: So, now, when did you decide to write the book [Buried Dreams; Inside The Mind Of A Serial Killer]?
Speaker 2: From the first day I met him. From the first day--. (motions to interviewer) You dropped something, a picture or something. But,  I knew I had to put something together, so I started compiling everything I could get on [John Wayne] Gacy.  And what happened was I submitted it to Bantam [Books]. And Bantam was--Bantam, they made mostly paperbacks--but when I submitted the material I had, they wanted to really blow it up. So they wanted one of their writers to write what I had done. Which was the best thing to do, because that way I would make twice as much money and guarantee massive sales. And I had never written a book before. And I did all of the investigating and Tim Cahill did most of the writing. So we sold 300,000 copies right away.  And the city where we sold the most books was in San Francisco [California]. And I thought it would be here in Chicago [Illinois] because this is where it happened. But no, they told me that they sold more in San Francisco than anywhere.
Speaker 1: Now, so he took--so this is interesting--so they say, "we're going to assign a writer."  You had already written a book, but he rewrote.  Did he rewrite things?
Speaker 2: Well, he changed it all around and he used my investigative stuff, some of which I hadn't written.  I wish I had some of those pictures. And he wrote, he came up with a wonderful product. And we shared equally, so I'm counting the money.  I wouldn't worry about whose name was on the book.
Speaker 1: That's fabulous.  But it sold heavily in homosexual communities?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, yeah.  In San Francisco, it was big, big out there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He was, he was next--. But what was the guy who was eating people.  Who am I--?
Speaker 2: Dahmer.
Speaker 1: Dahmer, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Jeffrey Dahmer was this--.
Speaker 2: I wanted no parts of him.
Speaker 1: And he ended up dying, right? Dahmer?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They killed him in--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) The guy killed him in prison.
Speaker 1: They killed him in prision, right, right.
Speaker 2: You see prisoners, there are prisoners--and I know a lot of them, very well--their families and everything else.  There are some prisoners who are going to be in prison for the rest of their lives.  So what can you do to 'em?  They can kill anybody else.  They don't care.  They say, "Give me another life sentence."  They got a life sentence already.  So, they are very dangerous people.  When they get out in the yard, and they're talking among themselves and playing ball, and everything, they might do anything, because they're like animals, really, some of them are.
Speaker 1: Now, what is your wife saying all this time to all of this?  Because, you know, it's not like, you know, she has you, and if she lost you, that could be devastating and--. Is she--?
Speaker 2: Is she in here?
Speaker 1: No, she's not.
Speaker 2: She's counting the money. (laughing) Oh, dear.  No, she went along with me with almost everything I did.  And I think that I'm one of the few men who married the right woman.  And I know a lot of them who didn't.
Story_ID: 17758
Speaker 1: Now, did you--? Are there disappointments that you had, in your, you know, in your news career or your anchor career?  I mean, things that, you know, that people don't know about, or, you know, that really disappointed you?
Speaker 2: Well, when I first got into it, I wanted to be an anchor. And when I realized that an anchor has to have one talent. He has to know how to read real well, that's all.  But as I investigated stories out in the street, I wouldn't have taken an anchor job for nobody. Because an anchor comes in and reads, that's all he does.  But I had a chance to help some people, to hurt some people. And I had a chance to do a lot of things which would give me personal gratification.  And the one about that little girl, that was one of the best ones.  And my cameraman--I told you had moved to Las Vegas [Nevada]--he keeps up with that family and that girl has graduated from a junior college already. And we're so proud of her.  'Cause she would have been dead just because of religion.  But I've done a lot of funny stories, too.  We had one guy.  He was some kind of missionary Baptist preacher.  He had told everybody in his church that the world was going to come to an end on Saturday.  And some of these people really believe this stuff. And there were people in his church with their little children--no men, all women--with their little children, saying that they're going sit here and wait for the world to come to an end.  And the '[Chicago] Tribune' carried a story about it, almost making fun of the thing. So naturally, television picked it up and they sent me out there.  The man wouldn't let any reporter come in his office, and he heard I was out there, so he let me come in.  He said, "you've been doing a lot of things for black people, so I trust you."  I said, "you'd give me an interview?"  He said, "yeah."  And when I got there he said, I said, "is it true that you said the world is going to come to an end?  What's going to happen?"  He said, "we're going to glory."  I said, "going to glory?"  He said, "yeah.  We're all going to glory."  He looked up at the ceiling.  I looked up at the ceiling.  My cameraman looked up at the ceiling.  It was almost funny.  And I said, "well, my understanding is that some of these women have sold their cars, their houses, their furs, and brought you the money.  I said, "do you have to have money to go to glory?"  Once I said that, he threw me out.  He threw me out.  He wouldn't talk to me anymore.  But, I don't know, I kinda have always, I got one reputation I didn't like.  I got a reputation of being hard on preachers.  Because I'm the one who caught [Reverend] Paul Hall.  And I was the only one who caught Paul Hall when he was molesting those kids.  And I brought four of these kids, I brought them to my house, and taped them in my house. The fact that he was taking them out to a motel, giving them wine and whiskey, and he would molest them.  So I'm trying to do a story and everything.  I went out to the motel where it was and the fellow who owned it told me to, "get out.  Don't come in with cameras.  I won't let you in here."  I said, "well, I'll do two things for you.  I'm going to be nice to you, and if you throw me out of here now and if you won't let me see your book, where this man signed your book, every Friday, Saturday and Sunday when all these prostitutes bring men in your place, I'm going to be right out there in the front with a camera and you're not going to have one customer once they see this camera."  He let me come in.  And I filmed where Paul Hall signed his own name in there and we did the story.  And Mayor [Richard J.] Daley was State's Attorney at that time, and, you know, being Irish Catholic, he couldn't stand--if you do something to a kid--he'd get you.  So he indicted Paul Hall and they sentenced him to seven years.
Speaker 1: And he was a very loved minister.
Speaker 2: Oh, they thought, they thought he was great.
Speaker 1: But now how did you find out about that?  How did you get the lead for that?  That's the other thing, I mean.
Speaker 2: People told me about it.
Speaker 1: So, people knew that he was doing this?
Speaker 2: Well, one or two mothers got it from their kids, and they were quiet about it.  They didn't want to go to the police.  They were afraid.  They didn't know what to do.  So, they came to me for advice and I said, "just keep quiet and let us take care of it."  And he was sentenced to seven years.  He served, I think, five.  And some rich people from the North Shore [Chicago, Illinois] were building a big million dollar facility for Paul Hall out on Ashland Avenue.  The moment that story ran, they pulled in all their money and the shell of that place that they were building is standing there right now.  It's still there.  And, incidentally, the women in the church picketed the station.  They came down and picketed the station and said I defamed a man of God.  So, I went out when they were walking up and down in front of the station and said, "this man raped your kids.  This man is a, whatever he is.  He's a child molester, and you're gonna stand behind him?"  They said, "He's a man of God."  Well, I was aggravated.  I said, "Was God a child molester?"  Little by little, we got to hate each other more than we did before.  But that gave me a lot of publicity, good publicity, because people understood that.
Story_ID: 17759
Speaker 1: So, was--you didn't have any disappointments?
Speaker 2: I wasn't disappointed with that [Paul Hall story].
Speaker 1: No.  No. but I'm talking about in your career.  Was there anything that you found, because it seems like--. I know you said that you never would have been a news anchor if you didn't, you know--. But you continue to operate the way you started by being able to do your own investigation and not just reading unless the station, would the station then saying you couldn't investigate, you'd just have to read?
Speaker 2: Well, they wouldn't push you into something you didn't want.  They wouldn't do that.  And they never did.  But now in doing many of my stories, I had to appear live in the studio and do the lead in and tag and all that. I didn't mind that.  But just to be an anchor and sit there and read every day, there's nothing to that, because other people were doing the work, and you're just sitting there reading.  But I had a secret I used to pull on all of the news directors and they caught on to it.  If they assigned me to a story that I didn't like and they did every once in awhile. I would always have a better story in the background.  So when they tell me--. Oh, one time--. Were you here when Flukie [Stokes, deceased South Side drug dealer] was killed?
Speaker 1: Flukie, the gangster, right?
Speaker 2: Flukie was a drug pusher.  Right, right. No, I remember.  Okay.  Fine.
Speaker 1: Flukie was a drug pusher and he was shot and killed. And the embarrassing part about it--while he was laying in a casket, with $100 bills in his hand--there were about, oh, I don't know how many, black people were lined up for a block to go into the funeral parlor to look at this drug pusher laying in a casket.  I thought that was ridiculous.  So they told me to go do the story. So, I said, "I won't do it."  And they said, "well, we order you to go do this story."  I said, "I won't do it.  I don't want to put my name and have people all over Chicago [Illinois] area to see dumb black people going in to look at a drug pusher laying in a casket.  I think that's, I think you shouldn't even do the story yourself.  It shouldn't be on the air."  So they assigned somebody else to do it.  But I wouldn't do it.  I said, "I'm not going to do it."  So, finally the news director said, "if he said he's not going to do it.  He's not going to do it.  So let him alone."  I would've quit. And I'd have started working for another station the next day, if they would've done that to me.  But then it came out in the newspaper, in the '[Chicago] Defender', that I refused to do that story. And people applauded me for it.  Because I said, "it would embarrass black people, and I'm not on television to embarrass black people."  And I think everybody standing in line to look at a drug dealer in a casket has got to be stupid.  It can't be any other way. I remember that. Because I remember I think there was a big spread in the '[Chicago] Sun Times.'
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  They blew it up.  I remember reading it and thinking--.
Speaker 1: But can you imagine people wanting to look at a drug dealer?  That was ridiculous.  So I got at odds with some of my people that way, but I don't think it was right.
Story_ID: 17760
Speaker 1: Oh, one thing we did which was good, with the same cameraman, Art Campbell. There was a lady who had six children, and these kids sold newspapers, sold different salves, they sold books, magazines and things.  She lived in public housing and together they had put together about $5,000.  And this lady went to a guy that I knew very well, who was a real estate dealer, and she told him she wanted to buy a house.  She gave him her $5,000.  He kept her $5,000 for a year.  And she finally got disgusted and figured something's wrong.  She went to ask for her money back and he told her he had spent all of her money trying to find a house for her, and she had nothing left.  He said, "I'll give you $500, but that's all you got." he came down to me to the station crying, upset, naturally, so I told her "don't worry about it.  We'll see what we can do."  Well, this was one day we were coming from a fire out by his real estate place.  I talked to my friend at Channel 5 [WMAQ NBC television station, Chicago, Illinois] and another friend at Channel 9 [WGN-TV WB television station, Chicago, Illinois] and we pulled up in front of his real estate dealership and put our aerials up.  Now it was just about the time school was letting out, so you know kids came from everywhere.  We had kids all over the place.  And this guy comes running out of his real estate dealership saying "what are you doing?"  I said, "didn't they call you from New York?"  He said, "what do you mean?"  I said, "You're gonna be on national television."  He said, "for what?"  I said, "for Ms. Shelby. For stealing Ms. Shelby's money."  He said, "what are you talking about?"  I said, "the $5,000 you took from Ms. Shelby, you're going to be on national television."  He said, "that will ruin my business."  I said, "it's not going to help you too much."  And we went on for a few minutes and he said, "I'll give you some money if you try to keep it off the air."  I said, "I'd love to keep it off the air, but you have to give Ms. Shelby her money back."  He said, "I'll give that old woman her money back."  Oh, he was mad, cussing, upset and everything.  He agreed to give her her money back.  So, he told his secretary who was out there, he asked me first, "now, if I give her her money back, can you keep this off the air?" I said, "I'll try." But I kept looking at my watch, and the cameraman was going along with me said, "well, we got to get together now, I got this thing up.  I got a signal in."  And this guy was so upset, he came out with a check for $5,000.  I said, "no, no.  We can't take no check from you.  You've shown what you'll do.  So, we can't take a check.  He said, "well--." It's a big real estate dealer, and you'd recognize the name right away if I told you.  He said, "I'll give her her money, but I'm not going to give it to you, I'll give it to her."  And I said well, "what are you going to do?"  He said, "I'll give it to her.  Can you find her?"  I said, "there she is right inside the truck."  We had her waiting.  He went back and came back with $5,000 and gave it to her and all the aerials started coming down.  And the people around there, and people would come up and say, "what's going on?"  I said, "this man took that woman's money," and they all started talking among themselves, you know, you know how crowds build up.  And one lady said, "he's a gyp anyway. He gypped me out of my money.  I rented an old raggedy apartment from him."  I really got him in so much trouble.  It was really funny.  But once he gave the money to the woman, then we had to take her in our truck, in our camera truck, to the bank. Because the gang bangers were sitting along the fence waiting for her to walk down the street with that $5,000.  That would've been the end of that.  So we had, we had fun doing that.
Story_ID: 17761
Speaker 1: So there were, you didn't really have any disappointments in your career when you think about it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I guess I had some.  I'm trying to realize what they were.  When I had a stroke that was a disappointment.  That disappointed the hell out of me when I did that.  I was lucky in most of the things that I did.
Speaker 1: When--? I want to ask you a couple of questions.
Speaker 2: (Ewing coughs)
Speaker 1: When you look now and see the news business, are you--? Is it a business that you would, you would want to be part of right now?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You don't want to be?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You don't miss anything?
Speaker 2: No.  The way that the news business is going now all around the country, I wouldn't want to be a part of it.  Because the whole emphasis of getting it first, getting out there first. And some of these shows are--. Even when I look at television and I see 'Divorce Court, [television program],' 'Jerry Springer [television program]' and the absolute junk that they're putting on television, trying to do a decent news show is impossible.
Story_ID: 17762
Speaker 1: A couple questions.  One, what do you think about the future of blacks, blacks in the broadcasting industry?  Because it's not like there are any more fac--I mean there a few more, you know, the cable channels. There are a few more faces and things like that, but it's not like, you know, we're looking at the time from when you started to now, there hasn't been like a meteoric change.
Speaker 2: No.  There hasn't been a rise at all.  When I first came in, within the next five years, we got quite a few.  Carole Simpson [broadcast journalist] worked with me.  We worked together.  We got to know each other very well.  I think the future is going stay just like it is, I believe.  I don't think it's going to change too much.  I'm unhappy, again, with many of the shows I see on the air.  And I'm not too fond of BET [Black Entertainment Television]. Because BET has gotten to be all entertainment, a lot of dirty comedians and whatever. So I don't, I don't, I don't see a bright outlook for it.  It may change now.  I hope it does, but I don't see it right now.
Speaker 1: And do you have--? We had spoken earlier about your concerns about the black community.  You know, you have spent a career very involved with the black community.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: You have worked a lot with the black community. And also championing the concerns and the way that you do that, very aggressively and smartly.  But I'm just wondering you know, you know, what your concerns or hopes are, your concerns. Because you said, "I don't feel good about where things are headed."
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to see people like--who have the money--like John Johnson, and others. Of course, he's ill now, as you know.  I would like to see some black millionaires put money into good solid network. And I'm not talking about "Puffy" [Sean Combs, entertainer] and things like that and rap music and all, that's the worse thing in the world.  But I would like to see some blacks really invest in it and do something with news.  Not black news, but news for everybody. Because anybody can subscribe to City News [news service] and to UPI [United Press International, news service] and Associated Press [news service] and put on a good news show along with the local aspect of it. But we're gonna have to get busy and do it, not just talk about it.
Story_ID: 17763
Speaker 1: And what are your thoughts about the whole situation with the '[Chicago] Defender.'
Speaker 2: Well, my very good friend, Judge [Earl E.] Strayhorn was chosen to do something with the 'Defender' and he talked to us about it a couple of times, within the parameters that he could talk about it. And I think the Sengstacke family [owners of the 'Chicago Defender'] is gonna have to come together before anything can really be done.  Some of the younger members of that family are probably just trying to take some money out of it.  But that's not gonna do it.  There has to be somebody who really has the newspaper business at heart to get started and do it.  You know, we're so quick to sell out and take the money and go buy a Mercedes [automobile] and run up and down the road.  I don't--there's a market for the 'Defender'--a great market for it. But on the horizon, I don't see it.  I just don't see it at all.
Story_ID: 17764
Speaker 1: Do you think O.J. [Orenthal James] Simpson was guilty?
Speaker 2: I know he's guilty.  All of us know he's guilty.  O.J. killed his wife.  There's no question about it.  And if you find some newsman who says he doesn't believe O.J. did it, tell him to call me.  Everybody believes he did.  Even my wife probably believes he did.
Speaker 1: Now what, are there people that you generally respect or, you know, had respected in the news--that were either peers of yours or, you know, or that you see maybe that are up and coming that you respect even though the industry is changing?
Speaker 2: There's one fellow--I'm trying to think of his name--over at Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, television station, Chicago, Illinois]. Darrick Blakely [broadcast journalist].  He is the most thorough when it comes to investigating his stories.  He's not spectacular.  He doesn't run out and try to get it on the air right away.  He's thorough.  And he has a lot of trouble by being thorough, but I see a good future for him.  I think he's gonna be alright.  He's the main one that I like quite a bit.  Now over at Channel 7 [WLS-TV, television station, Chicago, Illinois], there's Charles Thomas [broadcast journalist], and he's good.  Now when I say, 'good' I don't mean just good at talking and presenting a story, but I mean being thorough and knowing what he's doing and the ability to convince people to talk to him and open up to him.  You see, there are some people who can do it and there are others who can't.  We've got some reporters who run up and stick a microphone in your face, and it would offend you and it would offend anybody.  We've had reporters who wanted to interview me, and they would come and almost insult my wife now--but she has a way of insulting them back.  So, she's done that many times.  Who was the lady from People magazine who tried to get you--(asks wife, Ruth Ewing off camera)?
Speaker 1: (wife) I don't know--(unclear).
Speaker 2: She wouldn't talk to any of them.
Speaker 1: (wife, unclear)
Speaker 2: But while I was doing stories about drug dealers and criminals, I don't want my family up there in the forefront.  You wouldn't want that.  It's not necessary, number one, and number two, you wouldn't want it.
Story_ID: 17765
Speaker 1: We haven't talked a lot about your flying.  You had mentioned it earlier--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But that's a part of your life, you know, we haven't talked about, but you got your license--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Incidentally, when you have a stroke, they take your license, but the government was stupid enough to send me another license a year later. So I got a license in my pocket now to fly although I'm not allowed to fly.  I could still go to the airport and get in a plane and fly.
Speaker 1: So how did it feel when you first got up in a plane?  You know, because you said, this was, you said you were born wanting to fly.
Speaker 2: Oh, I wanted to fly all the time.  I always wanted to fly.  It--. Well, I don't know, it's a feeling of freedom.  It's good and you're pitting your wits against nature, and you're always on the edge and it's good.  It's even fun to fly these little things now, since I can't fly any others.
Speaker 1: You build these to fly?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Wow, see--.
Speaker 2: Those are automatic.  You control those, just like a real airplane.
Speaker 1: Now I want to ask you between music and being a news anchor and flying.  Do any of those have similarities to you?  You know, do they all represent something the same? Or do they represent different parts of you?  And if they do, what are those different parts?
Speaker 2: Well, that's difficult to answer.  I don't know.  I enjoy all of them.  I enjoy music.  She [wife Ruth Ewing] gets mad at me when I'm playing Duke Ellington music all day and all night when I do.  But I tell her I could play rap if she'd rather have that.  But, I had to give up flying, so I had to accept that.  And as you get older, there are certain things you have to give up and that's the way it is.
Story_ID: 17766
Speaker 1: Why do you think people trust you so much?
Speaker 2: Well, number one, I never lied to anybody.  If I promised people I would do things, I would do it. And if I promised people I would, I wouldn't put certain things on the air that they said, I never did. And I never let them--I never did anything I shouldn't do to them.  That might be one reason.  But even now, when we go out to a restaurant, people come up and they still say, "hello" and still remember like--. Sometimes they just ask me when did I quit, you know, and they talk, and we can't walk half a block in Chicago [Illinois] without somebody saying "hello." And that's what--. We like that. I enjoy that.  And, you know, a lot of reporters don't want to be bothered with the public.  If anybody stops to talk about me, talk with me, I'll stop and talk to them.  So that's been good.
Speaker 1: Now your aunt [Elizabeth Johnson], when did she--? Did she see your success?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: She never saw your success?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What do you think she would have said had she seen it?
Speaker 2: Oh, I believe she would have been happy about it.  Of course, she died--. (speaks to wife Ruth Ewing off camera) Aunt (unlear) died when I was in the fire department, did she? (to interviewer) Yeah. Yeah, she died when I was in the fire department.
Story_ID: 17767
Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I just did the best that I can do with what I had.  That's about it. (pauses) That's about it.
Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything that I really want to be remembered for.  Because once I'm gone if you forget about me, that's alright.  It doesn't make any difference.  It's all over.  Yeah, I'm not worried about legacy.  You asked me before about any individuals or any man that I really respect, and I look up to people like Thurgood Marshall [Supreme Court Justice] and others like that. And I'm not a Jesse Jackson fan.  So, my grandmother used to say, "If you can't say something good about him, don't say nothing."  So, I don't say anything. Double negative there.  I don't even know whether I want to be remembered. It doesn't really, really matter.
Speaker 1: Mr. Ewing, I'll let that lie, but I'm just saying--. I mean, whatever--lying does lie, whatever the term is--. But I'm just saying a person who has lived their life with so much passion, I, you know, I'm not sure I believe that last statement.
Speaker 2: Well, it may be a little different. But I still have a one hundred-fifteen guys in prison who would practically do anything for me and that's important. And everybody doesn't have that.
Speaker 1: (to wife Ruth off camera) I told her how you used to act when you answered the phone and John [Wayne] Gacy called.
Speaker 2: (laughing)
Speaker 1: Anything else you want to say?
Speaker 2: No.  I think you've just about covered everything.
Story_ID: 17768
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I can't come up with the date at all, but that seems to be--
Speaker 2: We were off travelling--.
Speaker 1: That seems to be a picture of us while we were in Hawaii.  Wasn't it?  That looks like it was in Hawaii.
Speaker 2: We were travelling.
Speaker 1: --Traveling and we took that picture while we were there.  We went to China and Japan and everything.  We had a wonderful time in China and a miserable time in Japan.
Speaker 2: [Russ Ewing with his wife Ruth Ewing in Hawaii, n.d. From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17769
Speaker 1: We were doing a story about a strike in Atlanta [Georgia].  The reason I can remember that is because I had that coat at that time.
Speaker 2: [Russ Ewing reporting on a strike in Atlanta, Georgia, n.d. From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17770
Speaker 1: I can identify that picture because at that time we had to wear the Circle 7.  And then we stopped wearing those, we stopped wearing those about ten years ago.
Speaker 2: [Publicity photo of Russ Ewing from WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois, n.d. From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17771
Speaker 1: This was a time about a week after Malcolm X was killed--he let me come into his house, and we discussed that at night.
Speaker 2: Oh, Gosh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughing) I forgot I had that picture, that's a shame. So what did he--?
Speaker 1: Well, he was saying, of course, that he had nothing to do with Malcolm X's death and he respected Malcolm X, although he disagreed with him about many things. But he was a frail man at the time I went there and, but he talked to me for at least an hour.  I remember that.  And I can--I used to always tease Harry Porterfield because he was outside trying to get in there and they wouldn't let him come in. But he let me in.  And I think I'm the only person that ever walked in his house without being searched.  They didn't search me at all. But they, those guys used to search everybody that came near him.
Speaker 2: [Russ Ewing (left) interviewing Nation of Islam leader, Elijah Muhammad, Chicago, Illinois, 1965.  From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17772
Speaker 1: Well, that was the time at the Condessa Del Mar in Chicago.  Bob Hope was there and he was doing a little singing, a little clowning about, and I was playing for him. And he said that there were not too many piano players who could play 'Thanks for the Memories'.  And I played it for him and he was surprised because that wasn't a popular song that people played. But we talked and got to know each other and I spent about an hour with him.
Speaker 2: [Russ Ewing (left) with comedian Bob Hope at Condessa Del Mar supper club, Chicago, Illinois, n.d. From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17773
Speaker 1: That, of course, is one of my favorites.  That's Count Basie. And we had a chance to talk, and he was trying to trick me.  He was asking me what key--many of the songs that he played--what key were they in.  And he was shocked that I happened to know the right key for most of them.  And we--off camera, we had a conversation for about an hour or so.
Speaker 2: [Russ Ewing (left) with band leader, Count Basie, ca. 1980s.  From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17774
Speaker 1: That's a picture of [Phillip] Phil Walters.  He was a reporter along with me, and he started working at Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois] about the same time I did.  And we were very good friends and we had just won Emmys [award for the television industry] with that one.
Speaker 2: [Russ Ewing (right) with fellow WMAQ-TV reporter, Phil Walters at the local Emmy Awards, Chicago, Illinois, n.d.  From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17775
Speaker 1: That was a rather traumatic situation there.  That was at Home Juice Company when these policemen had gone in and pulled this man out.  Actually, this young man had a route where he delivered Home Juice and he built up the route over about four or five years. And his supervisor gave his route--which he had built up--to another person. And he got mad and went in with a gun and threatened to shoot the owner.  And as he came out, this policeman that you see pointing a gun at his head, he cocked the gun, and you can see I'm turning.  I'm telling my cameraman to be sure and get a picture of this.  He took the picture.  It showed up in the paper, and the policeman got suspended because you're not supposed to cock a gun at anybody unless you intend to shoot them. And this man had given up, as you can see.  And the cameraman was way ahead of me.  He was getting the picture when I yelled and told him to be sure and take it.  And this policeman ended up hating me for the rest of his life because I got the picture and--,
Speaker 2: He got suspended.
Speaker 1: --he got suspended.
Speaker 2: [Russ Ewing (left) safeguards an arrest, Chicago, Illinois, n.d. From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17776
Speaker 1: That's one of me, Jane Pauley and Tim Weigel.  We were in a parade--.
Speaker 2: (conversation off camera)
Speaker 1: We were in a parade down State Street when Jane Pauley was at Channel 5 [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Russ Ewing (right) rides parade route with fellow WMAQ-TV reporters, Tim Weigel (left) and Jane Pauley, Chicago, Illinois, n.d.  From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17777
Speaker 1: That was a picture of me and my camera crew [at WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois], and we were just standing outside of the news truck talking about how we should film a particular story that we were getting ready to do.
Speaker 2: [Russ Ewing (center) with his camera crew at WLS-TV going over plans to shoot a news story, Chicago, Illinois, n.d.  From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17778
Speaker 1: On the top, I'm doing a story [for WLS-TV, Channel 7, Chicago, Illinois] that a young man in Gary had surrendered to me and you can see us in the other picture, we were walking in, walking into the police station.
Speaker 2: [Russ Ewing reporting for WLS-TV, Chicago on a criminal suspect who surrendered to him, Gary, Indiana, n.d. From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17779
Speaker 1: The one at the bottom is a picture of this man who had surrendered with the police chiefs--police chief of Gary, Indiana.
Speaker 2: Oh that's that story you were telling--the guy, where you went and followed him in the old building?
Speaker 1: [Russ Ewing (right) aiding in the surrender of a criminal suspect, Gary, Indiana, n.d. From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17780
Speaker 1: No that's not that one. That's another one. There's been so many of them it's hard to put them all together.
Speaker 2: Now can you see anywhere on the--on the clipping there a date?
Speaker 1: No, there's no date on that clipping at all.
Speaker 2: [The criminal suspect (left) who surrendered himself to the police chief with the aid of Russ Ewing, Gary, Indiana, n.d. From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17781
Speaker 1: This is a picture of a plaque given to me by a lady who--and her five kids--who lived in the project--public housing project. I'm as proud of that as I am any plaque that I have because these were very poor people who were being taken advantage of and we managed to help them out in a couple things and made sure that she got her money back.
Speaker 2: And we should read the inscription.
Speaker 1: It's hard for me to see from here, but it has the name of some of the kids, I believe.
Speaker 2: It says "Thanks for being the person God intended you to be.  You did the same thing the Lord did, offered your life for someone else.  With deep appreciation."
Speaker 1: That was from this lady and her family and she says, "Thanks for being the person you were" and some more stuff.
Speaker 2: [Plaque presented to Russ Ewing for aiding the Tracy family, n.d.  From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
Story_ID: 17782
Speaker 1: We were just doing a story in the street.  You can see that the cameraman was using the old Auricon then so that had to be at least eighteen years ago. And we were just doing a story out in the street there.  I think you can see it from there.  It was probably a routine story that we were doing.  There was nothing big about that one.
Speaker 2: [Newspaper clipping of Russ Ewing covering a local news story, Chicago, Illinois, 1972. From the collection of Russ Ewing.]
