Story_ID: 622260
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Clance, C-L-A-N-C-E, my first name.  Middle name, Jack, J-A-C-K, last name Ellis, E-L-L-I-S [HistoryMaker C. Jack Ellis].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born January 6, 1946, here in Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And what is your profession or occupation?
Speaker 2: Well currently I'm a senior consultant with Chester Engineers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This interview is taking place at 1305 Hardeman Avenue in Macon, Georgia, downtown Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is April the 22, 2011.
Story_ID: 622261
Speaker 1: I'm just going to ask you some fun questions.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I do.  Blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: And what about a favorite food, what do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is, believe it or not is broccoli.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I do, St. Johns, U.S. Virgin Islands [St. John, U.S. Virgin Islands].
Speaker 1: And what time of the year do you like best?
Speaker 2: I like spring and fall.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I do, I have several.  But one that I use quite often is that people are always trying to give you a six for a nine.  Other words, people are trying to trick you.  So I said--I use that phrase quite often.  Don't try and give me a six for a nine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know better (laughter).
Story_ID: 622262
Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your family and I'd like to start with your father's side of the family.  Tell me his name and when and where he was born?
Speaker 2: My father was named William Claude Ellis [William Ellis].  He was born in Roberta, Georgia, Crawford County which is a county adjoining Bibb County [Georgia].  And he was the oldest son of five children.  His mother [Emily Cloud Ellis] died when it was eight years old.  His daddy [Arthur Ellis] died when he was twelve.  His mother was half black and half white.  Her father was--this is my paternal grandmother--her father was a white man and once he died, my grandfather died, my father being the oldest son, even though he was twelve years old, had to, had to leave school and had to--began to work to help support his younger siblings.  He had an older sister but all the rest of them were younger than, than he.  So he dropped out of school and went to work and eventually fond- found his way to Macon [Georgia] which is like I said just the next county over from Bibb County is Macon.
Speaker 1: Did he share more stories about his growing up?  You said that he had to take on responsibilities to help the family.  But did he talk much about where they lived?  Did they live on a farm?  Did they live in a rural area?
Speaker 2: They lived in a rural area of Crawford County.  He did grow up in a farm and later he became a farmer himself as an adult.  But he did grow up on a farm.  His father had been a sharecropper so he was born the son of a sharecropper and later in life he became a sharecropper as well.  I was born on a quote, unquote, plantation where he was a sharecropper.
Story_ID: 622263
Speaker 1: Well le- let's talk about your, your [paternal] grandfather and your grandmother.  Tell me your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was Arthur Ellis.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know what year he was born?
Speaker 2: I do not.  You know that I do not know.  I know the year that he and my grandmother got married.  I know that they got married in 1901 because I have a copy of the marriage license but I don't recall the date on those ma- how old they were at the time.
Speaker 1: What was your relationship like with your grandfather?
Speaker 2: I never knew my grandfather.  Never knew either one of my grandfathers because here again he was, my father [William Ellis] was twelve years old--
Speaker 1: Oh that's right.
Speaker 2: --when his father died so consequently I never had a relat- never knew him.  I've seen pictures of him.  He was a very tall, handsome gentleman, very, very dark complexion.  And of course my, as I said he married my grandmother who was half white and--but he was a learned man even though he, he worked on the plantation.  From what I understand he knew how to read and write and so forth and instilled that in my father who later instilled in us the importance of an education.
Speaker 1: Tell me your grandmother's name.
Speaker 2: My grandmother was named Emily [Emily Cloud Ellis].  Her maiden name was Cloud and you know in those days growing up in the South a lot of people if they had white parents, especially white fathers in those days, they--it was a family secret.  But in this case from what I understand, that she knew who her father was, he acknowledged her as his daughter although he did not share in--she did not share in the, his, his fortune.  He was a big landowner, plantation owner out in Crawford County [Georgia] but she wasn't in the will if you will, even though she died young.  But even so, and none of her offspring, none of her children you know were the beneficiaries of anything that her father had, had accumulated and he had accumulated quite a bit from what I understand.
Speaker 1: Do you know about her education?
Speaker 2: She did go to school.  I understand she was, she was educated. That, that, that money was given to her in a, I guess clandestine or maybe not even clandestine, from her father and I understand that she was--speaking to one of my older aunts that she was one of the prettiest women and that she always carried herself in a very dignified manner and an always very good dresser, dressed very well.
Speaker 1: Did you know, or know the names of her siblings?
Speaker 2: I do not.  I--not her--from the, the--from her father's side who had other children.  But I didn't know, I understand she did have two, two siblings, a brother and a sister.  They did not share the same father from what I understand but I, I don't know of them or their names or anything of that nature.
Story_ID: 622264
Speaker 1: All right, so let's talk a little more about your father [William Ellis] and tell me about your relationship with him?
Speaker 2: Well my father was my hero and I had a great relationship with him even though he was always so busy.  I'm one of thirteen children so he fathered thirteen children and took care of one--with one woman I should say, might add which was my mother [Willie Glover Ellis].  So he was a very hard working man.  I guess you would have to be with thirteen children.  So I always admired his--how hard he would work and, and how he would make sure that we were provided for and how he did not allow his wife, my mother to work outside of the house.  And I guess one could probably wonder how could she work anyway with thirteen children growing up?  But he didn't allow her to work outside of the house. Nor did he--I have eight sisters.  So it was thirteen of us, five, five boys and eight girls.  And he didn't allow his daughters to do very hard, manual labor although we were farmers.  He owned a little farm later in life.  He started as a sharecropper when I was born but later he acquired his own little piece of land but--so he worked that.  Worked the, you know my- myself and my brothers very hard but never--my sisters did work on the farm of course, the gathering and the picking and you know maybe weeding and things of that nature but all the hard work fell to us.
Speaker 1: So, so what did you raise or what did you grow on the farm where you lived?
Speaker 2: Well we grew--we had a truck farm.  Well of course you had the--cotton was a staple.  That's when, that's where you made the most of your money, at least at the end of the year. Cotton was harvested in I think September, October and that would be enough money to probably get you through the winter in terms of having hard currency.  But in the summer months of course we grew all type of produce, watermelons, collard greens, tomatoes, peppers, anything that would grow in the South pretty much we grew.  And not only did we grow it, but we sold it.  My father was an entrepreneur so he would go throughout the streets of Macon [Georgia].  And we had on his, back of his pickup truck and we would on Saturdays and throughout the week we would, when we were not in school we would go with him. And he had his regular route as a peddler and he sold--he was an entrepreneur if you ask me because a man that can take care of thirteen children with the spurt of hi- with the sweat of his brow.  I never recall him being on any type of welfare and us being on any type of assistance and things of that nature.  So he was my hero.  I look up to him mightily.  The only thing that I regret that I had--I was an athlete and of course I--because he worked so hard and then he had another job in addition to farming so he was always working so he never had time to participate in any of my extracurricular activities at school such as athletics and things of that nature. He just didn't have time.  So he was never involved in that aspect of my life.
Speaker 1: What was his other job?
Speaker 2: Well he worked at Robins Air Force Base [Houston County, Georgia] for a while and then of course he decided he would be a full time farmer rather than being a government employee, he would be a full time farmer.  And he was able to acquire enough money to buy a little farm out in the western part of the county.  And then he quit that job and became a full time, full time farmer.  And of course what I didn't realize at the time that on his property, on our property as well that he was also making moonshine (laughter) and so he did whatever was necessary to take care of his family, even though making moonshine was illegal.  And he was ultimately called before the court of law for, for making moonshine and served a two or three months in jail as I remember it.  And I remember it was during the time, it was almost harvest time so we were young, my brothers and I at the time.  I probably was ten, eleven years old as I recall and I had two older brothers.  And we were--it was left to us to finish the rest of the year with the farming and gathering together all of the crops and to--but what we didn't have, we didn't have the expertise and the wherewithal to sell it, to distribute it.  So of course that was a very bad year for us eco- you know from an economic standpoint because we didn't have the wherewithal.  I don't even think my older brother had a driver's license so we couldn't get the produce to market other than we did have a stall at the farmer's market in town and my mother would sell our wares from there.  But that's not like mass marketing.  That was a static location where everyone would have to come to buy the produce which was you know it was a, you know a good living but it wasn't sustainable if you didn't have the mass marketing that--as my father was doing.  So, so that was a, that was a very, I remember that as being a very, very difficult year--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --from an economic standpoint for us.
Story_ID: 622265
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you want to tell me about your dad [William Ellis]?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Or any of his family members?
Speaker 2: Well my, my dad as I said, he was the oldest of, of his, of his siblings, except a sister and she moved to Atlanta [Georgia] early on, shortly after--when she became of age I think when my father--when my grandfather [Arthur Ellis] died.  She probably was sixteen or seventeen, so maybe when she turned eighteen she moved to Atlanta.  So my father, you know this--here at that time he was like thirteen, fourteen years of age and he took on the responsibility of all of his, of all of his siblings.  And I have an uncle which was like next to my father in age but when he turned sixteen, he decided things were too tough here for him and he told my father he was going north.  And he--and my father said he tried to persuade him not to go north but he did and never heard from him again.  He left Macon [Georgia] going to Chicago [Illinois] as a sixteen year old and my father I guess was eighteen at the time and still holding the family together.  And he left here at sixteen and was never seen, nor heard from--this gentlemen who is my uncle, Joseph Ellis is his name--never heard from him again.  Whether he went to Chicago, whether he went to St. Louis [Missouri] or what happened to him we don't know.  And then something that some of my sisters said they were going to endeavor to try and find maybe now with the advent of the Internet, maybe that's something that will be easier to do then heretofore.  But that was one--then he had another younger brother who by that time went to live with his older sister and--who had moved to Atlanta.
Speaker 1: What were their names?
Speaker 2: Excuse me?
Speaker 1: What were their names?
Speaker 2: That was Herbert Ellis [ph.] and my aunt was Hattie Mae [Hattie Ellis], the oldest sister that then took in my younger uncle.  So--and, and then the other younger sister as well.  She had a younger sister, so then--
Story_ID: 622266
Speaker 1: So my father [William Ellis] that, that time, he was free then.  He had, in his words, he had accomplished his mission.  He had held the family together, had worked hard as a young teenager to support them.  So then he moved on to become a full time farm worker in a different town, Jeffersonville, Georgia which is near Macon [Georgia] as well and that's where he met my mother [Willie Glover Ellis].  My mother was born and raised in Jeffersonville and he became--my father at that time was a hired hand on the farm that my mother's father [Early Glover] owned.  She--he owned a little farm in Twiggs County, Jeffersonville, Georgia.  And that's--he met my mother doing field work.  She was in the field and he said--one thing he said to me that when he saw my mother she was like nineteen years old.  I think he was like twenty, twenty-one--what--he was twenty-two, cause he's three years older than she was.  She was like eighteen, nineteen.  And he said that, "This woman is too beautiful to be doing the work that she's doing."  And he began a courtship with her and said he was going to get her off of that farm at least if she stayed on that farm she wouldn't have to do the type of work that he witnessed her doing even though it was her father's, father's farm.  And so they got married and began to produce thirteen children (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 622267
Speaker 1: And there's one of your [paternal] aunts you didn't mention her name.  You said Hattie Mae [Hattie Ellis] took in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And there was Hattie Ann [ph.], there were two of them had the same name, Hattie Mae and Hattie Ann. And so she later was a very stylish woman I recall.  I saw pictures of her.  Never knew her but saw pictures of her.  She died shortly after my birth so I never--don't have any recollection of her. But I--but my oldest--but my other aunt, I did. She ultimately moved to Cincinnati [Ohio] and my father's youngest brother then moved to Cincinnati with her because it was the oldest sister and the youngest son.  And he stayed there and he never moved back to Macon [Georgia] again.  But he was--finally, finally decided that he would come back south after he had a family and children and I know most of them and he was coming back to visit my father [William Ellis] driving from Cincinnati on I-75 [Interstate 75] and had an accident and got killed.  So I have very little memory of him.  I recall his face when I was a young boy but I don't--maybe four or five years old--but I don't have any memory of him.  And so ultimately then that left just my oldest sister and my father.  Not my oldest sister, my father's oldest sister and he were the only two left that--so she was the only one that I really knew and she lived to be almost ninety years old and she died in Cincinnati several years, several years back after my, after my father's death.
Story_ID: 622268
Speaker 1: So you were telling me about how your father [William Ellis] met your mother.  Tell me about your mother.  What was her name and where and when she was born?
Speaker 2: My mother was named Willie Mae Ellis [Willie Glover Ellis].  Willie Mae Glover, maiden name and she was born in Jeffersonville, Georgia.  And she was the oldest of five children.  She has three sisters and a brother.  She was, she was the eldest. A very smart woman although she only had a sixth grade education.  My father only went to like fifth grade as well.  But she had a sixth grade education, but she was a reader.  She was a voracious reader and especially the Bible and other things.  And she would always--and would always encourage us to read.  So although my parents did not have a formal education per se--but in those days I guess if you went to the sixth grade and given her age, she was born in 1911 that was considered a pretty good education.  And so being my first teacher as a parent, as your mother always is the first teacher, she taught me, taught me quite a lot and she was a very proud woman, very, very spirit filled woman and very Christian woman.  Didn't smoke, didn't drink, didn't lie, wouldn't lie for anyone no matter what you did.  She would tell all of us, "No matter what you do I will never lie for you.  If you get in trouble you're in trouble.  I will never lie for you.  I love you and," on, so she was that type of woman.  She was that type of woman.  And I said at her funeral, I spoke at her funeral.  "If there is a heaven and I happen to believe that it is, then there's no doubt that if my mother is not in heaven, no, then no one's going to heaven if she didn't go to heaven," because that's the type of life that she lived.  And she would always preach to us, "Do unto others if you--as you would have them to do unto you."  Tell us how proud she was of us and how we, how we had opportunities that she didn't have even though we grew up in a Jim Crow era.  But she would say how better things were for us than it had been for her.  And her thing was, especially with the boys and that she didn't want us to--when we began to get to be teenagers and began to challenge the status quo, the Jim Crow and things of that nature, her thing was that you, you know she didn't want us to get in trouble, not that she didn't want us to challenge it but she just thought that it was too dangerous to be involved if you will, the Civil Rights Movement, that people would--that we would get hurt.  So although she wanted to see change, she was afraid for her family to be involved in bringing about that change.  And I, and later I understood.  At the time I didn't understand but later I did and I understood what she was saying.  That you know in one hand she's told us we're as good as the next person but you know, this is the lot that we have been dealt so therefore live within the system.  Almost like Booker T. Washington, that we can be as separate as hands in a glove, you know and the fingers, but one is the glove.  And she kind of had that mentality about segregation whereas my father was a little more vocal, a little more--he would push the envelope if you will.  He didn't--put it this way, he didn't take too much stuff off people, (laughter) yeah.
Story_ID: 622269
Speaker 1: With you having so many brothers and sisters, did you have a special relationship with your mother [Willie Glover Ellis]?
Speaker 2: I had a very special relationship with my mother.  People would say that I was her favorite.  I don't think so.  I know one thing, that she's the only person that calls me by my first name, Clarence [HistoryMaker C. Jack Ellis].  Everyone, Jack--everyone else knows me as Jack.  My mother was the only one that called me by my first name and which is Clance--she was--my--at birth--let me digress here.  That at birth she named me Clarence but I was birthed by a midwife so I guess the midwife couldn't spell too well so it was Clance--she, on the, on my birth certificate.  So consequently that name has, that's the, my official name, Clance, not Clarence.  But she meant for it to be Clarence.  And she meant for it to be Clarence because at the time of my birth we were--I was born in west Macon [Georgia] and west Bibb County and now it's in the city.  At that time it was a country.  My father [William Ellis] was sharecropping on the farm by a guy by the name of Clarence Rankin.  Now all of my other brothers were named after either my uncles or my grandfather or my father, but I was the fourth son and I'm the only one with the name of a--she gave me the name of the white sharecropper, the owner of the plantation.  So God would have it that my name was meant to be Clarence and it's Clance.  So my uncle was named Jack and she gave me his middle name so I preferred to be called Jack than, than by the sharecropper (laughter) plantation owner to be honest with you.  So, so, so Jack is what everyone referred to me--
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: --called me.
Story_ID: 622270
Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings.  Start from the oldest and tell me where you fit in and tell me who they are and--
Speaker 2: Well my oldest sister is Mattie [Mattie Ellis].  She's, I think she's like eighty now, soon will be eighty if I'm not mistaken.  She's the oldest.  My second, my mother's [Willie Glover Ellis] second born was a girl as well, Daisy [Daisy Ellis].  She's one year younger than Mattie and then came my oldest brother, Joseph [Joseph Ellis].  Well unfortunate- Joseph didn't grow up with us.  Joseph got killed in a car accident at two years of age and he got killed because my father [William Ellis] was on his way to town.  They were living out in the rural area and he was on his way to town and had a flat tire on the car.  And my mother was petrified of snakes and crawly things, creepy crawly bugs and things of that nature.  So he had stopped to change the tire and instructed my mother to stand in front of the car on the, near the--off the road.  Well of course she said she heard something in the bushes and she moved close to the road and an impaired driver, drunk driver had been drinking--well we assume that he had been drinking.  No one will ever know that.  Maybe he was just a mean spirited guy, person, came by, hit my mother, knocked my brother out of her arms and killed him on the spot there on the, on this rural road here in Bibb County [Georgia] and took my mother's dress and it got caught in the car and dragged her down the road a bit and of course injured her leg and she walked with a limp since that time.  And of course that was very devastating to both of them, I can imagine having your first born son snatched out of your hands and out of your arms and dying right before you.  And then my father of course, he was--she was--she tells the story how angry he was and angry at both the person that hit her and angry at her because she had stood where he had asked her not to stand.  And of course it resulted in the death of his oldest son and who was named after my Uncle Joseph [Ellis' paternal uncle, Joseph Ellis].  And I heard that story time again too often as a matter of fact.  When my father, he did partake of adult beverages and sometimes he would have one or two of them and he would always want to remind my mother of that which I thought was, my father even though as high esteem that I held him and still hold him, his legacy in very high esteem, I always thought that was a kind of mean spirit.  And, but he was dealing with his own posttraumatic stress that perhaps he didn't know how to deal with and so he would say, "Had you--," he would still dwell and this was like thirty, forty years later, "--had you just stood where I told you to stand Joseph would be alive today."  And I just thought--and of course you can imagine how bad she felt anyway without him having to remind her of that.  So--and I told my father that once, once I became a man he and I had that conversation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then so that's Joseph.  So then I have my, then another sister, Mamie [Mamie Ellis] who is ten years my jun- my, my senior.  She was born and she's still alive and lives here in Macon [Georgia] today and she has six children.  Then after that, another sister Willie Mae [Willie Ellis] who's named after my mother, she's deceased.  She died of colon cancer about ten years ago and my mother died of colon cancer as well a year after my sister.  So, and then my parents had twins, a boy and a girl, William [William Ellis] and Lillian [Lillian Ellis (ph.)], both of them are here in the city. Lillian--most of my siblings left Georgia, moved north and you know furthered their education.  For instance Lillian, my twin, sister that's a twin, she's a nurse.  But she left here because she couldn't, she couldn't go to nursing school here when, at the time because there were no nursing schools for, for, for African Americans.
Story_ID: 622271
Speaker 1: Okay, let's continue.  Who was after William [William Ellis] and Lillian [Lillian Ellis (ph.)]?  Who's next?
Speaker 2: Then Herbert [Herbert Ellis].  My brother was named after my [paternal] uncle, the one that I had mentioned that had got killed in the car accident traveling from Cincinnati [Ohio] to Macon [Georgia], that was Uncle Herbert [ph.].  So my brother Herbert was named after him. Brother--and he's deceased now as well.  He died of cancer a few years back, a very--the one that they say looked more like my grandfather [Arthur Ellis].  He was about 6'4", very, very dark complexion.  And so if you look at my family, look at my siblings you know they got from very light to very, very dark because of the genes and so forth.  But Herbert was one of my favorite brothers, I was next to him.  He was three years my senior but he was the one that taught me how to do a lot of things, taught me how to drive.  He always had a lot of patience for me so we were probably closer than my other siblings and my, he and my sister who is like a year and a half my junior.  So we were very, very close because she was very, very smart.  Not that I wasn't smart in school but maybe I was a--I worked a lot and so she would always help me with--because we were like a grade difference in school.  So she used to help me a lot, but all of my sisters would help me a lot, my tutors, my older sisters.  I, I will say this, my, my siblings were very academically inclined, especially my sisters.  They worked very hard to get good grades so--and they would tutor me to make sure that I had good grades as well.  So I'm forever indebted to all of them.  So that was my--so then like I said my, then my youngest sister who's here now, younger than I am, she was a year and a half my--she was born in '47 [1947], I was born in '46 [1946], about eighteen months apart.  And she's here now.  She's retired and owns a, owns her own business here, married to a presiding elder, two beautiful children.  And then after her another sister--no, after her was my brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, after Herbert was you?
Speaker 2: Was me. Yeah, then me.
Speaker 1: Okay and then what's your next sister's name?
Speaker 2: Dorothy [ph.], then Dorothy, yes um-hm.
Speaker 1: And who's after Dorothy?
Speaker 2: After Dorothy was my brother Arthur [ph.] who was named after my grandfather.  So they skipped right over me in the naming you know and named everyone after one of my uncles or grandfather.  And Arthur is, he's deceased as well.  He was murdered here in the City of Macon at the hands of another man, a gun, gun violence and very tragic death.  He was, these men, they knew each other and--but it was over something very, very minor, frivolous but unfortunately too much of that is happening and not only in our city but in our communities throughout, throughout, throughout America.  So that was Arthur and then two younger sisters, Mary--Clara [ph.] the next one.  She's retired from the government, worked at Robins Air Force Base here near Macon, she's retired.  And my younger sister who also worked at Robins Air Force Base and she too is retired so they're all in their late fifties now and--
Speaker 1: What is her name?
Speaker 2: Mary [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, it was Clara and then Mary (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Clara, then Mary, my youngest sister.  So two sisters--my oldest, the oldest one is a girl and the youngest one is a girl and then five, five guys packed in between.
Story_ID: 622272
Speaker 1: So now let's talk about where you lived as, as a young, young boy in your elementary school years.  Tell me about some of the activities besides going to school [Eugenia Hamilton Elementary School, Macon, Georgia], what were some of the activities that you participated in?
Speaker 2: As an elementary school student of course growing up on a farm, I was born on this place I was telling you that my father [William Ellis] was a sharecropper and when I was about four or five years old, I remember that place not very well but I do remember it.  I remember moving to our own place.  My father had accumulated enough money to rent a farm from this lady they called her Ms. Annie [ph.], that's all I knew, she was a white lady.  And he had rented this farm.  Her husband had died who had been a farmer but--and she had no interest in farming and didn't have any sons to take it.  So she--he rented this farm on a place, on a street called Rocky Creek Road here in Macon [Georgia].  And so I remember I was--prior to going, at that time we didn't have kindergarten so prior to entering first grade that--but on that place there was always work to do and we all had something to do even as a five year old, my job was to feed the pigs or to carry in firewood or to carry in water because of course this is before running water and outdoor toilets we had in that time.  And so there was always something to do so I remember that as my childhood because the only person that was around to play with other than my siblings was Ms. Annie's grandson, a young lad by the name of Skeeter [ph.] I recall.  And Skeeter was my first introduction to racism, to know racism and, and to recognize it.  Skeeter and I was playing, I guess I was five, six years old, we were playing and it was lunchtime and his grandmother Ms. Annie told, had summons him to come and have lunch which was a peanut butter and jelly sandwich and of course I went along, and a glass of milk.  I went along and of course I was directed to the back porch when he went inside.  I was directed to the back porch to have my peanut butter and jelly sandwich and he went inside to have family with--have lunch with his grandmother and maybe whoever else was there.  And I recall thinking even as a six year old, five or six years old, I remember in my mind I can remember that 'til this day, why am I out here?  Why am I--why can't we--he eat with me, my playmate?  We've been playing all day.  And I remember mentioning it to my mother [Willie Glover Ellis] and she you know tried to, said, "Oh don't worry about it, it's just you know, they probably think you wanted to be outside."  Or something like that she probably said, but it, it, but it stuck with me and that was my first introduce- introduction to racism if, if, if you will.
Story_ID: 622273
Speaker 1: And of course we grew up on that place until finally my father [William Ellis] got enough money to--so you know we bused to school. I went to the public school system here in Macon [Georgia], Eugenia Hamilton Elementary School.  That was my first school and we took the bus from, at that time--it's in the city now.  At that time it was kind of like in the rural, so we took the bus to school every day so obviously afterschool activities was very, very minimal because you had to go home after school.  You got on the yellow bus and you went back home and you--and there was always chores to do.  So you went--so shortly, I think I was in the fourth grade.  Third or fourth, yeah fourth grade that my father decided that he was going to buy his own farm, that he had enough money.  He had scraped enough money to own his farm.  That he moved from the sharecropper to renting a farm and now he was purchasing his own farm so he moved further out into the county in west Bibb County [Georgia] and he bought--was buying this little farm.  And that's the place where I mentioned earlier that, where my brothers and I had to take the reins after he got in a little difficulty with the law.  So by this time now I'm in the seventh grade and so basically we lost that place and we moved back in town.  So grown up, growing up as a boy to answer your question, I had a--but once we, once I got in like the fourth, fifth grade I began to participate in athletics and things of that nature.  So playing football and basketball and baseball and that was a good outlet for me.  And, and then we moved back in town, moved back into the city.  I think I was in, I was in junior high school, getting ready to go to junior high school [Ballard Hudson Junior High School, Macon, Georgia].
Story_ID: 622274
Speaker 1: Let's go back just a, a little bit and I guess the most, was it the most stable time in your elementary school years when you were living on the property rented from Ms. Annie [ph.] or when your father [William Ellis] bought his place?  How long did you live on the farm that your father purchased?
Speaker 2: From--about four years--
Speaker 1: Four years (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) from the fourth through the seventh grade.
Speaker 1: How was your house different as far as running water and how it was heated?
Speaker 2: They were the same.
Speaker 1: Were the same?
Speaker 2: We were heated by fireplaces.  We had fireplaces.  We had a well where we had to draw our water and of course we had outhouses so both of the places were very similar matter of fact, the houses look alike.  I have a picture of that, one of those, one of those homes.  You know just a clapboard building you know what we call water colored.  Other words it--no paint on the outside of it.  Inside it was insulated with cardboard and maybe a little sheetrock here and there to keep the winds out.  And of course we cooked by wood, we heated by wood and so forth.  So those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many, how many rooms were there?
Speaker 2: Well, it was like four bedrooms as I recall, four bedrooms the house had. And my brothers and I, four of us shared one room, two beds in one room.  My brother, my younger brother and I slept in one bed, my two older brothers slept in the other bed.  And then there were like two bedrooms that my eight sisters shared, so four and four and then of course a bedroom for my mother [Willie Glover Ellis] and father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so that's how we, that's how we lived.
Story_ID: 622275
Speaker 1: Now if you were to think about a sound, a sight or a smell, what would take you back to that time?
Speaker 2: Well the, the smell would be my mother [Willie Glover Ellis] washing clothes, building the fire around the wash pot, the old big black wash pot and with her, the smell of the sheets being cleaned and the soap that she would use.  They used to call it oxygen soap I think I recall.  I--that smell would be there.  And the sound, the sound would always be of the birds and the other animals that exist in the farm I used to--on the farm.  You would always hear some type of, either at night an isle--owl.  In the daytime, birds chirping, always some type of noise and that's what I remember hearing a lot of.  We didn't hear cars going by because we were off of the main road so those were the sounds.  And of course the sight to me was always you know the beauty of the fields once they had been planted, once the rows were, the rows, the cotton was growing or tomatoes, how straight they would be and how green they would be. That's what I, I, I, that's what I re- re--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know recall.
Story_ID: 622276
Speaker 1: I was going to ask you what was your earliest childhood memory.  Would that have been the story that you told about your friend Skeeter [ph.]?
Speaker 2: That would be, yeah that's one.  I re- you know of course I remember--my earliest memory is watching a cow give birth to a calf.  I remember that and I remember my father [William Ellis] and his friends trying to help the calf out of the cow and that, I remember that.  I had to be about four or five years old.  I remember that distinctly.  And, but the latest, the one that really stuck with me and on the strain of my mind 'til this day is that incident with the young guy named Skeeter.  But you know as it turned out, Skeeter still lives on his grandmother's place today where she used to live, built the house.  And when I was running for mayor the first time, Skeeter and I reacquainted ourselves with one another and he insisted that I put a sign in his yard advertising my candidacy for mayor [of Macon, Georgia].
Story_ID: 622277
Speaker 1: All right, let's talk about school. And you told me that your sisters were there to be your--and your brothers to be your tutors.  So you were a very good student?
Speaker 2: I was a good student.  I was very conscientious.  I loved to go to school and I used to cry when I couldn't go to school because there were certain times a year when the cotton was to be picked and that was always in the fall and that was shortly after school.  School would start after Labor Day and about a month later you had to stay out of school two or three days to pick cotton or to harvest the corn or to harvest potatoes, the sweet potatoes, whatever it was.  And that used to bother me eventually because you were just getting deep in a subject maybe after five, four or five weeks in school and then you would disappear for two or three days and you would get behind.  And I remember crying as an eight year old, nine year old having to stay out of school to work on my father's [William Ellis] farm as opposed to going to school so that wasn't a very pleasant memory for me.  But because like I said I had siblings that would help me catch up somewhat when I was behind and so I was a very studious student and cared about learning, still do 'til this day.  And have impressed my own children, impressed upon them and thank god they have pursued academics with great vigor and had success.  So I was a good student and tried to learn, tried to read as all--as much as I could although we didn't have a lot of reading materials at home because being--given our economic situation the--most of the books you had were your textbooks, you know.  You didn't have the luxury of magazines and comic books and things of that nature.  I remember my brother used to maybe beat somebody out of a comic book playing, playing marbles and I would get a chance to read it.  But I've never been a big comic book fan anyway so that didn't matter too much.
Story_ID: 622278
Speaker 1: Was there a, a favorite teacher or a teacher that might have encouraged you in your elementary school years?
Speaker 2: Oh no question.  One comes to mind, her name Walter Mae Jarrett [ph.].  She was my fifth and sixth grade teacher.  She taught both fifth and sixth grade.  I was going to school in Mizell [Georgia], a place, little school called Pleasant Grove Elementary School [ph.].  And Ms. Jarrett was my football coach, she was my basketball coach, she was my English teacher.  She was everything to me and she just cared.  I thought she, maybe she cared for every child and that's what teachers should--but as far as I was concerned, I was the only one in the classroom that she care--she made me feel that way that I was the most important person in the world.  And Ms. Jarrett died a couple of years ago in a house fire and I--after many years traveling all over the world, Ms. Jarrett still remembered me and remembered my ability to play basketball and my ability to play football as a fifth and sixth grader.  And she used to--we would--she would drive us from--we would have to play the city schools.  We lived in the, out in the rural area and we had to play the schools in town.  And some of the--the school that I had attended before I even, before we moved out in the country [Eugenia Hamilton Elementary School, Macon, Georgia].  And we would come back and she would make sure that we, after we played she would take us home and take us, get us some lunches and some food afterwards.  So Ms. Walter Mae Jarrett comes to mind not only because of her introduction--introducing me to athletics, but because of the attention that she paid to me in the classroom and how she taught me.
Story_ID: 622279
Speaker 1: So what school did you go to next?  Did you go to a middle school or a junior high school?
Speaker 2: No, I went right to junior high school and had some very favorable memories there as well.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Ballard Hudson Junior High School [Macon, Georgia].  It's still--now it's a--Ballard Middle School [Ballard Hudson Middle School, Macon, Georgia] it's still now but at the time it was Ballard Hudson.  We had one African American high school, Ballard Junior and then Ballard Senior [Ballard Hudson Senior High School, Macon, Georgia].  They were all on the same footprint, marked by the same geography just a different building.  So when I arrived in--now we're living back in the city now and I'm in the eighth grade at junior high school and my first time having male teachers.  I had always had female teachers from one through seven [first to seventh grade], so now I have male teachers, a male principal, Mr. Perdue who's still alive and had to whip me once, at least once.  And I tell him about that now and he's a big supporter of mine and my political endeavors, Mr. Harold Perdue [Harold L. Perdue, Sr.]. But that's where I first got interested in politics by my civics teacher, Mr. Booth [ph.] used to--had introduced me to American government and the [U.S.] Constitution and politics and how our system worked and so forth.  And there I also met my, later would be a very good friend of mine and right out of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], he was a basketball coach of Ballard Hudson Junior High School by the name of Don Richardson [Donald Richardson].  Don Richardson went on to win more--after integration, became the high school basketball coach of a large school here, Southwest [Southwest High School, Macon, Georgia]. Produced more players, went on to college.  Norm Nixon is one and Jeff Malone and others. But, so these men became my role models, the principal, civics teacher and Don Richardson.  I wanted to be like them.  I wanted to play basketball like Don Richardson and I wanted to know about basketball.  I wanted to know about, as much about government as Mr. Booth and I wanted to know as much about leadership as Mr. Perdue and how he ran that school, Ballard Junior School, Ballard Junior High and so that was a very, very good experience for me, learned a lot in those days.
Story_ID: 622280
Speaker 1: And so you went there all the way through the twelfth grade to that particular school?
Speaker 2: No, that was the only--junior high school was only in those days--
Speaker 1: Eighth (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) eighth grade only.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Grade school was one through seven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then junior high school, eighth then went to the ninth grade to Ballard Hudson Senior [Ballard Hudson Senior High School, Macon, Georgia], just went to the next building over.  Ballard Junior [Ballard Hudson Junior High School; Ballard Hudson Middle School, Macon, Georgia] was here, Ballard Senior was there.  So then I went there and had a school, a job after school and had you know everybody was pitching in because now farming was over.  My father [William Ellis] is now working at Mercer University [Macon, Georgia] as a--as the head groundskeeper, not making a lot of money, no longer farming.  We're living in the inner city, living in Unionville [Macon, Georgia] and we're all pitching in.  My brothers and you know now, you know about three of us in school and couple of us in college at the same time so we're all pitching in trying to help out.  And I worked after school at a supermarket downtown Macon [Georgia] and tried to do my lessons as much as possible and tried to participate in athletics as much as I could.
Speaker 1: So did you, you played football in high school?
Speaker 2: I played basketball.  I didn't play football.  I played football in junior high but not senior high school. Played basketball and because of having to work after school you know, you just couldn't--three whole months just too full a--you know football season starts like in May--not May, in August and will go through November and of course then basketball season.  And so that was just too big of a chunk of time and you had to work, had to help out so I chose to play only one and ran track but that was--basketball was my main sport.
Speaker 1: And was there a teacher in high school that encouraged you or influenced you?
Speaker 2: Definitely.  Matter of fact he's the honorary chairperson of my campaign now, Mr. Bob Washington [Robert Washington], my tenth grade science teacher.  He's still around.  He, like I said, we're very good friends now but he, I recall as all the--and Ms. Delores Williams [ph.] at the time, Jones, she later married a gentlemen by (unclear) Ms. Delores Williams.  I had a difficult time with math.  For whatever reason I thought I couldn't do math when I showed up in her class.  And she made mathematics so simple to me until I still use some of the systems, some of the methods that she taught me way back in the ninth grade about math.  And I--because I was a petrified of math, I really was and she made it so simple to me and made it easy.  And so I recall her as someone who had a great deal of influence and then the principal of the school, R.J. Martin.  Now R.J. Martin--I was not a high school dropout.  I was a high school push out.  I mentioned earlier that I had to, that I had to work after school and I had arranged it with my teachers that I would have--at that time we had what was known as study hall and I had the study hall as my last hour of the day.  So, but rather than go to study hall I would go to work because I could study at home or I could study some other time.  So Mr. Martin saw me leaving school in the eleventh grade, saw me leaving school without permission even though, even though my teacher, my, my--who set this up for me told me it was okay.  I told him I had to work.  He said, "Okay well just you know just come in, answer the roll and disappear," and that's what I was doing.  This, I had been doing this for like two or three months going--I worked at a Food Fair supermarket and supermarket downtown where I stocked shelves and took groceries out, make a few tips, make some money.  And Mr. Martin saw me leaving school and told me I can go home and stay home until I brought my parents back, which I did, brought my parents back like the next day or two.  And I remember my mother [Willie Glover Ellis] having to go before--and I said earlier my mother was a sixth grade scholar.  I remember her having to go before the entire faculty, entire teaching body at Ballard Hudson and get up and plead with them to allow me to come back to school.  And I remember Ms. Williams, the lady I had spoke about the math teacher, and I remember Mr. Washington and my shop teacher and several other teachers testifying on my behalf why I should be allowed to come back to school. 'Cause I was a good student, I was studious and I cared about learning, that I wasn't a troublemaker, I never got in any trouble.  But this man for whatever reason, he said he had had trouble with one of my older brothers.  I'm not aware of that.  But whatever reason he never allowed me to come back to school.  After my mother made this plea he said, "Well I will notify you when you can come back to school."  And see, here I am now, seventeen year old sitting at home.  I wasn't--definitely not going to spend the rest of my life working in a grocery store stocking shelves.  Don't get me wrong people do that, that's okay.  But--so I told my mother I wanted to--told my father I wanted to go to Cincinnati [Ohio] to live with my [paternal] aunt [Hattie Ellis] and I would finish school in Cincinnati but that didn't work out. They said, "No, no we're not going to--" you know, "you're going to get back in school here.  We're not separating the family.  You're not going away to Cincinnati."
Story_ID: 622281
Speaker 1: So this guy [R.J. Martin] never allowed me to come back to school [Ballard Hudson Senior High School, Macon, Georgia].  I joined the [U.S.] Army instead. Joined the Army, became a paratrooper and of course with, in mind of finishing high school.  And let me tell you how small the world is and how good God is.  I wound up being stationed in Paris, France, right outside of Paris.  And I had, I was stationed at NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] headquarters.  I was at, this time I'm--this is a year and a half, I'm almost nineteen years old.  My commanding officer, captain of mine was a gentleman from Macon, Georgia named Arthur Rich, a white guy.  Now the black man put me out of school, he was a black--Dr. Martin.  And my father [William Ellis] worked at Mercer University [Macon, Georgia] and worked for his father, Dr. Rich, Arthur Rich, Sr.  I'm in Arthur Rich, Jr.'s command in Paris.  He came to--Arthur Rich, Sr. came to visit his son at Christmas of '64 [1964], '65 [1965], I can't recall.  Had to be '64 [1964], Christmas of '64 [1964], came to visit his son and said that, "You know there's a--." My name happened to come up.  I was from Macon.  And he said, "Well his father works at Mercer University," where he was a professor of music and my father also did work at his house as a groundskeeper, took care of his lawn and all of this and he wanted to meet me.  So they sent for me to go to the captain's house for dinner which I was a private first class.  Private first class, we don't get invited to captains' houses for dinner as a rule.  And I went and it was--wanted to introduce me to his father who knew my father.  The next day or shortly thereafter when we were back to work, it was during the Christmas holidays and we were back to work, he looked at my file and said, "I notice that you didn't finish high school before you joined the Army."  I said, "No, that's why I joined the Army." I gave him the story about how I wanted to finish high school and what had happened. And he says, "I will make a deal with you.  If you can think you can finish in one year, I will arrange for you to go to the American overseas dependent school and you'll get a high school diploma." And that's how I finished high school.  Finished high school there and started taking college courses at the University of Maryland overseas branch [University of Maryland University College].  And Arthur Rich, Jr. and I today are very good friends.  He, when I ran for mayor the first time, my first check came from him.  He's a retired colonel now living in Alexandria, Virginia, went on to be a real estate mogul.
Story_ID: 622282
Speaker 1: --School in about seven months.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was able to get in and out.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So 1963 is the year--
Speaker 1: I entered the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: That you--okay, entered the Army.  Is this before or after the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination?
Speaker 1: I entered the Army before and I entered the Army in March of '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: When I left Macon [Georgia] we were still sitting on the back of the bus.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So now in that era, talk to me about what's going on in Macon?
Speaker 1: You ready?
Speaker 2: As far--yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, in that era, Macon is a, still a very segregated town, we're still attending--there's still all white and all black schools.  There are still white and colored water fountains.  There is still colored people's--the signs on the buses still say, "Color seat from rear, white passengers seated from front."  As a matter of fact when I left Macon to take the train to Atlanta [Georgia] to join the Army, I entered through the colored waiting room at the train station downtown, the Terminal Station [Macon, Georgia].  One of the first buildings I purchased when I became mayor was that building.  I remember that sign being there and of course they have since covered it up with plywood.  And once I purchased, the first thing I did was uncovered it and it's there today.  It's in stone and this magnificent building that we have downtown.  So Macon was a town that was very, very oppressive for people of color.  It--we were just a very, very segregated town, very divided town, the neighborhoods.  And what happened, not so much the neighborhoods were separated and divided.  Of course that was common throughout the South, the Jim Crow South.  But in Macon, there were no services provided for the most part in the African American community.  Dirt was--the streets were dirt.  They had not extended water and sewer into the black community for the most part.  Our schools were substandard.  When I say--good teachers, don't get me wrong.  We had good teachers, good dedicated teachers but the materials that we had, some of the books that we were given had been used by some of the kids at the white schools and sometimes you would even have a page missing out of a book, always writing and that type of things in the book.  So, so it wasn't a very, very pleasant place other than when you were, when you tried to venture outside of your community, that's when a lot of hostility, you would meet with a lot of hostility.  Inside of the black community then of course we had the--our own economic system if you will.  There were black merchants, there were black hotels, there were an all-black theater.  So we didn't go in the theater to sit in the balcony while the white people sat down front, I mean down below.  Fortunate here, we had a man that had vision, Charles Douglass [Charles Henry Douglass] back in the early 1900s to build a theater here so we had our own theater, so we had our own restaurants and things of that nature.
Story_ID: 622283
Speaker 1: So now you were away from home when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated?
Speaker 2: I was in the [U.S.] military.  Matter of fact I was, if I'm not mistaken I was in training.  I had finished my training.  I was on a training exercise I recall.  I was a parachutist at the time and we were on a parachute jump some place in Virginia.  I remember being in Virginia.  I was stationed at Fort Bragg [North Carolina] but I remember being in Virginia on maneuvers and when I heard of, of his demise, which was what, November of '63 [1963], yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 622284
Speaker 1: Now you enter into the service during the Vietnam era [Vietnam War].  Were you not afraid to join the service at that time thinking that you might go to Vietnam?
Speaker 2: I was trying to get out of Macon, Georgia and trying to get an education.  I was just oblivious to Viet- I didn't even know Vietnam was going on.  I didn't know Vietnam existed.  I didn't know where it was.  I, you know in '63 [1963] it wasn't that big of a deal in '63 [1963] even though we had some advisors there.  But it wasn't on the--yeah, it wasn't a topic of discussion in my household and most people I knew, we didn't discuss Vietnam.  It was a--I saw the [U.S.] military as an opportunity for me to have gainful employment and an opportunity for me to continue my education.  That's what the military meant to me.  And then once I entered the military and my first assignment--I was overseas after I entered the military in 1963, in March.  In August of '64 [1964], I was transferred to--a little over a year I was transferred to Europe living in, living in France.  And in France of course, Paris, right outside of Paris was a much more liberal place than Macon, Georgia, ever will be.  And there I began to feel like a real human being.  There were no separation of races.  You know you interact with people from different backgrounds, different cultures, different religions and different colors and things of that nature.  So that--I began to really feel not that I had felt inferior, but when you live in a system, when you grow up in a system where one group feels that they are superior to the other group, some of that stuff is internalized in you.  And you not--you think you are not inferior and you say to yourself and your parents tell you and your teachers tell you, you're as good as anyone else and everything, but yet you go to the Krystal burger place and you can't even buy a ten cent hamburger.  Or when you get on the bus you see this sign that says, "Colored people seated from rear, white passenger--." That has an impact.  That has a psychological impact on you.  So when you get out of that system and you're able to do everything that everyone else can do without those restrictions, you realize and feel--you feel as though a weight has been taken off of your shoulder.  And that's what that inferiority and superiority complex comes from and that's what race and racism has a tendency to do.
Speaker 1: Well, talk to me about racism in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: Well racism was--it was there because we come from, we bring our baggage with us, some of us.  But one thing about the military in those days, there--you had an opportunity to compete with a white kid, to get promoted.  There were no, you know, if you demonstrated leadership abilities, you would be placed in a leadership position and you would supervise white kids, white boys and black boys and--but we're young men I should say.  But in Macon, Georgia, no matter how smart you were, no matter what your leadership abilities were, you were not going to find yourself supervising white people.  That was just the way it was.  A black police officer could not even arrest a white person.  They could hold that person, that white person 'til a white cop would have to come and make the arrest.  So that type of--when you're coming out of that system then the military was a breath of fresh air in terms of opportunity and things of that nature.
Speaker 1: I see.  So, so black police officers in Macon didn't have any power?
Speaker 2: Didn't have any power, only over black people.  They could hit a black person over the head with a billy club.  They could arrest a black person but they, they, they could not do the same to a white person.
Story_ID: 622285
Speaker 1: All right.  Well tell me more about you being in the [U.S.] Army and how do you, how do you become or is it chosen for you to become a paratrooper?
Speaker 2: Well I was in basic--after I got through with my advanced infantry training--well during advanced infantry training--well when you go in the--in those days I was making $78.10 a month.  That was the starting pay for a private.  Now had I been fortunate enough to attend a white school here that had ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], Reserve Off- Junior ROTC, I would have been able to go into the [U.S.] military at a higher pay grade.  But because they didn't offer that in black schools, it was only offered to--in the white schools in Macon [Georgia].  So I--my salary was $78.10 a month and I remember to become a paratrooper you have to volunteer.  I was already a volunteer.  I had volunteered for the Army, then you have to volunteer again.  Nobody is forced to be a--to jump out of an airplane.  And I remember the recruiting sergeant that came from the, with his, with the paratrooper outfit on and so forth and he was recruiting young men to become paratroopers.  And he said, "You make another fifty-five dollars a month, hazardous duty pay."  So in addition to your $78.10, you'll get fifty-five dollars and I said, "Where do I sign up?"  And the fact of the matter, I had never been on an airplane before, never flown on an airplane before.  The very first airplane I was ever on, I jumped out of it.  So, so, so I volunteered for airborne training and I was at Fort Gordon, Georgia finished my advanced infantry training and after that I got on a bus and we moved to Fort Benning [Georgia] and became--went through the paratrooper school and made my five qualifying jumps and was assigned to Fort Bragg, North Carolina and later to Europe and became you know, began to become this soldier if you will and moving up the ranks and really enjoyed soldiering.  I was a good soldier.  I really, really enjoyed it.  Some people say I was brainwashed and whatever you call it, indoctrination.  I was trained well.  I know I had been given some of the best training that one could possibly--that a soldier could possibly receive.  And then I got to Europe and I was in this ceremonial outfit kind of, so to speak.  My job was when dignitaries come I would put on my shiny helmet and my--and like The Old Guard [3rd U.S. Infantry Regiment] in Washington, D.C. when dignitaries come and they troop, you know inspect the troop, that was my job.  And that's where they--the gentlemen I spoke about earlier, Captain Rich [Arthur Rich, Jr.], he was the commander of that, of that detachment.  The only paratrooper detachment in all of France and I was, I was fortunate enough to, to be a, to be a member of it.
Story_ID: 622286
Speaker 1: And then shortly after, Charles de Gaulle, the former president, the late president of France decided he would withdraw from NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization], so, which meant that we had to leave all the military, all the U.S. military personnel had to leave France and I was transferred, transferred to Germany and this would have been in 1966.  So I was transferred to a paratrooper outfit in Germany and had a great time in Europe.  I, matter of fact I was having so much fun that I wanted to stay and I--this is '67 [1967].  The war in Vietnam [Vietnam War] was raging at that time.  Now I know about the war, you know but I'm in Europe.  The war is in Vietnam and now I'm a staff sergeant and I attempted to extend my stay in Europe for at least another two years.  I had had a sports car.  I was having fun running up and down the autobahns in Germany from Frankfurt [Frankfurt am Main, Germany] to Wiesbaden [Germany] where I was stationed.  But when I requested this extension, not only did they deny it but they sent me orders telling me that I had been reassigned to Fort Campbell, Kentucky for further shipment to Vietnam.  This would have been in the spring of 2007 [sic.] so I came back to the states and wound up in Fort Campbell and became a member of the one 'o--101st Airborne Division and started out training.  And we were--what I remember about that period is that at that time Detroit [Michigan] was burning.  Detroit had the big riots in Detroit in August of sixty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 1: --August of '67 [1967].  So here I am in Fort Campbell training to go to Vietnam to fight the enemy, the Communist quote, unquote, enemy and we were diverted to Detroit to help put down an urban riot and, and to kill young boys and girls in the inner city of Detroit which didn't register well with me.  And, but as a soldier you do what you're told.  So we stayed there for a few weeks and when that was over, went back to Fort Campbell and got on a plane, went to--shipped out to Vietnam.  And let me, now--
Speaker 2: Well you have to tell me more about the riot in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, about, you know, how--what happened and how--
Speaker 1: Well what was happening if you recall, I don't know whether you remember this in this era.  The Michigan National Guard [Michigan Army National Guard] had been called in to--the governor of Michigan [George W. Romney] had called the National Guard and I think Governor Romney [Mitt Romney], the guy that's running for president, I think his father was the governor of Michigan at that time.  I know it was a Republican if I'm not mistaken.  They had called the National Guard and the National Guard didn't deal softly if you will with the rioters.  They were shooting to kill, you know.  They had shoot to kill orders.  Well that just kind of you know made things worse.  So they called and they said, "Hey these guys are not trained to do this and they are really going to make things worth here--worse."  So they pulled the National Guard back and they asked for the 101st Airborne Division to come in and help maintain order.  And I recall I was a young staff sergeant, reconnaissance platoon sergeant training to go to Vietnam to do this and I remember a captain telling me to use a flamethrower to burn down a building where a couple--we had received a couple of sniper rounds, probably someone from--had a .22 caliber rifle and I refused the order.  I refused to do it.  I refused to do it because I thought it was overwhelming force that we would be using on maybe a seventeen, eighteen, a twenty year old black kid with a rifle, with a .22 caliber rifle.  And he wanted me to use a flamethrower to just burn the building down and it was a two story building.  There could have very well been on the top floor and I refused that order.  And nothing ever became of it but I did refuse a direct order to do that and I told him it wasn't necessary.  I thought we could cordon this area off and bring some sense to it without burning down an entire building.
Story_ID: 622287
Speaker 1: So then I go back to Fort Campbell [Kentucky] and wind up in Vietnam.  I get to Vietnam, this is late '67 [1967] now when I finally--we moved up north getting ready for the Tet Offensive, 1968. The Tet Offensive which was in way.  But we had moved, the 101st Airborne Division, we had moved from near Saigon [Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam] all the way up near the DMZ and we didn't have--demilitarized zone.  And we didn't have a proper amount of ammunition and things of that nature.  And I remember the [U.S.] Marine Corps guy that I went to speak to, I said, "Look I need some ammunition, I need some (unclear), I need this, I need grenades," and he says, "I can't--we don't have any of that to give.  But there is a, an [U.S.] Army major over in that tent you see," in the middle of this ammunition place.  "Now if he says yes, then you can have whatever you want.  But I--," this Marine Corps sergeant was telling me, "you can't--I can't give it."  I go to this tent, pull the flap back on the tent, sitting behind the desk in the tent is Arthur Rich, Jr., the same gentleman that I told you about earlier.  So we embraced each other as though we were long lost cousins and he made it possible for me to have all the ammunition I, that I, that I needed.  And of course shortly thereafter the big Tet Offensive happened, way--I got wounded and not severe enough to leave, to be taken out of the country, went back to a field hospital, got patched up and went back into battle again.  So, and that was--I left Vietnam in '68 [1968], came back to the states and took a little break from the Army.  I decided I would get out.  I had had enough.  I had been in from '63 [1963] to '68 [1968]. It was six years I reenlisted.  And I got out and moved to Cincinnati [Ohio] and went to work for the U.S. Post Office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] as a matter of fact.  And I think I worked there two weeks and I said, "Oh, I don't think I want to do this."  And I went and got another job at General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], they were making Camaros [Chevrolet Camaro] and since then I think I went to work there for a--I said, "I don't want to do this either."  And I was thinking about going back to school but this was in the middle of the year so I would be going back to school, I'd start school in September.  And--but I began to miss the Army and reenlisted, you know, rejoined the Army and so I was out from December of '68 [1968] 'til April of '69 [1969], not very long.  But I--and so I reenlisted then went to Fort Bragg, North Carolina, back to the 82nd Airborne Division and lo and behold while I'm there, this would have been 1970 now, President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] (background noise) decided that he was going to have a surge, that we were going to end the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War].  That we were going to go into Cambodia, we were going to go into Laos and so I was one of the unfortunate ones that were tapped to go back for a second tour of duty in Vietnam.  This would have been June--I'm sorry April or May 1970.  So they said, "You'll probably only be over there another three months, so ninety days we're going to surge, and everything is going to work out okay and you guys will be back at Fort Bragg before the year is over."  Unfortunately that turned into another year's tour of duty and we know how that all turned out ultimately Vietnam, the North Vietnamese won.  But so I came back to the states after that year.  It was--I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-one [1971].
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-one [1971].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-one [1971].
Story_ID: 622288
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you, did you really miss the [U.S.] Army or were you just having a hard time adjusting to civilian life when you came out (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably, probably a bit of both.  Remember, I had been in the Army since I was seventeen and at this time now I'm twenty-two, almost twenty--I'm twenty-three now.  I'm twenty-three years of age.  I had been in charge of people as a twenty-three year old.  Most twenty-three year olds at that time are just out of college by one year, but I'm combat hardened.  I'm--I've been leading young men in combat as a reconnaissance platoon patrol leader in Vietnam.  So I'm, I'm a different place from the average twenty-two or twenty-three year old in my mind.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So it was probably a combination of both.  My readjustment had not--now when men and women come back from war they go through this long readjustment counseling.  I got back from Vietnam as an individual, I flew into Oakland, California, I think it was two o'clock in the morning.  We landed, got a little sleep, the next day a process, they said, "Well you got to stay around here about three or four days."  I went downtown San Francisco [California], hung out, came back, got my, got my discharge and got on a plane in civilian clothes and flew home but no, no, no transition counseling whatsoever.  So you probably, you're probably right, probably a combination of that, missing the [U.S.] military, missing the structure and, and maybe it was an adjustment period as well.
Story_ID: 622289
Speaker 1: When you come back in '71 [1971], what happens next for you?
Speaker 2: In '71 [1971], I'm, I'm assigned now to the paratrooper school [U.S. Army Airborne School] at Fort Benning, Georgia to teach young men and women--well mostly men.  I don't recall ever seeing a woman in paratrooper school at that time.  They do now.  So I became an instructor in the paratrooper school at Fort Benning and got married (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And married my first wife [Vernilla Ellis (ph.)] and--but I was--then Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] decided again that he was going to end the draft and start the volunteer army.  So I was recruited and highly persuaded to become an [U.S.] Army recruiter.  They said that I had all the attributes and my combat record, my parents [Willie Glover Ellis and William Ellis] and everything.  I was a soldier's soldier and that they wanted me to become a recruiter and that would give me three choices as--in the nation where I could recruit.  And you would get one of those three choices.  So I asked for Atlanta [Georgia], Savannah [Georgia] and Charlotte, North Carolina and I wound up in Detroit, Michigan so--(laughter) as a recruiter.  So I became an Army recruiter in early '72 [1972] and was transferred to Michigan and, and that's where I really got involved in politics--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --by the way in, in Michigan.
Story_ID: 622290
Speaker 1: Before we go there, tell me who you married.  Tell me who your wife was.
Speaker 2: I married a young lady by the name of Vern- Vernilla Ellis [ph.] and we had two lovely daughters--we have two lovely--that union produced two lovely daughters and--Taria [Taria Ellis] and Jamillia [Jamillia Ellis].  And they are--
Speaker 1: Tell me about them.
Speaker 2: Well Taria is--both of them reside in Atlanta [Georgia] now.  Taria is a vice president of a bank, a graduate of the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], undergraduate and she's doing well, married with--produced four grandchildren for me, twins, she has twin girls and two older children.  Taria is doing quite well.  She's a good banker and a very, turned out to be a very, very good, young, young woman.  Then my youngest daughter who played basketball in college went to North Atlanta A&T University [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] as a computer engineer and she has a master's [degree] from Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and she's a software engineer for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation].  And she too lives in Atlanta.  She works from home so those are my two daughters.  But I had a son that was born prior, born out of wedlock shortly after I came back from Vietnam.  He's the one with spina bifida as a result of my being exposed to Agent Orange.  That's my oldest son, Brian [Brian Smith].  Brian lives in Cincinnati [Ohio].  He's been confined to a wheelchair all of his life.  The Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] finally acknowledged that spina bifida was a result of men being exposed to Agent Orange and coming back and had that in their bloodstream when their children were conceived.  And so the VA compensates him a reasonable amount of money, not enough but gives him you know a reasonable amount of money for his, for his, for his condition.
Story_ID: 622291
Speaker 1: Let's take a, a minute right here to talk about Agent Orange.  Tell us what Agent Orange is.
Speaker 2: Well Agent Orange was a, a chemical. Dow Chemical [Dow Chemical Company] made it and the [U.S.] Army contracted to buy that stuff in Vietnam to spray it over the foliage because the triple and single, double and triple canopy jungle, they felt that the enemy could hide.  So if they would spray this deadly toxin on the jungle it would destroy the vegetation and therefore the enemy would be more exposed.  And it worked, it worked like within a week's time you spray it on, it was dead.  Everything was completely dead.  I witnessed seeing it.  Little did we know at that time--maybe they knew but we didn't and if the [U.S.] military knew they didn't tell us that this stuff was deadly and that we were--even though they were spraying it on the foliage, we were operating in that area, drinking water and doing everything else.  And it's a lot of cause- cancer causing compounds in that particular chemical.  So a lot of men--spina bifida was one of the birth defects that children would suffer from it.  But of course prostate cancer, we notice now a lot of, a lot of Vietnam [Vietnam War] veterans have a very, very high rate of prostate cancer because of that, liver cancer and several other cancers that has been linked directly to Agent Orange.
Story_ID: 622292
Speaker 1: You are going to now be a recruiter [for the U.S. Army], 1972 in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: I'm a, I'm a recruiter in Detroit, Michigan 1972 and it's cold, it's--I arrive in Detroit in the early winter, February I think of '72 [1972], don't know a soul.  My young bride [Vernilla Ellis (ph.)], I've sent her to be with her mother in North Carolina.  She's pregnant with my first daughter [Taria Ellis] so I go and try to make a way and find a place to live and all of that.  And fortunate I didn't move her to Detroit right away because I was in Detroit about nine months, eight, nine months and they transferred me to Lansing, Michigan, the state capital and so I went there.  After I got there and settled down sent for my bride, my wife and my newborn baby daughter and they joined me in Lansing.  And I stayed there an additional four years, stayed there until '76 [1976] and I was transferred to Atlanta [Georgia], again still in the recruiting command.
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned earlier that in Detroit is when you became more involved in politics.  How so?
Speaker 2: Well Detroit was on the cusp of changing the political landscape.  Coleman Young was running for mayor, the first African American mayor, Cole- of Detroit.  There were two or three very outspoken city council members as I recall and I remember taking this in.  I had not witnessed this before, black people being involved in politics speaking truth to power, challenging the system, running for mayor of the, one of the largest cities--Detroit, at the time Detroit probably had a couple of million people.  And running for mayor and got elected mayor of Detroit.  And I remember how a lot of white people were saying that, "If he's elected mayor, we're going to move out of the city.  If they can get a black mayor," running against a guy name Cavanagh [Jerome Cavanagh].  I should never forget it.  Cavanagh had been the chief of police and a very tough law and order guy.  And of course they--he became a very racial tension was very high in that particular campaign I recall.  And so that's when my interest in politics came--that's where my interest in politics really was, was, was heightened.
Story_ID: 622293
Speaker 1: In '76 [1976] you leave to move to Atlanta [Georgia] is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I trans- was trans- I was given an opportunity for a lateral transfer because I had done such a great job as an [U.S.] Army recruiter and they would allow you if you had, had you know performed at a certain level they say, "Okay you can get a lateral transfer."  You can go wherever you want to go in the country.  So I finally got to my first choice which was Atlanta.  I was transferred to Atlanta in 1976 and I became the recruiter of the year in Atlanta.  I served in Atlanta from '76 [1976] to '79 [1979], became the senior recruiter, the recruiter training for the--trainer for the State of Georgia teaching other young soldiers how to be a good recruiter.  And out of that I began to--they assigned me as a senior advisor to the secretary of the army on recruiting matters who were having a very difficult time recruiting nationwide and they wanted me to go and advise the secretary of the army what we needed to do to have a more successful recruiting campaign throughout the nation.  And I helped with marketing campaigns and advertising campaigns and out of that I was assigned to the U.S. Virgin Islands in St. Thomas, in charge of recruiting for St. Thomas and St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands] and St. John [U.S. Virgin Islands].  So because of my good work here in Georgia, I was given that very, very unique and very special assignment.  So I spent three years there prior to retiring in St. Thomas, the U.S. Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: And you were there to recruit you say?
Speaker 2: I was there in charge of recruiting.  I was in charge of Army recruiting.  Of course that's a U.S. territory.  I was based on St. Thomas but I was in charge of recruiting for the entire U.S. Virgin Islands which was one of the best assignments I ever had.  And it was primarily my last assignment.  I did get transferred back to Atlanta my last year in the Army but that was primarily for getting ready to retire and I told them I was going to retire and they wanted to move someone else in that position and I was transferred back to Atlanta for like eight months prior to retiring.
Story_ID: 622294
Speaker 1: Well did you manage a television cable station in St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands]--
Speaker 2: I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) during that time?
Speaker 2: No.  I retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I retired on a Friday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--in Atlanta--in Fort McPherson, Georgia.  I signed my retirement papers on a Friday afternoon at two o'clock.  On a Sunday afternoon I was on an Eastern Air Line [Eastern Air Lines] flying back to the U.S. Virgin Islands where I became--this was already, had been arranged and I became the general manager of St. Croix Cable- well not the general manager at first.  I became the marketing director for St. Croix Cable TV and later became the general manager of St. Croix Cable TV on the island of St. Croix.
Speaker 1: Well I understand that you had those--that working before you actually got out of the service.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: But how did that come about?  How did you meet someone that would then--how were you qualified to work as--the marketing had to do with the strategies that you came up with for the [U.S.] Army recruiting, is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So who did you meet that got you into the cable television business?
Speaker 2: Well I knew one of the owners of the cable television system.  I had met him while I was on active duty and I knew they were getting ready to build this cable system from the ground up.  It was new, the cable television was very new to the islands at the time.  So I told him I would like to get involved when I retired and they gave me an opportunity to come in as a marketing director to build--to recruit people to buy cable, really.  And it was twenty-eight dollars a month, I remember that's what we--that's what the package cost, twenty-eight dollars a month to have HBO [Home Box Office] and everything else that we had, had to offer.  Of course BET [Black Entertainment Television] was only on about four hours a day at that time.  Primarily there were videos, Donnie Simpson playing video and 'Video Soul' so cable has come a mighty long way from that time.
Speaker 1: So how long did you stay--this was at St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands] or St. Croix?
Speaker 2: This was St. Croix.  I had moved to St. Croix once I retired and became the manager of the cable television system.  And of course you know during this, during all of this time when I'm in Michigan, I'm continuing my education, I'm taking college courses at night at Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan], the Lansing Community College [Lansing, Michigan].  While I'm in Atlanta [Georgia] I'm taking courses and at a college, DeKalb College [Perimeter College - Clarkston Campus, Clarkston, Georgia], radio and television broadcasting there.  And I'm taking courses from Saint Leo College [sic. Saint Leo University] out at Fort McPherson [Georgia] which was a military education center which has various college courses they offer on, on, on the base and ultimately got my degree from Saint Leo College.
Story_ID: 622295
Speaker 1: But on St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands], I'm managing this cable television system [St. Croix Cable TV].  I'm getting all involved in the community, doing other things.  Did the media for a--did all the media work for a governor that was running for the governor of the [U.S.] Virgin Islands, Alexander Farrelly and did all this media package for him so still nibbling around in politics.  And Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] visited St. Croix while I was there and I didn't know Jesse.  Knew of him, never really met him obviously.  And got to meet Jesse through the governor and some other politicians there on the island and told him if he would run, if he was going to run for president again I'd like to be involved in his campaign.  And he decided to run again in '87 [1987].  I left St. Croix, moved back to Atlanta [Georgia] and got involved with the Jesse Jackson campaign, first as the media--I was in charge of all the media relations for the campaign for the State of Georgia and they were having a difficult time finding a campaign manager.  And they asked me did I think I could do the job.  I said, "I've never managed a campaign.  I've worked in campaigns from the media standpoint but I would take a shot at it and I did."  And I managed the Jesse Jackson campaign for--the 1988 campaign for the State of Georgia.
Speaker 2: Tell me what you thought about him running at that time?
Speaker 1: I thought it was very useful.  It was useful for a couple of reasons.  Some people didn't think he could win but what was winning?  The definition of winning was totally different than it, than it is now.  Winning for us meant that we could get a lot of African Americans registered to vote.  We could, down ticket we would probably get more state legislators, city councilmen, mayors and other county commissioners elected than ever before because of this great voter registration drive that happened with that campaign.  And out of that, that was the result of that.  In addition, remember that Ron Brown was our--was a chairperson for Jesse Jackson '88 [1988] and because we won Super Tuesday and we had showed up in Atlanta at the convention in '88 [1988 Democratic National Convention, Atlanta, Georgia] with a ton of delegates and they kept asking, "What does Jesse want?  What does he want?"  Dukakis' [Michael Dukakis] people wanted to know that, negotiating with Jesse.  Well it wasn't about Jesse.  A lot of people say he's selfish and that it's all about him.  But Jesse saw a bigger picture.  He knew that this wasn't about him, this was about the thousands and millions of people that had voted for him that had agreed to register.  So therefore he went to the negotiating table with that in his bucket if you will, his tool, tool kit.  And what ultimately we wanted to do was control the Democratic Party.  We thought that the Democratic Party had lost its way, that it had become very afraid of the Republicans.  It had been afraid of the southern strategy and we thought that there was another way that we could get a Democratic president elected.  If not Jesse, there would definitely be a Democratic elected if we could change the Democratic structure, the structure of the Democratic Party.  And we demanded, Jesse did out of this campaign, demanded that Ron Brown would be the chairman of the DNC, Democratic National Committee after that campaign.  And I remember sitting in a hotel room at the Hyatt Regency Hotel [Hyatt Regency Atlanta] in Atlanta where Dukakis' people were negotiating but that was non-negotiable that Jesse would get a primetime speaking part at the convention and that he would be given money and a jet and a staff to go around to help rally people to vote for Dukakis.  But the most important thing was that Ron Brown would be the chairman of the Democratic Party.  Normally the nominee choose the chair of the Democratic Party as President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] chose Kaine [Tim Kaine] from Virginia to lead it.  But this case, Jesse Jackson chose Ron Brown, well selected Ron Brown and gave him to Dukakis, says, "This man must be the chairman of the Democratic Party." And, and it turned out to be a true statement that we could win because under his leadership, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] became president.  Under Ron Brown's leadership as the chairman of the Democratic Party, Ron--Bill Clinton became president and later Ron Brown--appointed Ron Brown as the chairman, as the secretary of commerce--
Speaker 2: Sec-
Speaker 1: --if you recall.
Story_ID: 622296
Speaker 1: So it had to be a lot of excitement around that campaign and, and what was the feel after this was all said and done and now what did you decide that you would do after this campaign?
Speaker 2: Well what Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] said to us when the campaign was over, he said, "The most important thing that's going to happen the rest of this decade and early next decade is the 1990 census.  That's going to be the most important thing that happens because given the voter registration that we have embarked upon, given everything else that's happened, the political landscape has shifted somewhat.  If we can get a good count, a good count, especially in the African American community," which heretofore had always been undercounted, "if we can get a good count that we can have more congressmen and more state legislators and so forth in the South.  This will be the new South." And that's what happened.  I went to work for the [U.S.] Census Bureau in charge of the--became an executive of the Census Bureau based in Atlanta [Georgia] in charge of recruiting forty thousand people in three states, North Carolina--sorry, Georgia, Alabama and Florida.  My job was to put the infrastructure in place, get enough people motivated people from all segments of the community to be involved in, in, in doing the 1990 census.  So I did that from ni- from '88 [1988] until early '91 [1991], to January of '91 [1991].
Story_ID: 622297
Speaker 1: And I was offered a position, a full time position with the Cen- I was full time as it were but I was given a--I could become a career employee with the [U.S.] Census Bureau and wanted to transfer me to Wa- to Washington, D.C.  I respectfully declined and resigned and moved to Macon [Georgia] and got involved in politics here.  Started a television program here called 'Community Forum' where I focused on the political and other social issues and decided to run for office for the first time in 1991. Ran for the state senate [Georgia State Senate].  I lost by a very, very small margin considering I had only been back home a couple of years.  I thought it was quite encouraging me to try again and so I went back to work in the community and doing things that--not just to get elected but doing things that needed to be done, got involved in other areas.
Speaker 2: Okay.  First, let's go back to the television show.  Was this a cable access program (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was cable.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was on cable.
Speaker 2: And you talked about the politics.  You--why did you move back from Atlanta [Georgia] to Macon?
Speaker 1: I--you know during the census, I was in and out of here a lot.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: And I reconnected with my family.  I had not--remember I hadn't lived here since 1963.  This is in 1989, '90 [1990], '91 [1991] and I had decided--at first I was going to move back to St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands] to be honest with you.  But in September of 1989 if you recall, Hurricane Hugo, one of the strongest storms ever come across the Caribbean and Atlantic blew St. Croix to pieces, including my condo that I had at the time, completely destroyed it.  So, not that I didn't have a place to go back to but I had been--back of my mind had been thinking about moving, giving Macon another chance to see whether I wanted to live here.  So I--that kind of settled the deal.  I wasn't moving back to St. Croix and I decided to move out of Atlanta so I came home.
Story_ID: 622298
Speaker 1: What were some of the issues that you dealt with when you, you came here, when you came back to Macon [Georgia] that you, you know talked about on your television show ['Community Forum']?  What were some of the issues?
Speaker 2: Well one of the very first issues that I took up was we had a, we had a state fair here called the Georgia State Fair.  It's run by the Exchange Club which is a civic organization.  And I remember asking were there any--and this club has been around since 1935 and I remember asking were there any African Americans in this club.  And I remember telling--being told, no.  And I said, "Well why should we then, why should the City of Macon allow this organization to exist and not to exist but to have this program on city owned property and they don't have one African American?"  I wanted to know why they didn't.  They said, "Well we don't have any because these are some of the most influential," I remember them telling me, "some of the most influential people and the city is a member of this organization."  I said, "So what you're telling me is that there are no influential African Americans in Macon, Georgia basically since 1935?  That's how long the club's been in existence.  You don't have one member of color.  So what are you telling me?"  And I remember that being--and they wanted--what they wanted, I think they were trying to get us to let them build a building in Central City Park [Macon, Georgia] and I killed that by that--asking those questions at a press conference.  That was my first froray- foray if you will into politics.  The next thing that I noticed is that I mentioned earlier that when I left here I was still riding on the back of the bus but at least the bus was running until eleven o'clock at night and the bus would run where people needed to go.  Where the bus system now had stopped running at seven o'clock in the evening, didn't run on Saturday, didn't run on Sunday and so poor people were just left to make their way the best way they could.  And here it was as a result of the 1990 census, I looked at the figures, 22 percent of the people in Macon, Georgia did not own an automobile.  So how were they to go to do their business, to go to work, to go shopping, go to church if the public transportation system was so antiquated and inadequate?  And why they told me where it was at--I said, "Why aren't we running these buses at night?"  I had a little press conference.  And they said, "Because we don't accept federal funds."  "Why don't you accept federal funds?"  "We don't accept federal funds because we would have to recognize a union."  "So rather than to get federal funds and recognize a union, you would rather have the bus system shut down at seven o'clock in the evening during the week, not operate on Saturday and not operate on Sunday and leave 22 percent of the population without transportation."  That didn't make any sense to me.  So I fought them and pushed and pushed.  Finally they accepted federal funds.  Now the buses are running 'til midnight or eleven o'clock at night, it's running on Saturday.  We still haven't gotten it on Sunday yet.  We're working on it.  And the way they had the people, where the citizens were--the conditions that the bus shelter was in where they had to wait on the bus, I thought that was inhumane.  So when I became mayor, I bought the Terminal Station [Macon, Georgia] with the idea and with the concept of moving it, moving the bus riders there, becoming a multimodal facility where they could wait inside in the warm and in the air conditioning while they're waiting on the bus and that's what we have now.
Story_ID: 622299
Speaker 1: After dealing with some of these issues, you decide to run--you don't run for mayor first.  I note you have--
Speaker 2: I ran for the state senate [Georgia State Senate] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Senate, senate, okay.
Speaker 2: In '91 [1991], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's where you said you lost by a small margin.
Speaker 2: Lost by a small margin to two men that--the current mayor and a current state senator who's thinking about running for mayor again.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what are their names?
Speaker 2: Robert Brown, Senator Robert Brown and Robert Reichert.  Both of these men had long, a long political history here.  One was on city council and the other one had been on the school board for some eight years and I came with no political record at all and came within two hundred votes of being in the, I think it was yeah, 230 votes of being in the runoff.  So I was quite encouraged by that to be honest with you.
Speaker 1: So your next campaign is for mayor?
Speaker 2: Next campaign is for mayor.  I go back in the community and I work.  I start organizing, doing community organizing work.  And my next campaign is for mayor in 1995.  I lose by 109 votes.  And then where I demanded a recount and the recount came up, I lost by thirty-two votes.  And then I sued to have those votes counted because what happened, a lot of our seniors had--when they checked their ballots, at that time we had the paper ballot, they checked, they put an X and a check in the--on the ballot and the optical scan that was to count the ballots didn't necessarily pick up those X and checks.  So I sued in Superior Court to have those ballots recounted.  I lost.  I could have appealed but my--and should have appealed but my, a lot of my supporters said, "Hey, looks--began to look like sour grapes.  Let it go.  We'll come back another day."  So I let--I got off of that lawsuit.  But I digress here just a minute and say--not digress but say that I was right on that issue.  Later the governor of the State of Washington [Christine Gregoire] sued using that same system, the optical scan system, sued to have all the votes counted by hand and she won and became governor of the State of Washington using the same system that I had challenged.  So then, so--but anyway, I let it go and went back to work in the community doing different things and still keeping my TV program ['Community Forum'] and tried to make a living to take care of myself and my family and ran for mayor again in '99 [1999] and of course the people were kind enough to give me their vote and elected me as the first African American mayor of our city.
Story_ID: 622300
Speaker 1: Who did you run against and what was your platform?
Speaker 2: Well I ran against a gentleman by the name of Buck Melton.  He had been a former mayor, was the senior partner of one of the largest law firms in the city [Macon, Georgia].  I--my, primarily my platform was about safety and about the substandard houses, that we wanted to revitalize neighborhoods.  Our neighborhoods had become you know very, very deteriorated.  A lot of deterioration had taken place in the communities. And the buses.  I wanted to get federal funds for these buses as well.  That was one of the things but primarily it was crime.  Crime was--black on black crime was very high.  The year before I came in office, we had twenty-eight homicides in the city of a hundred- at the time 106,000 people and twenty-eight homicides.  That was just, I thought it was something we could do something about and we did. We reduced that my first year in office.  I think homicide rate went from twenty-eight to sixteen, something like that which was still too many.  But those are the things that I ran on: safety, economic development and, and revitalizing our neighborhoods, substandard houses, getting rid of substandard housing, and we made good on that.
Speaker 1: (Cough).
Story_ID: 622301
Speaker 1: On the crime issue, I understand one of the first things that you did was fire the police chief [John Vasquez].  Was that in, in 2000?
Speaker 2: I did.  It was early 2000.  I did terminate the full--police chief.  Our philosophy on community policing and policing in general was just diametrically opposed to one another.  When I first came in office there was a young black man had been murdered by a police officer, shot in the back, fleeing a police officer, shot in the back.  They said they thought he had a weapon.  There was no weapon found and then they tried to discredit him, say he had drugs in his system.  Well that's not a capital offense for someone to use drugs.  So we--so I called for a full investigation by the GBI [Georgia Bureau of Investigation].  He disagreed with that, thought that they had, internally they had conducted a thorough investigation which I did not agree with because number one, you have a young black man, nineteen year old, young black lad dead, shot in the back, no weapon found anywhere around him and so what's the deal here?  So he disagreed with that and we disagreed on a couple of other things so I told him I thought it was time for him to go find another job so that I can get about the business of doing what the people had elected me to do.
Speaker 1: Who was appointed as police chief after that?
Speaker 2: I appointed an interim police chief, a major for a short period of time while I conducted a nationwide search and wound up appointing the first African American police chief that Macon [Georgia] has ever had, a young man from Washington, D.C. who had been the assistant police chief there, Rodney Monroe who is currently the chief of police of--in Charlotte, North Carolina.  And so Rodney did a great job in coming in, working with the community, working with the faith community, really implementing community oriented policing as it should be implemented, reduced our crime, made people feel good about the police force again.  Because people began, had began to see the police force in Macon as an occupying force, especially in the African American community.  And this was a majority African American city.  So if you start seeing a police force as not there to protect and serve as they say on their vehicles, but if you start seeing them there as an occupier, as the only time you see them they are locking people up or they're beating somebody over the head or they have a roadblock or some other thing, if that's the only time you see the police officer in your community that means you become somewhat hostile toward that force.  And that's what we, that's what we, that's what we had here.
Story_ID: 622302
Speaker 1: So you corrected that, the crime situation and then you receive a federal grant, the federal Hope--
Speaker 2: Hope VI grant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, which was--I ran on this saying that we're going to disperse poverty.  That cities--the new urbanism says that you don't concentrate poverty, you disperse poverty.  Well we have more public houses per capita in Macon [Georgia] than any city in America so the only way you can do that is by help of the federal government which at the time was administering Hope VI grants, so I applied.  We applied and we were, weren't successful the first time.  They told me what I--what went wrong so we reapplied and we got $21 million, gave us an opportunity to transform an entire neighborhood, eliminate a public housing facility over 235 units and to replace it with mixed income housing.  Using the model that they use in Atlanta [Georgia], the old Techwood Homes around Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], that's the model that we use and we were very successful at it but we still have a lot of work to do in that area.
Story_ID: 622303
Speaker 1: And so what ha- what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well (background noise) of course I, I you know I, I think I had a pretty successful run first term.  I established--what I noticed that a lot of people took issue with, but I established a sister city in Africa.  Well Macon [Georgia] is approximately 50--at the time 58 percent, now it's over 60 percent African American but we had sister cities in all parts of the world, in Europe and Asia and other places, but we didn't have a sister city on the African continent.  So having been a big fan and a big--I'm a big history buff so a big fan of Kwame Nkrumah, the first president of Ghana, I thought that we ought to have a--the first country in Africa to get its--gain its independence.  And of course we know our Ethiopian brothers and sisters were never colonized so them aside.  So it was the first country to receive its independence so I went looking for a sister city in Ghana and met with the ambassador in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] from Ghana and he recommended Elmina [Ghana], Cape Coast [Ghana] which of course is a place where most of the slaves were shipped from, place that President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] went when he visited down at Cape Coast, the slave dungeon there.  Our sister city is Elmina which is a twin city of Cape Coast.  They both have big slave dungeons there.  So we established a sister city there.  A lot of people didn't like the fact that we were establishing a sister city with an African country, which we did and so--and we had a lot of success our first term, eliminating a lot of substandard houses, brought grants in here to do midnight basketball with children, got the Hope VI grant and bought the Terminal Station [Macon, Georgia] to create a multimodal facility among other things.  Raised everybody's salary up, employees, some of them were working below the poverty level, got everybody above the poverty level, created the Office of Workforce Development and the youth council [Mayor's Youth Advisory Council].  And we were just busy, we had a very active four years, first four years.
Story_ID: 622304
Speaker 1: Safe school initiative, did you want to talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The Safe Schools Initiative that was my second term where I got a million dollar grant from the [U.S.] Department of Justice with a lot of latitude as to what we could do with it.  Put my chief of police [Rodney Monroe] in charge of it to work with the various precincts [in Macon, Georgia], work with the churches in the various precincts area to distribute this million dollars in a way that we would do some after school programming, some tutorial programming through the various churches working with the--under the supervision of our police department.  This is crime prevention we're working on.  And of course we had--was very successful at it.  Unfortunate--well it was a very successful endeavor and I'm very proud of the work that they did.
Story_ID: 622305
Speaker 1: There's something about criticism for some racial slur.  He's criticized for using a racial slur several times in public, confrontation to describe critics of his administration.  I don't know what that means.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I used a term that Maynard Jackson used (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh okay, we'll talk about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Let's, let's talk about your [mayoral] reelection campaign.  Since things were going so well in your first term you decide to run again and tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well, you're right.  After--you know when I came in office my very first thing that I had to deal with the first time people wanted to make our campaign very racial and that, but it wasn't.  It was a coalition of white and black voters.  And one of the first issues I had to deal with when I came in office in 2001, in 2000, 1999, 2000 was John Rocker, the infamous baseball player from Macon [Georgia] that had made some very racist statements in New York, how he didn't like Puerto Ricans and other people and so forth.  So I embraced John Rocker and saved his job basically by getting [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron to accept his apology by using my friendship with Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] taking John Rocker to Andy's House and Andy bringing Hank Aaron over to accept his apology and which kept him in baseball really.  But then after that, my second term, we had a very vigorous campaign.  I was challenged by three or four people.  We won with some 70 percent, 70 percent of the vote and we continued to move our agenda, our agenda forward in spite of some opposition, not only from external but also inside of city government.  Some city council people became very combative if you will and very--some people called them obstructionists.  I will just say they were misguided on, on some policy, some very serious policy issues.  But we, but we had a good term, a good second term as well.
Story_ID: 622306
Speaker 1: You also create the C. Jack Ellis Youth Foundation and tell me what the purpose of that was for.
Speaker 2: That was near my, the last--my last year of my last term.  I have two sons born with disability.  My son I was mentioning earlier, my oldest son that has--and I have three sons.  I only talked about my daughters [Taria Ellis and Jamillia Ellis].  I'd like to talk about my sons.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My oldest son was born with spina bifida, I talked about him, Brian [Brian Smith].  And my second son, which is my fourth child, was born with Downs syndrome [Down syndrome], Omari [Omari Ellis].  He's now twenty-one years old.  So--but because God blessed me with two children with disabilities, I thought that--and I know how difficult it can be to raise children with disabilities, the kind of care that's required.  So my foundation raised money to use my foundation to help with families and children with disability both here in America and Africa, as well as the Caribbean where I have lived.  And I'm honorary counsel for Uganda so we do some work there through my foundation as well as in Ghana where we have the sister city [Elmina, Ghana] and where I was made a chief.  So in my village I try to help the family of children with disability there as well.  So that's the purpose of the foundation.  So we of course with the fundraising the last couple, two or three years because of the recession, we haven't been able to do as much as we had hoped to do, but we've been able to do what we could do.
Story_ID: 622307
Speaker 1: And speaking about Africa, how did Uganda--how did you become a chief of Uganda?
Speaker 2: I'm a chief in Ghana.
Speaker 1: Oh Ghana (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I became a chief in Ghana
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --and, and the city where I became, where--which we had the sister city [Elmina, Ghana].
Speaker 1: The sister city, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I was--it was an honorary position but yet, one that's taken very seriously when I'm there, when I'm in Ghana.  They give me all the respect that a chief is given.  And then the honorary counsel is a position that has a little more importance.  Both of them I think are important but the honorary counsel is more important because I'm vetted by the state department [U.S. Department of State], I'm given certain rights and privileges as a diplomat.  And my job here is to represent Uganda's interest in the southeastern United States as citizens having any type of problems with visas and things of that nature.  I also have the responsibility of promoting Uganda to the world and promoting businesses both here and Uganda, getting people to invest in Uganda and getting America to important goods and services and produce and things that they--from Uganda.
Speaker 1: Now explain also about the African, let me see, Diaspora, the African Diaspora--
Speaker 2: Her-
Speaker 1: --Heritage Trail?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yes, tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well the African Diaspora Heritage Trail is a vision of the former prime minister or premier of Bermuda [HistoryMaker Ewart Brown].  What the purpose of it and I was asked to become a part of it while I was mayor [of Macon, Georgia], the purpose of it is to establish throughout the world, throughout the diaspora. From Africa, Senegal, wherever slaves came from to trace that route and to have a trail in every community with a significant African American history.  To create markers and designate certain areas where significant things happened pertaining to African Americans or people of African descent.  So that has been a very worthwhile project.  We have yearly conferences in different parts of the world.  Last--year before last we were in Tanzania and we were in Bermuda again last year and the year coming up we'll be in Nova Scotia, Canada where a lot of the slaves came from America once they were freed trying to get back to Africa.  They went as far as they could go up in Nova Scotia and Halifax [Canada] and Canada and it's a large African American--African community up there, Canadian Africans I guess up there.  So they have quite a history so we're focused on that one this year.
Story_ID: 622308
Speaker 1: So what did you accomplish in your last term that you're most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well the most important thing that we did, we built a $37 million hotel.  We had been talking about building that hotel for quite some time.  I was able to bring the forces together in a $37 million hotel which was a sizeable--a convention center hotel, which is a sizeable investment in our community.  We also built a downtown office building.  We hadn't had a new downtown office building in Macon [Georgia] in some thirty years.  We were able to get that done with a partner in the private sector.  We were able to get the driver's license bureau moved to the Terminal Station [Macon, Georgia].  And that's important--it was important to me.  When I got my driver's license as a sixteen year old, we were in this dilapidated building in Central City Park [Macon, Georgia].  When I became mayor, we were still there in that dilapidated building where people had to stand outside in the cold, the rain to wait to get a driver's license.  In the summertime they were standing in the heat and I thought that was unconscionable.  So at the Terminal Station we created a very, very nice facility there for people to get their driver's license.  I'm very, very proud of that accomplishment.  But most importantly, we engaged the youth in this community through the Mayor's Youth Advisory Council, through the youth council of the mayor's Office of Workforce Development.  We engaged young people, especially some young people with--come from quote, unquote, disadvantaged households based on income.  So we were able to give them summer jobs and year round jobs and year round counseling and tutoring so I'm very proud of the accomplishments that we have there as well.
Speaker 1: All right.  Why didn't you seek another term or were you politically, could you not seek another term at that time?
Speaker 2: Right.  Term limit, term limit we have is now chartered, you can--two consecutive terms you have to sit out a term and come back.  So I'm following my mentor and my good friend and my idol, Maynard Jackson, the first African American mayor of Atlanta [Georgia].  As you know he became mayor in 1973, served two terms.  [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young came in to serve two terms and Maynard ran again for a third term.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, so it's not unheard of.
Story_ID: 622309
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We're going to talk about this new campaign but let's talk about some other, other things.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And one is about your solidarity with Hugo Chavez. That, that seemed to be a big controversy.  Did you want to speak to that?
Speaker 2: Yes, right, really. While I was mayor [of Macon, Georgia] I served as the international affairs committee for the National Conference of Black Mayors and served as the vice president for the World Conference of Mayors for tourism and economic development.  Well as we have members of our organization in the world conference of mayors from around the world, that President Chavez had made it possible for a lot of these cities and various countries, especially developing countries to do some development that they would not have been ordinarily able to do because he made resources available from his vast oil wealth that Venezuela is blessed with.  So our thing was to always look at how can we eliminate poverty, ignorance and disease?  So what I said was because he was willing to help us in Senegal, willing to help the mayor in England, in London and was able to help mayors in Jackson, Mississippi as well as the Kennedy son [Joseph P. Kennedy II] in New York [sic. Massachusetts] provide heating oil for poor people.  And I made a statement and I stand by that statement to this day that I stand in solidarity with anyone who is committed to and willing to work with us to eliminate poverty, ignorance and disease.  Those are the three things that's effecting the world, especially the third world countries and developing countries more than anything else, poverty, ignorance and disease.  So whoever is willing to stand with us, whoever is willing to standby to help and to assist or to lead in those efforts then I stand in full solidarity with them.  After all, President Hugo Chavez is a duly elected member of his country, elected democratically and we are a trading partner with Venezuela.  They have--they own two of the world's largest oil refineries are owned by them and they're located in this country, one on St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands] and one in Houston [Texas].  The Venezuelan oil company [Petroleos de Venezuela, S.A.] owns all of the CITGO [CITGO Petroleum Corporation] gas companies.  So--and we have five flights a day from Atlanta [Georgia], Delta Air Line [Delta Air Lines, Inc.] flies here.  This is a duly democratically elected government with a country that we have diplomatic relationships with and one that we have trading relations with.  So why then would we be afraid to have a relationship with the president of a country that we have all these relationships with?  So I stand by my, my, my, my comment.
Story_ID: 622310
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about--well is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to talk about up to this point?
Speaker 2: Well you know I just want people to know that, that, that this has not been an easy challenge as an African American, a first African American mayor of this city [Macon, Georgia].  And I was warned of that, that the expectations would be very high from the African American community and that the anxiety would be very high in the white community.  Remember we're coming from, given the history of our city so I was prepared for that.  But I wasn't prepared for some of the hostility, some of the racism that I encountered.  The very first day I was in office, either someone threw a brick through my window or attempted to put a bullet through the window.  I have the picture of that.  But fortunate the bullet--the window was bulletproof and it couldn't penetrate totally.  But--and to go out to your car after--I mean I've been in office two or three days.  I go out and there's a note on my car with racial epithets, epithets and racial slurs and things of that nature.  So you know I had thought that we had moved a little further than that but it just led me to--I never gave up hope, never lost hope that we could get to that place, the beloved community, that we could get there.  But what it proved to me that we had a long way to go, that we weren't there as of yet and we're still not there.
Story_ID: 622311
Speaker 1: There are, are other discriminations that we see going on in different cities.  After 9/11 [September 11, 2001], can you talk to the fact, I don't know how many Muslims you have living in this area.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But can you talk to--talk about that?
Speaker 2: Readily.  We have quite a few in this area and they're all welcome.  I have a great deal of respect for every great religion in the world, Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity and Islam as well as maybe some others that I'm not aware of.  But I have a great deal of respect for all of them.  And what I wanted to do after 9/11 to make sure that they understood with our chief of police, Rodney Monroe at the time, make sure that they knew and that we wanted to ratchet down if you will some of the rhetoric that was going on here that everyone with the name of Mohammed or Abraham or what have you, is not necessarily bin Laden's [Osama bin Laden] chief lieutenant.  And some of that began to bubble up here and we wanted to squelch that, put that to rest.  And I think we did a pretty good, you know a pretty good job of it, but we still had some of it.  As a matter of fact, I converted to Islam during my second term [as mayor of Macon, Georgia] and I'm sure you're aware of that, during my second term and some of the hostility, some of the venom that was directed my way.  And--but what I say to that about that is this: I was a Baptist before I was a Methodist.  I was as Methodist before I was a non-denomination, before I was a Baptist again.  So one thing about this country that I--every time I took the oath of office be it when I was in office or when I was taking the oath to reenlist as a soldier is that what that oath says is that I am prepared to defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies foreign or domestic.  And in that Constitution the things that are so near and dear to me, had a lot of things but the four that's so near and dear to me: the freedom of religion, the freedom of the press, freedom of speech and the freedom to assemble with whoever you want to assemble with.  Those four things we should all be prepared to die for, people to have their freedom to express themselves religiously however they want, people to say what they want to say and be with who they want to say and to have a free press too.  And so I never equivocated if you will from that.  So--and one's relationship with their god is such a personal, such a personal thing and that's where it should stay.  It should stay right there, it should be personal.
Story_ID: 622312
Speaker 1: So now you're going to embark on your third campaign.  Who is, who is the present mayor of Macon [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Robert Reichert.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was my successor and hopefully he will be my predecessor.
Speaker 1: Tell me how you're preparing and what your platform is for this new term?
Speaker 2: Well of course we have some different challenges.  Some challenges are old, some are new.  We have constantly lost population in this city over the last forty years.  It's 1970, since integration we've constantly had an out migration of people, primarily Caucasians. So which means that a lot of the black people have relocated from what were traditionally black communities into what the--because there were better houses, there were better streets just by virtue of white people lived there before.  So some of the places that black people have migrated from are in very, very bad state of repair.  So we are advocating using the model that was started in Eastern Europe and kind of perfected in this country in Youngstown, Ohio and that is to take a lot of those areas, bulldozing them, get rid of all the dilapidated houses that's left behind, turning them into green space, community gardens and things of that nature.  That's one thing that we're working on.  Of course the crime situation, still must--crime is up again in our city.  We got to make this city safe.  And thirdly and definitely not lastly, jobs.  We got to have jobs in the town for the people.  And education is something that we all have to work on at all times.  We have too many of our children, especially people of--children of color that's performing below the state level, below--not doing as well in their educational attainment.  We have to address that.  Even though the mayor doesn't have direct responsibility but the mayor has a responsibility to work with the school board superintendents and the community at large to make sure that a spirit of learning and that a--the atmosphere of learning is alive and well in our city.
Speaker 1: So your campaign has started here--this is--we're in your head- headquarters here in Macon.  Okay.  And so when is your--are you going to have debates and is all of that scheduled or worked out yet?
Speaker 2: Hopefully we will have debates, we will have forums.  We want to get before as many people as we possibly can.  We have one of--I have a very, very trusted and a very capable campaign team of young African American men and women as well as white men and women that are helping me in this effort.  And we are obviously on the road to victory.  If we didn't feel that way we wouldn't be here.  We would be wasting their time and they wouldn't--and I wouldn't be wasting my time but--because this election is about the future of this city.  It's not about me.  It's not about them.  They understand that.  But I need their expertise in order to get elected and we need people to contribute, we need people to volunteer.  But it's not about us, it's about the people that we endeavor to serve and that is to make this city a--the most livable city in America.  That when young men and women finish college, when they go away from here to go to college or the ones that go to college here, that they know that there's a place here for them.  Not only is there a place for them to live, but there's a place for them to be prosperous and make a difference in the community and that's what we're about, nothing more, nothing less.
Story_ID: 622313
Speaker 1: Has anything changed as far as who is eligible to, to vote for the mayor [of Macon, Georgia]?  Do you have to live in the city proper (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You have to live in the, always have to live in the city limits.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the corporate limits.  You have to live in the city limits in order to vote for, for the mayor.  Have to be a registered voter living in this corporate (unclear).
Speaker 1: So has the, has it changed because you were talking about how some of the people, even black people moving out of the city to the suburbs.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Are white people moving into the city?  You know--
Speaker 2: Not--some.  Some (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) is there much of a change is my question.
Speaker 2: Not much of a change.  We've had, we probably lost six thousand residents over the last ten years.  But before that we lost twelve thousand the year before, ten years before that fifteen thousand.  So the trend continues an out migration of white residents and some middle class, upper middle class blacks have out migrated as well because of housing stock.  But then we see some in migration, some infill houses that we've done, people have began--but it's not enough to, to, to be a zero sum game if you will.
Story_ID: 622314
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that we have not talked about--I don't want to miss anything--that you would like to talk about before we--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --go into the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you know, you know, my youngest son, I have an eight year old son too.  I don't want to miss Justin [Justin Ellis].  Justin David, he was born 2002, he will be nine this year.  As it turned out--God is always sovereign.  He knows exactly what he's doing at all times.  I have two daughters [Taria Ellis and Jamillia Ellis] I spoke out.  They--and of my sons, my oldest son [Brian Smith] of course he is not able to reproduce because of his condition and Omari [Omari Ellis] with Downs syndrome [Down syndrome] not able to reproduce.  So the only--my eight year old son is the only one that will be able to carry on my name if you will.  And I'm very proud of all of my children from the oldest one that was born with spina bifida then confined to a wheelchair all of his life and had both of his legs amputated because of his condition, to my youngest boy, youngest son Justin who lives in Atlanta [Georgia] and a very smart boy, attends Atlanta Public Schools and doing quite well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you want to say that you divorced from your first wife and then you're married again?
Speaker 2: I married again, yes.
Speaker 1: And tell me your wife's name that you're--
Speaker 2: Tishangi Ellis [Tishangi Bennett Ellis], my current wife.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she is--tell me about her.
Speaker 2: She's a--she has a Ph.D. from Nova University [Nova Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, Florida].  She's a--graduated cum laude from Spelman University [sic. Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], graduated with honors from Georgia Tech university [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] as an engineer.  She's very concerned about people and I think she will be a good teammate if you will to help me carry out my duties as mayor of the City of Macon [Georgia].
Story_ID: 622315
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, is there something that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No, because when I look back over my life no--one word comes to mind, blessed.  Blessed, I mean given my start in life, given that little shack that I was born out on Chambers Road on January the 6th in 1946 on a cold winter night, where the wind was probably whipping through, through the house with the cardboard trying to keep it out, born at home by a midwife, coming from that place, thirteen children of a subsistence farmer, son of a farmer, sharecropper [William Ellis], coming from that, even missed the mark and the gentleman that told me I, that I couldn't come back to school, maybe he did me a favor.  Because it forced me out of Macon [Georgia] and it forced me, not forced me, gave me an opportunity to see some parts of the world that perhaps I would have never had an opportunity to see before.  I had never thought about being in the [U.S.] military but gave me an opportunity to finish my education, to get a college degree.  And what I did for Mr. Martin, I held a lot of bitterness in my heart toward him for many, many years.  But what I--when I came back to Macon, I made amends with him.  I met him, he was still alive and forgave him in my heart and publicly.  And I even endeavored to name a street in his honor before I left office.  Unfortunate, some of the paperwork wasn't done exactly right, we weren't able to do it.  But I will assure you that when I return to office I'll make sure that the street of the high school that I attended Ballard Hudson High School [Ballard Hudson Senior High School, Macon, Georgia], that that street, Anthony Road, should bear the name of R.J. Martin because Dr. Martin was a disciplinarian and he cared about all the children at Ballard Hudson.  He cared about me.  He had a--I don't like the way he showed his concern.  At the time I didn't but as it turned out, I turned out all right.  I survived two years in Vietnam and I mean, not just in Vietnam but in the jungles of Vietnam fighting.  I was wounded, didn't get severely hurt and fifty-eight thousand names on that wall up in Washington, D.C. [Vietnam Veterans Memorial], of young men that died in Vietnam and I'm standing, had an opportunity to become the mayor of my city, the first African American to hold that post.  So I am extremely, extremely blessed.  And God blessed me with five beautiful children although two of them [Brian Smith and Omari Ellis] have disabilities, lifelong disabilities.  But I love them and I think God knew exactly what he was doing.  And I am, I'm encouraged about the future not only for my children but I'm encouraged about the future of all children in this city and that's why I'm running for mayor again.
Story_ID: 622316
Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: Well you know sometimes I don't care too much what people say.  But if, but if I wanted, if I just I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Okay, well let me ask this question.  What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I want my legacy to be that I tried to help people, that I tried to make life better for people in this city, my hometown.  That everything I did every day was about that, that it wasn't about me.  I was born poor.  I'll probably die poor.  Most of my life has been in public service, first twenty-one years as a military person, almost twenty-one years a military person, working for the [U.S.] Census Bureau for three years and serving as the mayor for eight years.  All of these positions don't pay a lot of money.  So this is not about money for me, it's always been about service, service to others, making things better, giving back.  And that's what I've always--that's how I've always operated.  And so I want people to say that he tried to help, that he used his God given ability that he developed the talents that God gave him to the extent that he could share with other people and make things happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I'd like to thank you very much for taking the time out of your very busy schedule to share your story.  This is for the future generations when we're no longer here and our children's children will be able to hear the story of how the black, first black mayor of Macon [Georgia] made it through all the hard times coming up.  So thank you very much you know for taking this time to tell your story.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.  It couldn't have happened on a better day, Good Friday (laughter).
Speaker 1: Exactly (laughter).
Story_ID: 622317
Speaker 1: Me and President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].  That was in Washington, D.C. shortly after I was elected.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 1: That was--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Did you describe this?
Speaker 2: No, that's a picture--that's me and Oprah, Oprah Winfrey while she visit--when she visited our city.  I'm presenting her a key to the city.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: You got it upside down.
Speaker 1: Yeah it's better for us to capture it.
Speaker 2: Okay. Okay.  That's me and my siblings and I was too young to eat watermelon but the rest of them are eating watermelon.  And that's Gary [ph.] over there, the very little white guy over there, that's Gary (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's me being greeted with some Japanese--by some Japanese children and workers in, in Japan.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: That's me in my chief ceremonial clothes in Ghana.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: That's me doing what I like to do most and that is to visit schools and read to children.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my then four children, my oldest daughter [Taria Ellis], my other--my oldest son [Brian Smith] and Omari [Omari Ellis] and my other daughter [Jamillia Ellis].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Me and a picture of [HistoryMaker] President Barak Obama when I was advising him on something (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on.  Next.
Speaker 2: That's the first day of 2000 when I began my journey as the first African American mayor of the City of Macon [Georgia], new beginning (background noise).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: That's me taking the oath of office in 1999.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on, hold on, hold on.  Next.
Speaker 2: That's me thanking our first African American chief of police.  He's getting ready to leave us to Richmond, Virginia and I'm giving him a plaque and thanking him for his service to our citizens.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: Rodney Monroe.
Speaker 1: That's me in my military uniform prior to retiring.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) you said you didn't have that, but that's your farewell when you left (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's me in Vietnam and why they make us shave in Vietnam, I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That was my senior high school picture when I was graduating high school [Ballard Hudson Senior High School, Macon, Georgia] at nineteen years old.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: That's not the same picture is it?
Speaker 2: No.  That's my junior high school picture.  I was a junior in high school.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Two more.
Speaker 1: That's with our, with our spokesperson for Macon's tourism, Little Richard, home boy, born and raised in Macon, myself and Little Richard.  I don't know who the other guy is.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Don't take it out yet.
Speaker 1: Oh that's his movie producer in Hollywood.  That was in Hollywood, California [Hollywood, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: That's me and my son Omari, the one I told you had Downs syndrome [Down syndrome].  Was born, weighed less than two pounds when he was born.  Look at him now.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the last one.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  He's gotten big (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Man, I didn't know that could happen.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of the--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That is a picture of the window that was shot, someone shot in the, threw a brick threw it or something my first day in office.  Some of our mean citizens wanted to send a message I guess.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You want to use that one?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we got one more.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  His farewell celebration when he left office in 2007.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead and describe it.
Speaker 2: That's a, a program that the citizens saw fit to honor me when I was leaving office with the farewell cele- celebration.
