Story_ID: 31495
Speaker 1: My name is Regina Williams, and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer today is Scott Stearns.  And I just wanted to start by telling you a little bit more about the project.  It was launched in 1999.  The headquarters for the project located right now in Chicago, in downtown Chicago.  The program is the brainchild of Julieanna Richardson, who loves the theater and has her undergrad in theater, but she's a Harvard trained attorney and now public historian who's helping to preserve the history of African Americans by collecting the stories of people who are well known, and some who are not so well known.  So far The HistoryMakers' project has collected about 1,000 interviews.  And the goal is to collect 5,000, a total of 5,000 over the next five years.  And so it's quite am ambitious project, but I think it's been very successful so far.  So thank you very much for allowing us to come into your office here at NASA.  I just want to begin by doing some slating and to ask first of all if you would please state your name, first, middle and last and spell each one of those for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Julian Manly Earls, J-U-L-I-A-N, M-A-N-L-Y, E-A-R-L-S.
Speaker 1: And Dr. Earls, would you please us the location for this interview, including the address?
Speaker 2: NASA Glen Research Center, 21000 Brook Park Road, Cleveland, Ohio 44135.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And today's date?  Would you state that for record?
Speaker 2: It's January 10, 2005.
Story_ID: 31496
Speaker 1: And as part of the slating, we also like to ask what we call People Magazine-ish type questions, and they may seem silly, but we do want serious answers for each of these questions.  I'd like to ask first of all if you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Great.  And do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Lemon meringue pie (laughter).
Speaker 1: How about a favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: I like Los Angeles, California, primarily because my son is there.  And when we're vacationing we're able to enjoy getting, being with a family member as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite season of the year?
Speaker 2: I enjoy the spring.
Story_ID: 31497
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.  Now, as I said earlier, we don't have a script, but the interview is arranged in three sections.  And in this first section, we'd like to talk about your early life.  So I'd like to ask first of all if you could please state the names of your parents?
Speaker 2: My mother is Ida Deberry Earls.  My father was James Earls.
Speaker 1: And her maiden name was Barry?
Speaker 2: Deberry.
Speaker 1: Deberry.
Speaker 2: Deberry.
Speaker 1: And how is that spelled, please?
Speaker 2: D-E-B-E-R-R-Y.
Speaker 1: And your father's name again is?
Speaker 2: James Earls.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Margarettsville, North Carolina.  My father was born in Rocky Mount, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Do you remember their birthdates?
Speaker 2: My dad was born in 1922 and my mother was born in 1924.
Speaker 1: So both parents are children of the South?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember your grandparents and even great grandparents?  How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: I remember my grandmother, in particular, my mother's mother, all right.  Her name was Julia which accounts for my name being Julian.  So I remember her quite well.  She used to stay with us for a period of time.  She would also stay with my mother's sisters who were alive at the time, and after her husband, my grandfather, had passed.  And I never knew my grandfather on my mother's side.  After he passed, my grandmother would spend time with each one of the daughters, and finally, in later years, she decided that staying with my mother was where she wanted to be.  So she ceased the rotation, primarily because her grandchildren were there with my mother.  So we just, just really came, became so close.  My father's parents, I remember them quite well because they used to come visit us from North Carolina.  And my grandfather's name was Lawrence, and my grandmother's name was Betty.  And we used to go during the summer and spend time on the farm.  They were sharecroppers in Carolina.  So us, my brothers and sisters and I used to periodically go spend summers with them.
Speaker 1: Okay, you talk about your grandparents visiting the family home, your immediate family home, now where was that home?
Speaker 2: That was in Portsmouth, Virginia.
Speaker 1: In Virginia.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you also mentioned that your paternal grandparents were sharecroppers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And we're a little bit removed from that era--
Speaker 2: Yes, we are.
Speaker 1: --in American history, but can you just explain a little bit about how sharecropping worked in their lives?  You said you visited that farm sometimes.
Speaker 2: Well, yes, and as a youngster, I didn't quite really understand it because I thought that it was, the farm belonged to them.  But they essentially lived on someone else's property, and they would raise the crops and harvest the crops and so forth.  But it was only as an adult that I came to realize that they were working on land and tilling the soil and raising crops on land that they never really would own.  And, but as a youngster I never really noticed that there was that kind of environment or those were the conditions under which they were sharecropping.
Speaker 1: So, it's often presented, sharecropping, that is, as a difficult way to make a living.  And some of the studies that I read of the Reconstruction period, historians often refer to it as the new slavery because it's hard or it was hard, they often say, for people to get out of debt and as you say, become landowners.  Did you have a sense that it was a difficult life?
Speaker 2: I really did, but it's something very interesting about grandparents.  I think grandparents make sure that they shield grandchildren from whatever problems and issues there were.  So we, when we visited, we never got a sense that there were problems or issues associated.  We knew there was a lot of hard work and that they worked quite hard.  But they always shielded us, took care of us and made sure that there were no problems that came to the attention of the children who were visiting them when we would go on the farm.
Story_ID: 31498
Speaker 1: Okay.  But there's another question that we like to ask too and that deals with the sights, sounds and smells that remind you of childhood.  And if we could stay with that farming community for a while, what are some of the pleasant things, sights, sounds and smells that remind you of that sharecropping community that you found so nurturing?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you what.  We, we used to ride the mules.  And that was just fun to me, all right.  And then there are the smells of the farms, out in the barnyard and so forth.  Some people might have found it offensive, but to us, I think the relationship that, that we sort of grasped is that those smells, those sounds were sounds of being in an environment where you were loved and where you were protected.  So even though some people might say a smelly old farm, why would that generate pleasant memories for you?  But it was memories of, of my grandparents.  So that's what almost brings a tear to your eye, but a warm feeling when you think about those things.
Speaker 1: Okay, and are there sounds, in a farming community that we might be able to relate to--
Speaker 2: Well, just--
Speaker 1: --as city folk?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the sounds of the animals, but then the sounds of the tractor too because there were tractors on those farms too.  And as a matter of fact, I can remember as a youngster for Christmas, some of the Christmas toys we would get would be the little miniature tractors, and we could relate those with the tractors that were on the farm.
Speaker 1: And those were your paternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: They were my paternal grandparents?
Speaker 1: And how about your mother's parents?  You said you especially remember your maternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I don't remember my grandfather at all.  My grandfather passed in the early years, but I remember my grandmother.  And like I said, she was just, just so very, very special.  And she always, after I was named after her, she told my mother, "That boy is gonna be a doctor", and before--she died when I was six years old, and I really remember that just like it was yesterday.  But when I finally went on to school and got my doctor's degree, my mother reminded that my grandmother had predicted that I would be a doctor, and we were laughing because I said, well, Mom, she probably thought I was gonna be a real doctor rather than a Ph.D.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: Ph.D.s don't count for a doctor?
Speaker 2: Well, what I, we, there's a joke that goes on, is that the M.D.s are the real doctors and the Ph.D.s are pseudo.  And I, my son tries to remind me on occasion.  He's an M.D. So my response to him is when you repay me the funds that I invested in your becoming an M.D., then I'll allow you to call yourself a real doctor, but until then I'll consider myself the real doctor in the family (laughter).
Story_ID: 31499
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can we talk a little bit more about the household of your growing up years, where your maternal grandmother was a member of that family unit.  I wanted to ask also about siblings, other children in the family, and if you would please share their names in birth order, and if you wouldn't mind spelling their names--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --for the record too.
Speaker 2: The oldest brother, James Roger Earls, J-A-M-E-S, R-O-G-E-R, E-A-R-L-S.  He's the oldest brother.  He's living in Portsmouth, Virginia now.  He's retired as a pastor, okay.  The next brother just older than I, Raymond McCoy Earls, 	R-A-Y-M-O-N-D, M-C-C-O-Y, E-A-R-L-S.  He lives in Lithonia, Georgia, and is retired from the Navy.  Then I'm the one that's next in line.  The brother that was younger than me was Haywood Earls, H-A-Y-W-O-O-D, E-D-W-A-R-D, Earls, E-A-R-L-S, of course.  He died five years ago.  He was a pastor in San Antonio, Texas.  The youngest boy is Robert Lawrence Earls, Lawrence, of course, being after my grandfather, R-O-B-E-R-T, L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, E-A-R-L-S.  He's a pastor in Virginia.  His church is the St. John Baptist Church in Virginia.  My oldest sister was Cleo Earls, C-L-E-O, Earls.  She died seven years ago, and she was in Detroit [Michigan].  And the younger sister, Shirley Earls, S-H-I-R-L-E-Y, Earls, and her last name now is Bishop, B-I-S-H-O-P.  And she lives in Portsmouth, Virginia now.
Speaker 1: Did I count seven?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, full house?
Speaker 2: Full house.
Speaker 1: All right, and can you tell me what that was like, growing up in such a big family?
Speaker 2: Well, there was such a distribution in ages that when I as growing up, our oldest sister had left home and married and had moved to Detroit.  So there's not a lot of memories of her being in the house that long, but I remember that she was very, very protective.  So we were under her care because as my mother and father both worked, she would be the one there to make sure that we did the chores and did what we were supposed to do.  My oldest brother was my hero because I remember when he went off and fought in the Korea, the war at the, I guess they don't call it a war, Korean Conflict, I think is what they call it.  But at any rate, I can remember his coming home in that Army uniform and I mean he was spitting polished and just, just worshiped him as the oldest brother.  The brother that was older than me, he's eighteen months older than I, and we were in high school and shared some high school experiences together.  And when he left high school, he immediately went into the Navy.  And I can remember when I drove him down to the recruitment location where he was going to leave and head off.  They put him on the bus, and I must have followed the bus almost to Richmond, Virginia crying because he was leaving home.  The brother that's next youngest to me, Haywood, we just had fun in the household because then, when my brother just older than I left, I became the big brother in the household to Haywood and to Robert.  And the younger brother, the youngest brother, he's sort of the magnet that pulls the family back together to Virginia, and if there's one brother that's more like my mother who was really sort of the magnet that pulled all the family from North Carolina together, he is like that now.  And he just has her mannerisms and people gravitate to him.  But growing up in the family, it was just, just fun.  I mean we were always there for each other, close knit family and still maintain that closeness today.
Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Earls, you're sort of in the middle--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of the seven?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: No middle child syndrome?  And you describe your childhood like it was pretty special?
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: It was all right.  And I was the first one to attend college.  And so I got a lot of support from my older brothers and sisters because they felt that it was something that I should do and were willing to help out financially if I did that.  But after I went, then my brothers that followed, they went off to college as well.
Speaker 1: Okay
Story_ID: 31500
Speaker 1: I wanted to stay with the topic of education for a while, but I did wanna ask about your parents' employment.  You said both your mother and father worked?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell me a little bit about the work that they did in Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father [James Earls] worked for the railroad.  He was a chauffeur essentially because he would transfer the crews from Portsmouth, Virginia to wherever the crew needed to go.  And he would be called any hour of the night if the crew needed transportation.  My mother [Ida Deberry Earls] was a domestic, but she also was a seamstress.  And she taught all of us, the boys and the girls, we really need to, needed to learn to sew in that household because we had to take care of any number of things ourselves.  As a matter of fact, one of my jobs during the summer and the Christmas holidays, I worked as a tailor in a men's shop.  And my wife's first maternity dress, I made my wife's first maternity dress.  But it was those kinds of skills that I learned from my mother.  And so between the number of things that she would do in terms of being, she was a domestic worker and seamstress, she would be out during the day with my father working and my sister would be there to take care of us.
Speaker 1: So you said, your mother did day work?
Speaker 2: She did day work.
Speaker 1: She didn't have to stay overnight?
Speaker 2: No, she did not stay overnight.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So can you talk about some of the special occasions in that household?  Holidays, what were those like?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, there was absolutely nothing like Christmas.  That, I mean that was very, very special.  In fact, my oldest son [Julian Earls Jr.] loves to go back and collect toys from my generation, and you go to his home in Macon [Georgia] and you would think you could walk back into time because they're the kinds of toys that, that I had when I was growing up, my brothers and I.  So Christmas was always very special.  Thanksgiving, again, a time for family gathering and there's no one in the universe that could cook like my mother could cook.  And so that was always a special occasion, and everybody came home for that.  No matter where they were, they would come back home for Thanksgiving.
Story_ID: 31501
Speaker 1: Another thing that was special too was we sat down and had family meals which is almost a lost art, if you will, in terms of the family gatherings.  And my parents were not formally educated.  My mother [Ida Deberry Earls] only went through the eighth grade and my father [James Earls] through the fourth.  But they created an environment that was conducive to our learning.  We grew up in church, the Pentecostal church.  So that background helped in terms of the educational aspects as well because we went to church morning, noon and night on Sundays.  And there was no such thing as a nursery for the youngsters in my church.  So we had to sit and learn to pay attention and learn to be quiet, even when we couldn't understand what was being said.  But that kind of self discipline, I believe, is what helped in our school and in education throughout the process, because you learned how to pay attention.  You learned how to be respectful.  And I think those things served us quite well.
Speaker 2: Now, when you mentioned the Pentecostal church and sitting still and paying attention, it sort of runs (laughter) counter to some of the images that I have in my mind of the Pentecostal services that I witnessed, that I recall, I'm Baptist (laughter).  So can you tell us a little bit about the Pentecostal church that you attended and the order of worship, the nature of the service itself and how the members of the community were involved in church activities?
Speaker 1: Well, my church was Pentecostal, and that was, it was lively.  There's no question about it and very emotional.  But the sermons were very, I call it "infotainment" because they were informative and entertaining at the same time.  And as a matter of fact, the pastor of our church pastured, Bishop Twine, until he was ninety-three years old.  And one of the things that we did, is we were very active in the church as youngsters.  There were the Christmas programs where you had to learn how to say recitations and participate in the play.  You were on the Junior usher board.  You were on the, in the junior choir, and those kinds of activities had the young people in the church actively involved.  Every third Sunday was Youth Sunday, so we were the ones who were the ushers and sang in the choirs on those Sundays.  And it was just, the church was our family.  And there was no question that the neighborhood was also part of the family because if we stepped out of line anywhere within our neighborhood, it was not only our parents that would, in fact, pull us back into line, but any of the neighbors would do so as well.  But that church environment really, really served us quite well.  There's no question about that.
Speaker 2: And what was the name of the church again?
Speaker 1: It was Union Holiness Pentecostal Church.
Speaker 2: And Bishop?
Speaker 1: Bishop Twine.
Speaker 2: Twine, okay.  Is the church still in existence?
Speaker 1: The church is still in existence, still in Portsmouth, Virginia.  So periodically, when I go back home, I will stop and go over and visit it, okay.  None of my family members are still members of that church, but my brother is a pastor of a church that's about six blocks away from where we grew up.
Story_ID: 31502
Speaker 1: Now, you said that was an important part of your education as a child.  But I'd like also to talk a little bit more about the formal schooling.  Do you remember your first elementary school, kindergarten?
Speaker 2: I remember my first elementary school.  It was on Chestnut Street.  My first grade teacher was Ms. Richardson, and Ms. Richardson seemed to develop, recognize some kind of talent and skill and competence in myself that I didn't recognize.  And she thought that I had the ability such that I should be able to skip the first grade.  And she tested me and managed to make sure that I skipped first grade.  And I remember my fifth grade teacher was Ms. McKnight.  She was the one who made me fall in love with mathematics because she used to play math games with us and come in with puzzles and brain teasers and made it fun.  My eighth grade teacher was Ms. Louise Carly Brown.  She was an English teacher and in those days, she would have us diagramming English sentences.  And I don't even know if they still diagram sentences in classrooms anymore, but I remember the fun I had in her classroom.  And then, of course, when I got to high school, there was my algebra teacher, and I remember my shop teacher, Mr. Vick.  I remember the principal of the teachers, Mr. Horton and all of those teachers were special in a way.  I remember my geometry teacher, Ms. M. B. Garrett.  In my first geometry class, she asked a question, "Class, if you had to find the center of this rectangular ceiling and you didn't have any measurement instruments, how would you find it?"  And I remembered from shop classes, when we had to put wood on a lathe, we would take the rectangular piece of wood and mark an "x" on it, going from each diagonal and where they crossed, that was the center.  So I told her, one line from this corner to that one, this line to the other one and where they cross, that would be the center.  And she said, "Very well, young man, by the end of this class, you will say where the lines intersect rather than where they cross."  But that's, and we had math and science conferences.  In the state of Virginia, there was competition among all the black high schools within the state, and you would start in your school by taking tests in algebra, geometry, whatever.  And then you would go from being successful there.  You'd go to regional competition and go to state competition.  And you would actually compete with all the schools in those disciplines, and you could win certificates.  I have certificates that I'd won in geometry and algebra and then, of course, there were the science fairs as well.  But there was that healthy competition among the schools that, that I don't even think that exists even in Virginia to this day.
Speaker 1: Can you just give us the names of all those various schools that you mentioned, the elementary, junior and high?
Speaker 2: Okay, it was Chestnut Street was the elementary school.  Riddick B. Weaver [Riddick-Weaver] was the junior high school.  I. C. Norcum in Portsmouth, Virginia, N-O-R-C-U-M [sic, I. C. Norcom High School], was where I went for my freshman year.  And then we moved out in the county, and I graduated from Crestwood High School in Chesapeake, Virginia.  And then integration came on board, and my high school in Chesapeake, Virginia was converted to a junior high school because then the predominantly white high schools became the high schools once integration came.
Story_ID: 31503
Speaker 1: Okay, can you talk about the Jim Crowe school days and then talk about post-integration and how that went in Virginia?  You talked about the competitions between, the math and science competitions, between students at the black high schools.  Did you have a sense when you were in that segregated environment that there was anything wrong with that?  Or did the students seem to really thrive in that environment?
Speaker 2: I really think, no, not think, I know the students thrived in that environment because we never thought that we were inferior in any dimension.  We took the math courses, the science courses, the English, the history, the foreign language courses.  We had teachers, all of whom had degrees and their--I do understand that for black teachers in the South, the only way you could teach was to validate that you, in fact, had a college degree.  I'm not sure how true it is, but they said for many white teachers, they could, in fact, be teachers in the schools and they did not have to meet those same kind of stringent requirements.  But I do know that we had teachers who not only looked at us as students, but teachers who felt that they had a personal investment in our success and in our future.  The principals of the schools were individuals that would make sure that there was the right kind of environment that was created.  They knew the students by name, and if you were not performing, often the principal would be the one that would call your home and talk to your parents and so forth.  So it was, it was a very, very special environment.  As a matter of fact, my high school, Crestwood High School, in Chesapeake, Virginia, had the highest percentages of graduating seniors in Chesapeake, in that county going on to college after graduation.  So the education I believe we received was really second to none.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you said that integration came to that community.  Did that come as a result of court action or any cases filed by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or was it voluntary?
Speaker 2: I'm not really sure--well, I'm sure it was the result of court action, all right.  And what happened then was many of the black principals lost their positions and when integration came, they would end up being the assistant principals rather than principals of the high schools, ok.
Speaker 1: And what year was that when the high school was integrated?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I finished high school in '64 [1964], I mean in 1960, and the schools were still segregated then.  So it had to be the mid to late '60s [1960s] when they became integrated.
Speaker 1: Well, we're coming to the end of this segment.  But I just wonder if you could spend a few seconds talking about your graduation from high school and how that felt.  Did it feel like the end or just the beginning of a new era, as far as schooling was concerned?
Speaker 2: It was probably a combination of both, but I will say this to you.  That was very special to me.  I have not missed a single high school reunion.  I have not been to any of my college class reunions.  But those friendships that I made in high school are friendships that have lasted through the years.  And I remember the high school commencement exercise, and I remember just how it was at the high school.  We did not have it offsite at a different location.  And the teachers, even to this day, those teachers who are still in the area, when we go back for our high school reunions, we invite the teachers that are still around to come back and join us for the reunions.
Story_ID: 31504
Speaker 1: Dr. Earls, you told us at the end of the last segment that you enjoyed your high school years and that you looked forward to college.  You'd begun to make those plans by the start of your senior year.  So, can you tell me what colleges you were thinking of then and how you decided to attend a university in Virginia?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I decided that I wanted to go to North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and major in electrical engineering.  That was the only college that I considered.  We had assembly programs as high school students, and I remember the assembly program where this immaculately dressed man came in as one of the presenters.  And I raised my hand and ask, "What do you do?" and he said he was an electrical engineer.  And I said, well, how much money do you make?  And this was in 1956, '57 [1957].  He said $200.00 a week.  And I said, that's what I want to do.  Now, this was probably my junior year in high school.  So I decided I wanted to be an electrical engineer.  And my sole goal was to go to North Carolina A&T, but I could not afford to go away to college.  So I ended up going to Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia], and they didn't have an engineering school.  So I ended up majoring in physics as a result of a conversation with my major professor at that time who turned out to be Dr. Roy Alexander Woods who became like a second father to me.  But I decided I was gonna make myself an electrical engineer.  By going to Norfolk, I was going to take all the math in the math department and go over to the industrial arts department and take all the courses for being an electrician and through that combination was gonna make myself an electrical engineer.  And I ended up taking a physics course, and after the first test, he called me in, Dr. Woods, and said, "What do you plan to do?"  And when I told him my plans, he said, "Well, Little Brother, if you major in physics, you will find that physicists work as engineers quite often.  But engineers do not work as physicists.  So if you major in physics, that will give you more choices than even if you were an electrical engineer."  And I said, "Okay."  And that's how I ended up majoring in physics.
Speaker 1: And (unclear) is in Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 2: It's in Norfolk.
Speaker 1: Now, is that a historically black college?
Speaker 2: It's an historically black college, and at the time, it was a division of Virginia State College [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] in the early days.  But you would spend two years at Norfolk State and then transfer to Virginia State College in Petersburg.  But when I started at Norfolk State, it had become a four-year institution.  And another thing that was interesting about that, I remember just like it was yesterday.  I was out playing in my front yard in Portsmouth, Virginia.  My mother came home from one of her jobs, and the newspapers that day had an article on their breaking ground to build Norfolk State University, Norfolk State College at the time in Norfolk, Virginia.  And my mother looked at me and said, boy, by the time you get ready to go to college, you will be able to go over there; had no idea how prophetic that was.  And that's where I ended up.
Story_ID: 31505
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about your experiences on that campus?  Were they mainly pleasant also, like the high school years?
Speaker 2: They were one-hundred percent pleasant.  As a matter of fact, I found a wife [Zenobia Gregory Earls] on that campus so it really worked to my benefit.  But one of the things that happened was, the faculty members really did feel that they had a vested interest in your success.  And I remember Mr. Clyde McDaniel who taught my math courses.  At the time in the physics department there was only, there were only two professors, Dr. Woods and Mr. Harrison Ransom.  And every single course that we taught, that we took, those courses were taught in physics by those two professors.  The other thing was, we had Ph.D.s who taught us undergraduate courses because when they received their doctoral degrees, they did not have the options of going to work for a NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] or an IBM [International Business Machines].  Dr. Woods had his Ph.D. in physics from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  But when he got his degree, the only option available to him was to become an instructor at one of the historically black colleges and universities.  Other people on the campus ended up going to Michigan's [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] and Ohio State's [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and University of California [Oakland, California] because in the state of Virginia, they could not get accepted to graduate school.  And I understand that the state of Virginia, like many Southern states, would actually finance and fund their attendance, those students going to graduate school outside the state to keep them from going to the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] or colleges in those states.  The advantage we had as undergrads at those colleges is we had professors who had Ph.D.s who had gotten them from some of the top universities in the nation and were back there teaching us undergraduates courses.
Speaker 1: Now, I wanted to ask your opinion of it, well, of just that situation, not necessarily of the laws that made it possible.  But I know that Zora Neal Hurston, one of my favorite writers, used to refer to Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] as a black Harvard in America.  And a lot of folks said that was true because, as you say, some of the finest scholars produced by the black community were actually teaching at Howard University because they didn't have the option of going other places.  And it was good for the students.  Some people say bad for the faculty members because they were often frustrated by the fact that they didn't have those other options.  But did you detect any of that frustration on the part of your faculty members there in Virginia who were working so closely with the students?
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I did not.  They seemed to have such a love for what they were doing, and they adopted the students as family.  When I say Dr. Woods was like a family member, he became really a second father to me.  And I left Norfolk State in 1964.  Every major decision that I made in my life career wise, I made in consultation with Dr. Woods.  And when I would go back to visit Virginia, I would go visit Dr. Woods just like I went to visit my other family.  And Dr. Woods and Mrs. Lois Woods were my second set of parents.  And they both are deceased now.  He just passed away last year, and I was asked to come down and to be one of the speakers for his service.  And they have now dedicated and named the Science Center at Norfolk State, the Science building as the Roy A. Woods Science Building.  And they started a Hall of Fame for graduates of that department, and I was one of the first inductees in that Hall of Fame under the Roy A. Woods, Roy Alexander Woods Science Center.  So I didn't sense frustration.  I just sensed pride that they took in what they were doing and actually, molding and making students into the successes that we see today.
Story_ID: 31506
Speaker 1: So you're finishing up your undergrad program in 1964, the year of the Civil Rights Act.  And did you have a sense of all of the history that was being made in that year when you're coming out of college that maybe things would be different for you than they were for Dr. Woods [Roy Alexander Woods] or did he impress that upon you?
Speaker 2: I didn't have a clue.  I was so intent upon getting that degree and going out and getting gainful employment.  I was offered a position to work at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Langley Research Center which was right there in Hampton, Virginia at a salary that was more than my parents had ever thought about they would be able to make, at a salary that probably exceeded the salaries of some of the faculty members at Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia].  And when I talked to Dr. Woods, he said, "Little Brother, NASA will be there.  You ought to go to graduate school."  And that was fine with me because I never questioned advice he gave.  So instead of taking a position with NASA, I went to the University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry to work on my master's degree which was the best decision that I could have made.  Even looking back, he told me exactly the right thing to do.  And it was after that Masters degree that I came to work for NASA here in Cleveland, Ohio, which was Lewis Research Center at the time.  And it was through the NASA program that I ended up, went on for a doctoral program at the University of Michigan.  But my wife [Zenobia Gregory Earls], we got married at the end of our sophomore year at Norfolk State.  And when I finished two years later, we had our first son.  She stayed at Norfolk State, completed undergrad before joining me in Rochester, New York.  And then we moved to Cleveland together.  And she went on to get her master's from John Carroll University here in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, so when do you become Dr. Julian Earls then?  What year is that?
Speaker 2: That was 1973.  I came to work for NASA in 1965 after the University of Rochester and worked here for six years before I decided that I would go on and go back to graduate school with NASA sponsorship.
Speaker 1: And so the Ph.D. took how many years, with the research and the writing?
Speaker 2: It took two years to the day, one year on campus at the University of Michigan to satisfy the residency requirement and another year back here at NASA, completed my research for my doctoral dissertation.  NASA will sponsor you for one year away at any university of your choosing, but you have to do your research at the NASA Center, and it has to be related to the NASA mission.
Story_ID: 31507
Speaker 1: All right, so again, I'm looking at what's happening at the, I guess we say, the macro level.  In '64 [1964], you said you didn't have a clue.  But I would think by the late '60s [1960s] when you're here in Cleveland [Ohio] in the era of the, well, the tenure of Carl Stokes as mayor, you must have known that history was being made?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, and it was at that point that I really became active in trying to encourage black youngsters to focus upon math and science and increase the numbers of black scientists and engineers by increasing the number of black students who took those courses.  And I joined an organization called the National Technical Association, an organization of black scientists, engineers, architects that had been founded in Chicago in 1925.  And once I found out about that organization, I decided that we needed to form a Cleveland chapter.  And we formed the chapter here in Cleveland and started working with youngsters in the local school system.  Our first program was established a Kirk Middle High School in East Cleveland.  And we, second, next we moved out into the Warrenville school system.  And we had black scientists, engineers, technologists working at any number of different companies here in Cleveland, Ohio.  And we would go out on Saturday mornings into the schools and take projects for the students and also had a parental involvement section where the parents would be involved and would have to essentially agree that they would work with the students.  And some sessions, they would actually come with the students on Saturday morning.  But that was one of the efforts.  And then I started right here within NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], people blame me for the being the catalyst for starting the movement that said, look, not only do we need more black people working within NASA, but we need to make sure that we have black people in true, powerful management positions here at NASA.  And at that time, we didn't have blacks who were managers, section heads, branch chiefs, division chiefs and so forth.  And I became the first black section head at NASA.  I was the first black office chief.  I was the first black division chief.  I was the first black deputy director, but I was the second black center director.  But back in those days, back in '64 [1964], '65 [1965], we have records and archives of things that we did to make the points that we needed to open up opportunities for blacks here within NASA, Lewis Research Center at the time.  But then, we were the catalyst for any number of changes within the agency for black employees.  And, of course, being in Cleveland, when Carl Stokes was elected mayor, you would have to live in a cave not to know the importance of the activities that were going on at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so that was '67 [1967]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --his first victory?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the election night--
Speaker 2: I certainly do.
Speaker 1: --when it was announced?
Speaker 2: I certainly do.
Speaker 1: I watched a video in the 'Eyes on the Prize' series and I saw people dancing in the street.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Were you a part of that crowd?
Speaker 2: I was not dancing on the street, but I was dancing in my living room.  That's for sure (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you ever have an opportunity to work with Mayor Stokes?
Speaker 2: No, but I worked with his brother back in those days.  And I really call him my hero.  Congressman Louis Stokes and I forged a relationship when things needed to be changed within NASA.  And I credit him for all the progress that has been made within NASA as an agency, with progress that has been made for people of color and females.  I credit him especially with the progress that has been made with the small disadvantaged businesses because it was Congressman Stokes who attached to the NASA appropriations bill, a requirement that eight percent of all contract dollars in NASA had to be spent with small disadvantaged businesses in the set-aside program.  He was the architect of that which is a requirement that still exists to this day at this agency.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so those things are coming into being in the '60s [1960s] to the 1970s, in that era?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's--
Speaker 1: So more than a generation ago?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 31508
Speaker 1: All right, and I know--because I read the news, that very often, those kinds of programs are being challenged, successfully, by majority firms who feel perhaps that they're being shut out of opportunities and having doors closed in their faces that are open for minority and female-owned businesses.  What do you think of the future of those kinds of initiatives?  Do you think we'll see them very far into the twenty-first century?
Speaker 2: I'm ever the optimist, and I think we will.  When I was asked about the requirement that eight percent of the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] contract dollars be in the set-aside program and some questions were raised about that, my response was, well, why don't we look at it this way?  There's a requirement essentially that ninety-two percent of the contract dollars go to non-minority firms.  Are you not satisfied with ninety-two percent?  You want it to be one hundred [percent].  So there's something wrong with that picture.  Also, we've been successful within NASA of getting contracts to firms owned by women, firms owned by people of color, and we've not sacrificed one iota in terms of the quality.  We have not lowered standards.  As a matter of fact, as I sit here, the requirement is eight percent for the agency.  Here at NASA Glen Research Center, over forty percent of the contract dollars at this center are with women-owned firms and firms owned by people of color.  And we have not failed to meet any challenges that were put before us.  And we do this in mainstream areas.  It is not just the janitorial contract or the grounds contract or maintenance contract.  We have firms in computational fluid dynamics.  We have them who are working in micro gravity research areas.  We have firms that have been instrumental in experiments that have flown on shuttles.  And these are firms that are owned by people of color and by females.  So the proof is, all you do is open the door of opportunity, and those firms will perform.  So it's part of the issue that people will raise about lowering standards or welfare programs, and the affirmative action debate, if you will, that I don't accept.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, Dr. Earls, it's, there's a lot of complicated research, I suppose, that takes place here at NASA.  In fact, some of those things you just mentioned that went right over my head (laughter).  It is rocket science.  How do you, when you go out into the schools, how do you help students, and perhaps some teachers too, understand exactly what it is that goes on here and to support it with federal tax dollars?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things I try to do is to first, with students, I try to get them to see that math and science can be fun.  Every summer I take all the high school students who are working here and all the college students who are working here, and I take them for one day and put them together in our auditorium.  And what I do, is I do just like Ms. McKnight did with me.  I start playing games.  I'll have brain teasers, mind games that I play with them, put them in groups and have them laughing about some of the problems and the results that come from those and work puzzles.  And then I tell them what they can do if they stick with those math and science courses and the doors that will be opened to them.  I also then ask them to talk with the scientists and engineers here about what they do and get our scientists and engineers to not put it in those lofty terms but to put it in general terms that people could understand.  For example, I try to get them to understand that in the field aeronautics, one thing that's important is that jet engineers have to be quieter because there're noise standards and people are concerned about the noise around airports.  So we're trying to work on projects that will quiet jet engines such that if you're in the vicinity of the airport, that you really don't notice that the airport is there, that we confine the noise from those engines to the profile of the footprint of the airport itself.  We talk about energy efficiency.  How can we get these jet engines to be more fuel efficient?  Those are the kinds of things that we try to do and everyone can relate to that in terms of the flow-through, trying to develop programs such that you don't have to have these delays in the airport because of fog or because inclement weather, that you're able to have instrumentation that can see through that.  Those are some real life experiences that students and everyone can get, around which people can get their arms and understand that those are the kinds of things that we can do as well as looking at space exploration which is critical to getting minorities in the astronaut program, females in the astronaut program.  And we get those astronauts to go out to the schools, especially if they are from that particular population and let students see people who look like them who are in these disciplines.  And we try to make sure that we do as much of that as we can.
Story_ID: 31509
Speaker 1: Okay, and how do you measure the success of those programs?  Do you have numbers?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Or engineers now that weren't in place maybe twenty years ago?
Speaker 2: Yes, and unfortunately, we've not made the progress that we would like to make, okay.  There's a group, there are any number of groups.  There's the National Society of Black Engineers, NSBE, student organization, and they keep track of the numbers of students that are in the engineering disciplines.  I'm a member of a group called the National Society of Black Physicists and we get black physicists to join and we can track progress in terms of the numbers and the growth rate.  And, unfortunately, we are still not seeing the kind of growth.  We probably have--the numbers of blacks who are graduating in the engineering and science fields today are not very different than the number that were graduating five to ten years ago, all right.  And so it is a constant, constant battle and a constant concern.  And the high schools are challenged in terms of their abilities, particularly, the inner-city schools, in their ability to graduate students who had the right courses.  So what we're doing now is trying to form and forge relationships with the community colleges and do some recruitment through the community colleges for the students to take those science and math courses.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you say, if you look at the numbers from five or ten years ago, you don't see major differences in the numbers of black scientists being produced today.  Well, what about from the 1970s up to the beginning now of the twenty-first century?  Can you see progress from the '70s [1970s] till now?
Speaker 2: We can see progress, but still, of course, it's not the level of progress that we would have expected.  One of the things that's always a challenge is finances.  Back in 1983, I decided that what we needed to do was to have a scholarship fund that rewarded students for academic achievement just like we honor students for athletic prowess.  So I started a fund called the Development Fund for Black Students in Science and Technology, and a black female, health physicist, Hattie Carwell, H-A-T-T-I-E, C-A-R-W-E-L-L, Hattie and I started the Development Fund for Black Students in Science and Technology.  We received 501(c)(3) classification from the Internal Revenue Service.  Our headquarters is in Washington, D.C., and we asked for members to commit to $1,000 personal contribution every year for the rest of their lives.  And what we're trying to do is to get an endowment fund where we will be able to sponsor scholarships for students to major in technical disciplines at the HBCUs [Historically Blacks Colleges and Universities].  And so far, we have done pretty well.  We have well over a hundred students that we have sponsored and provided scholarships for to attend those colleges and universities.  And I try to get the accountants and the National Society of Black Accountants and other organizations to do the same thing for black students in their disciplines as well.  And I think many of them are picking up on doing that.
Story_ID: 31510
Speaker 1: Now, you talked about those organizations that deal with sort of the technical aspects of your career filed, but I wonder are there any benevolent or fraternal organizations that have also been important to shaping your world view?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a member of the Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity.  I tell people the 'greatest fraternity in the universe'(laughter).  And we have a 'Guide Right' program.  So part of our charter is working with the youngsters in making sure that we provide scholarships for them.  And what's interesting is even though it's a male fraternity, we will give scholarship assistance to females as well as males.  And I take a great deal of pride in that one of those students that we sponsored out of the Cleveland [Ohio] Alumni Chapter is now working here at [NASA] Glen Research Center.  We provided a scholarship for him.  He attended Bowling Green State University [Bowling Green, Ohio] and just graduated and started as a full-time employee here two months ago.  So and the Sigma Pi Phi fraternity is another organization.  I take a great deal of pride in our ability to provide scholarships and support for students, and not just in technical disciplines, but across the board, no matter what major field they choose.
Speaker 1: So you're in two fraternities?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, are they both social?  Is one honorary or?
Speaker 2: Well, they--
Speaker 1: What's the history of those two organizations?
Speaker 2: Well, the Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity is for undergraduate students.  And you graduate, you really join either as an under grad or the alumni membership.  Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity is one that is not an undergraduate fraternity.  It is a fraternity that is based upon the theory of W.E.B. Dubois, etc., where those who have been successful really have an obligation to give back to the community and take a great a great deal of pride in what we do in that respect.
Speaker 1: So, is that like the Boule [Boule Foundation]?
Speaker 2: That's the Boule.  That is the Boule.
Speaker 1: It is the Boule, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, all right.
Speaker 1: Dr. Earls, I know that we're coming to the end of this segment, but you mentioned that during your undergraduate years, I believe your sophomore year, you met your future wife--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or you decided to get married.  And so I wanted to talk about your career as a scientist and her work as a mother and a wife and the other things that she did and how those two very different career paths sort of complemented each other the years.  But I think we may have to save that for the next segment, but I just wanted to put that right there (laughter) in the forefront of our discussion because I think that's an important part of your history in Northeast, Ohio, the work that she did to complement yours.  But I also wanted to ask about a number of those 'firsts' that you mentioned here at NASA.  And I just wonder, is that a lonely journey when you're the pioneer.  And you're the first this and the first that, and the first to do the other.  Was that a lonely journey for you or were there other scientists of color here at NASA who worked with you to open those doors?
Speaker 2: They really worked with me to open those doors, and I felt that I was blessed and fortunate and I could not have achieved what I've achieved without that kind of teamwork and that kind of support because they, many of them had been here long before I started work here.  But they were not jealous.  They were supportive, and they were the ones who encouraged me and were my coaches and my mentors to help me get to the positions that I've reached within this agency, within this center.
Speaker 1: Are there any names, any particular individuals?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, Harold Ferguson, for example, was a physicist who I, when I first moved to Cleveland, didn't have an automobile, first job, stayed at the "Y".  He lived in Cleveland on Stockbridge.  He would drive all the way down to pick me up at the "Y" on Carnegie and bring me to work.  And he's become one of my best friends.  He retired now, and he winters in Florida.  So I have a place that I can visit during Florida.  But Harold Ferguson was there.  Glen Zellars, an outstanding chemist who retired.  Glen adopted me when I first came to work here at this center.  Bert Antoine [Albert Antoine] was a Ph.D. chemist, one of the few Ph.D.s that was working here at the center, adopted me, and gave me guidance, was a mentor for me.  Harrison Allen, retired. Harrison, and the names--it goes on and on and on.  But all of them.  A woman named Annie Easley.  Annie was a mathematician who used to work over here in the computer organization here.  She was here when I started, and they all were supportive.  When I decided to be the young rebel rouser, to start raising Cain about what was not happening, they jumped right on board and supported me all the way.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much for sharing that.
Story_ID: 31511
Speaker 1: Dr. Earls, in our last segment, you were talking about a number of the affirmative action initiatives here at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and the difference that it made over the years in opening the doors of opportunity for you and the other scientists of color and also for women scientists.  Do you have an opinion now about the future of affirmative action?  It's been an important part of our past, but do you see it being part of America's future?
Speaker 2: I think it has to be and affirmative action to me does not mean you, in fact, give unqualified people anything whatsoever.  Affirmative action to me is a remedy for correcting inequities.  Often I'm asked about affirmative action.  I'll tell people I will know when true affirmative action has arrived because when it has, you will see mediocre females, mediocre people of color in true policy-making positions.  The nation will not accept that.  But mediocre white males become presidents and CEOs of major companies, corporations, ENRONs and so forth.  So you know when you can see some mediocre black person in a position like that, then true equality of opportunity has arrived.  But what I tell folks is, you cannot let that lack of equality stop you from trying.  People say we want a level playing field, which is true, but you have to learn to run uphill while you're waiting for the playing field to be level.  And that's what we have to get our young people to understand.  And the other thing I caution them, is that they have to be careful and learn first and foremost that all white folks are not your enemies and all black folks are not your friends, and that what you have to do is learn to accept and deal with people of substance.  My mentors at NASA in many instances have been white males who were perfectly comfortable in their own success and in their own competence.  And they were not threatened.  They really did believe that what they wanted was to do what was best for the agency and get the best talent and therefore, they reached out.  And Ed Richley [Edward A. Richley] who was one of my bosses and Ed picked me to be the division chief in his organization and groomed me to take his position when he retired.  So much of the meteoric rise that people look and think happened in my career took years to happen, but under the guidance and tutelage of an Ed Richley or Leroy Humble [Leroy V. Humble] was my first division chief when I came here.  And he was the one that was most responsible for my going on to get my Ph.D. because he was the one who encouraged me to do that.  So if you get the coalition of right-thinking people, that's how you can make progress.
Story_ID: 31512
Speaker 1: I wonder does NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] have an office for, an EEO office or how do you launch these affirmative action programs?  Do you have a group that monitors the progress that NASA makes over time?  Or how do you do that?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: I understand you have about 4,500 employees here?
Speaker 2: Well, a combination of 1,900 civil service and about 1,300 support service contractors.  But we do have an office of Equal Opportunity Programs.  And that office is staffed with people who have the responsibility to make sure that we have an affirmative employment plan, that we, in fact, look at diversity and that that's a part of our strategic plans and initiatives.  And they ask for data and statistics and track the numbers in terms of how we're making progress.  And then they are the catalyst and they are the people who report to me about what our directors of in our various organization units, what progress they are making.  And on a monthly basis and a quarterly basis, we review the progress.  So that is a very active office that is here at, not only at Glen, but is at the entire agency.  And also, the agency has an equal opportunity board, and I happen to be the chair person of that board.  And that board is made up of NASA Center directors and associate administrators who are in NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C. and the Equal Employment Opportunity officers.  And my responsibility and that board's responsibility is to look at those kinds of issues, agency wide, and make sure that the agency has programs and metrics for measuring whether or not we're making progress.
Speaker 1: In recent years, we've seen a lot of challenges to affirmative action programs, California sort of leading the way and then Michigan, most recently, with the Supreme Court case.  But I think it's safe to say affirmative action was saved for a while in Michigan.  And there's something else afoot now, but have you met any resistance here in Northeast, Ohio at NASA to the affirmative action initiative?
Speaker 2: We really haven't, and I believe that when it comes to the federal agencies, NASA has always taken a great deal of pride of being the best within the federal government.  And we've also wanted not only to be the best in terms of space exploration and exploration and aeronautics, science, we wanted to be the best in management as well.  And we have within NASA, NASA Values which are safety, which are the NASA family, excellence and integrity.  And those values speak to where we want to be--we're not quite there yet.  We're trying to get there, but there's no way we can get there unless we pay appropriate attention to making sure that everyone has an opportunity to contribute according to his or her talent, skills and abilities.  And the fact that I sit as an African American center director within the agency, that at Kennedy Space Center [The John F. Kennedy Space Center, Merritt Island, Florida], one of my mentees, Dr. Woodrow Whitlow [Woodrow Whitlow Jr.] is the deputy center director, an African American at Kennedy Space Center.  And if you look at the agency leadership, you take a snapshot, and you see the deputy administrator for the agency is Fred Gregory [Frederick D. Gregory], an African American, former astronaut.  And it just, my folks used to say, "you preach more sermons with your life than with your lips."  In order words, don't listen to what I say.  Look at what I do.  And I think it was Emerson [Ralph Waldo Emerson] who said, "what you are speaks so loudly, I cannot hear what you are saying."  So look at what an agency does, what an organization does, and you don't have to ask about what are their policies with respect to affirmative action because you can see it.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm not a rocket scientist, but I know something about some of the other people of color who have excelled in the sciences because, and I hope I get his name pronounced correctly, Guion Bluford [Guion "Guy" S. Bluford, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Mae Jemison [Mae C. Jemison].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 31513
Speaker 1: I mean I'm just so proud of them.  And so, I don't know if that's because NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] is pushing them out front and saying, here's a role model or if they just have that excellence, that's part of that formula you just told me about.  Were they just that cream, you know, that just rose to the top?
Speaker 2: Well, I have to tell you my Guy Bluford [Guion "Guy" S. Bluford, Jr.] story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I applied to be an astronaut in 1977.  That was the same year that Guy Bluford applied, Fred Gregory [Frederick D. Gregory] applied, Ron McNair [Ronald Ervin McNair] applied.  Guy Bluford and I were born on the same day, November 22, 1942.  And I kid Guy because I tell him he was born at 10:00 a.m. in the morning.  I was born at 4:15 in the afternoon, and NASA, as a tie breaker, went with the old man.  That's why he got in the Astronaut Corp and I didn't.  But I've worked with those astronauts.  When Guy was launched, his was the first night launch of the shuttle, and I was the speaker for the Education program at Kennedy Space Center [The John F. Kennedy Space Center, Merritt Island, Florida] when Guy Bluford went on the first flight as the first African American in space.  And Guy subsequently retired from the Astronaut Corp and came to work here at NASA Glenn Research Center in Cleveland [Ohio].  He was a program manager for a major contract here and is still living here in the Cleveland area.
Speaker 1: And how about Mae Jemison [Mae C. Jemison]?  Have you had a chance to work with her?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Mae and I talked, before Mae's launch, the last six months before Mae launched, Mae's launch, she and I must have talked at least once a week about some of the issues and some of the challenges confronting her as the first African American female going in space.  As a matter of fact, one of the things that she and I talked about was she did a down link from her shuttle mission with the Chicago school system, which she's a product of the Chicago school system.  And so we worked that, and I've been in touch with her since that time.  She's absolutely--I maintain that NASA has a little back room where they build perfect people to make them into astronauts.  And that's why I never got selected to (laughter) to be an astronaut.
Story_ID: 31514
Speaker 1: I wonder with the astronaut program, how many people it into those classes?  I just saw a big poster out in the hall, looked like there were about seventy or eighty people depicted.
Speaker 2: It's very selective.  When I applied for the astronaut program in 1977, there were over 8,000 applicants, and they selected about twenty to twenty-five.  So it is a very, very competitive process to become an astronaut.
Speaker 1: So is there an education requirement?  Is the Ph.D., the terminal degree?
Speaker 2: No, that's not a requirement.  In fact, when I applied, it was the first time they opened the Astronaut Corp up to non-pilots.  Prior to that, you had to be military, and you had to be a pilot.  But then they opened it up to civilians for mission specialists.  So now, a technical background is a general requirement.  Most of those astronauts have a master's degree as a minimum, but they also opened it up to educate astronauts.  And this time, we've selected teachers who actually enter the Astronaut Corp and they're educator astronauts.  So they have been teachers in elementary or high schools or schools throughout the nation.  They get selected and they go through the exact same training and become certified as astronauts with the intent that after they leave the Astronaut Corp, then they will have an impact on education and perhaps go back into the education system.
Speaker 1: Now, I know also in recent years there have been a number of highly publicized tragedies associated with the Space Program.  And was it Sally Ride, was she the teacher?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I've forgotten her name, but Sally Ride was the first female, American female in space, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she's still active with some of the programs, but she was, I'll think of the name of the--
Speaker 1: Crystal?
Speaker 2: Christa McAuliffe [S. Christa Corrigan McAuliffe].
Speaker 1: Christa McAuliffe.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  I'm sorry for forgetting the name.
Speaker 1: That's right, thank you very much.  That's right, yes.
Speaker 2: But, and again, in 2003, I know there was a--
Speaker 1: Yes, Columbia tragedy [Space Shuttle Columbia Accident, February 1, 2003]--
Speaker 2: --disaster, yes.
Speaker 1: --and we are now in the process within NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] of returning safely to flight.  There was the Columbia Accident Investigation Board that issued a report about the things we need to do to safely return to flight.  We have implemented those recommendations.  Just last Friday, the external tank was shipped down to Kennedy Space Center [The John F. Kennedy Space Center, Merritt Island, Florida] and we are targeting an April or May timeframe for returning shuttle safely to flight.  But it was a great loss to the nation and to the agency and particularly for NASA Glenn Research Center [Cleveland, Ohio] because Columbia was on a science mission.  Unlike many of the missions that are destined for the space station, for construction of the space station, this was a mission was in lower orbit that had science experiments, what we call micro-gravity experiments.  And those experiments were from NASA Glen Research Center here in Cleveland.  So those astronauts had come back and forth to Cleveland getting oriented on the experiments.  So when we lost them, it was really a special blow to us because they were like family members for us with our experiments that were flying on Columbia.
Speaker 2: Do you find, in the wake of the 2003 tragedy, that there's been a falling off, as far as people being interested in joining the Astronaut Corp or are people just as interested now as they were before?
Speaker 1: Just as interested if not more so, and we just selected a new class.  And that class has people who are chomping at the bit in terms of becoming active.  We have the astronauts who already have been chosen and designated for the next launch.  And they are anxious to be there and to have a successful launch because the feeling within the agency is, we owe it to those seven brave human beings who gave their lives in pursuant of that exploration to continue that.  The worse thing that we could do would be to stop and not continue the program for which they gave their lives.
Speaker 2: So how soon then does NASA go out to try to identify potential astronauts?
Speaker 1: We do that on a periodical basis.  Every couple, or three years we will do that and, what, because what happen is, as you have launches, it takes maybe a year or two for an astronaut crew to be trained for that particular launch.  So you have to have a cadre, depending upon the number of launches, a cadre of astronauts that you prepare for that launch.  It's extremely difficult if you were to have astronauts who, say, drop out before launch, you couldn't just take any other number of astronauts and just insert them on that crew because they train together for that particular mission.
Story_ID: 31515
Speaker 1: Okay.  I want to ask also about some of those complementary activities that we referred to in an earlier segment, but again, involving this juggling act that I suppose you have to do in order to have a family and a career and to do all of the community service kinds of activities in the schools that you've described.  So how'd you do that?  I mean this is a very modern dilemma for women, with work and school and family and all of this.  But you did it, successfully.
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you what.  I often tell people, I borrow from Gladys Knight and her used-to-be Pips, because I say if anyone should ever write my life story for whatever reason there might be, Zenobia [Zenobia Gregory Earls] will be between each line of pain and glory because she is the best thing that ever happened to me.  We met as freshman at Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia].  Two years later, we got married.  By the time we graduated, we had our first son.  She stayed at Norfolk State completing under grad, taking care of our son with my family and her family's support before joining me in Rochester, New York.  Years later in Cleveland [Ohio], by the time I decided to go off or we decided, I would go to Michigan, we have two sons.  And she stayed here teaching school, full time while I was away at Michigan.  She would get up in the morning, fix breakfast for them, make sure that they got off to school, take one to school, another to daycare, teach a full day of school herself, come home, throw off her coat, kick off her shoes, fix dinner for them, see to it that they did their homework; then take care of her other thirty-six children, the students in her class by correcting papers and calling homes.  And she did that so that I could achieve.  Years later in 1978, when we decided I would go to the Harvard Business School[Boston, Massachusetts], she, in fact, did the same thing, took care of them while I was away at Harvard Business School.  When I came back home, she was there for me.  She provided all of that support.  And I could not have achieved it without her.  As a matter of fact, I didn't know how much she did for me until she went to school and I was stuck with those two demons.  Then I realized what that woman had gone through (laughter), dealing with those characters.  But I'll tell you.  She should be canonized.  I mean she has, and every major decision that I've made, I've only made because of her support.  She could have very readily said, "no, I'm not gonna stay here, and you can't go away to graduate school.  You have to wait."  But she never did that.  She was always supportive.  Everything that I wanted to do, she was, she has been there.  And I give her the credit for the success with our sons because she, without a doubt, was the greatest influence.  Our younger son went to Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia]--
Speaker 1: And what's his name, please?
Speaker 2: Julian, Jr., okay.  And he went to Howard University, left there and came back to Case Western Reserve University Medical School [Cleveland, Ohio]; did his residency at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] in neurology in pain management.  Our younger son, Gregory, and my wife's maiden name was Zenobia Gregory, so we named our youngest son, Gregory.  Gregory went to Norfolk State, left there and went to the American Film Institute in Hollywood, California and now he works for Fox Studios out in California.  And I credit her with being the glue that held all of that together and made that happen with our sons because I did a lot of traveling.  And the job kept me relatively busy, but she kept all of us on focus.
Speaker 1: You said your wife was a teacher?
Speaker 2: She taught for thirty-one years in the Cleveland School system in elementary schools and went to John Carroll [University, Cleveland, Ohio] to get her master's degree.  So she was going to school at night while going to school during the day to get her master's degree.
Story_ID: 31516
Speaker 1: Do you have an opinion about the Cleveland public schools?  We gonna be all right here as far as public education is concerned?
Speaker 2: I am very concerned.  I think we can be all right.  But the, the inequities just drive me up the wall.  In my community of Beachwood, we must expend $17,000 per student in our school system.  In the Cleveland school system, maybe seven [$7,000] or $8,000.  To have that kind of discrepancy in inner-city school funding and suburban schools and other school districts around the nation and then expect those students to pass the proficiency examination, there's something very wrong with that picture.  At the middle school in my community, every student in the middle school gets a laptop computer provided by the school system.  And we're transitioning that so that when they go to high school, they will carry those computers.  So in three years from now, every student in our system will have a laptop computer and wireless communications with the schools and so forth.  That's not gonna happen within the Cleveland school system.  We've got to come up with some way that we can level the playing field in terms of education within the State of Ohio.  We've got to do that for the future of Ohio and for the future of the nation.  We've got to come up with a way to fix that.  We have to attract more qualified teachers into the educational system.  When my wife and I were in school, there were the National Defense Student Loans where you could get those loans to fund your undergraduate education and then if you taught in an inner-city school system--I think it was Title I systems, you could be forgiven for a percentage of the loan for each year you taught in those systems.  And something like that I think really helped to get good quality people going into education and then teaching in the system.  We've, we've got an uphill battle.  There's no question about that.
Speaker 1: Well, I understand that the funding system for public schools in Ohio has been declared unconstitutional on more than one occasion.  But still we have the inequities, and I'm glad you mentioned Beachwood because that's the system that everyone in East Cleveland is jealous of.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What do you do?
Speaker 2: I really think that what we need to do is to look at a model, if we can find anywhere in this nation, that has been successful.  There are very problems with which we are confronted as a people that someone has not confronted and solved before.  I'm not sure what the answer is.  I don't know whether it's a sales tax that would do that or whether there is some way that one pools the money from property taxes within the state and then has an equitable distribution for that.  But whatever it is, it's going to require the legislature to be states' persons, not merely politicians, and come up with a system.  And people are gonna have to bite the bullet.  Those of us who live in the Beachwood's of the state of Ohio may recognize and come to recognize that our future is vested in how well people and students in the entire state are doing and how they are supported.  So it may be that we have to understand that part of that funding that we have has to be shared with the East Cleveland's and the Cleveland's and so forth.
Story_ID: 31517
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask also about your sense of how history, within the African American community has changed over time from 1964 when you graduated with the Bachelors degree until, well, to '73 [1973] when you became Dr. Julian Earls, up until the point when you were appointed director of the [NASA] Glenn [Research] Center [Cleveland, Ohio]?  Are we, have there been significant gains?  Are we at a point now where we're losing ground because I hear the naysayers saying that we're losing ground and we need to begin to struggle again.  Maybe it's not a Civil Rights Movement, it's a human rights movement.  But what's your sense of how things have changed over time from '64 [1964] through at least 2004?
Speaker 2: I think that we saw very significant progress between '64 [1964] and '73 [1973], okay.  I think that people were aware that there were real issues that needed to be addressed.  There were probably more visible battles to be fought in terms of segregation and overt discrimination.  Since that time, I believe that it's been in more subtle forms, the issues associated with the set-asides and the battles that are being launched against those, the claims that those programs really put unqualified people in positions and give unfair advantages to firms that are not really qualified and so forth.  So I think that there has been resistance, but the resistance seems to--any time times get challenging and tight economically, that's when I believe that there is more resistance to in fact program and support those that have been disadvantaged.  We saw, I think, more progress economically as a nation, and as that started to turn around, I believe that's what caused this, this backlash, if you will, against those kinds of programs.  The other thing that I have, I've noticed and I hate to talk about the good ole days because those good ole days were not such good ole days in many, many respects.  But one of the things that is a concern to me is that I don't see the family strength and structures that were there.  As I pointed out, even though my parents were not formally educated, they were there, mother and a father in a home.  We're seeing more single parent families these days.  Now, I caution people because I don't think that a broken home necessarily is a home with a single parent.  A broken home is a home without love.  You have homes in this nation where you have a mother and a father present, and for all practical purposes, it's a broken home because there's not the love and the nurturing and the environment created.  Also, I'll tell people too many successful people have been reared by single parents for us to start writing them off and labeling them at risks and throw-away children and this kind of thing.  And I honestly believe that even though they're single-parent households, that there are methods and vehicles for making sure that there's a kind of support.  For example, the churches.  Single parents who have their children in churches find themselves in a supportive environment, in an environment where there is the family there that will provide the kind of support and the kind of uplifting and the kind of morale, if you will, that will help the children for the development.  But I found out that, one of the experiences from Zenobia being in the schools, was that you find children having children.  And that's more than an issue because now what you don't have is the adult supervision, the adult rearing a child.  And those kinds of challenges that youngsters are facing when they're having children and they're struggling really makes it extremely difficult for us to turn this, this thing around.  Reports, research show that children in families that are higher income perform better.  So one could say well, the solution is to just have the children pick rich parents.  But, of course, how ludicrous that sounds.  But I think what we need to do is, if we're gonna fix a problem with education, we have to fix the problem with the families.  If we're gonna fix the problem with the families, then we have to provide an economy that provides jobs for them.  That's what we really need to do.
Story_ID: 31518
Speaker 1: It's been said that Ohio, the Buckeye state, is also the maker of presidents.  And I thought it very interesting that in this last election, November 2004, it seemed like it all came down to what would happen in Ohio that we would decide the victor in this particular race.  Were you surprised by the outcome here in Ohio?
Speaker 2: I was because what I thought was, based upon the unemployment rate in the State of Ohio and the concern that I felt people expressed with the City of Cleveland being the poorest major city in the area, I thought that people would connect that with the current administration and decide that they wanted a change.  So I was fully expecting that the results would have been just the opposite of what they were.  So it really, it came as a surprise and people that I know from around the nation, from other parts of the country, they sort of concluded that with what they had heard about the dire straits that the State of Ohio found itself in, that they would not be, they would not support the Republican party.
Speaker 1: And just this past week, I know our Congresswoman Stephanie "Tubbs" Jones, led a rally in Columbus, Ohio, our state capital, challenging the outcome of this particular election.  And she was joined by the Rev. Jesse Jackson.  And they talked about a number of irregularities, people waiting in line for five to 10 hours to vote, machines breaking down in the State of Ohio.  One county I believe they said reported 125 percent voter turnout (laughter), those kinds of errors.  And, of course, it was in President Bush's favor.  So they wanted every vote counted and they didn't want the election certified.  And they certainly had hoped to stop the inauguration on the 20th of January, 2005.  But, and many Democrats on the East side of Cleveland, cheered Stephanie "Tubbs" Jones.  And other people suggested, and one person in particular, that she's gonna make a fool of herself.  Were you watching all of those activities from your seat here on the, do we say the campus of (laughter) of NASA?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was watching it from the living room and family room of my home.  It sort of reminded me of the voting in Chicago [Illinois] back in the old days where they used to say, "Vote early and often" (laughter), all right.  But I'll tell you what.  I watched that.  I also watched the, and read about the debate that went on when the Congress was in fact to confirm those results, and the fact that one senator, I believe it was Senator [Barbara] Boxer and Stephanie "Tubbs" Jones, made their comments.  And there was some discussion and debate, if you will, on the floors of Congress about that.  I really that what we have to do as a nation, there has to be a better way of conducting elections, I mean the process itself.  We are sort of archaic in my mind with the way we have technology and being a NASA physicist, knowing that we can improve to a greater degree the way we handle elections, and especially when we're trying to tell the rest of the world that we want to monitor that process and make sure that there's fairness in there.  So I think any efforts that are designed to improve the process, those efforts merit attention.  And we have time between now and the next presidential election to really take a hard look at what are the issues and what are, where are the problems.  I've seen some results that say, well, if you look at what happened in Ohio, and you take the various categories in terms of provisional ballots and so forth, that the acceptance rate for provisional ballots they maintain in Ohio, was much higher than the rate in other states.  And if you look at the so-called errors in terms of more votes than people residing in districts and so forth, and you look at it nationwide, they're saying that Ohio, even though it was the center of attention, that you will find that the rates are no greater or in fact, in many instances, better than other states around the nation.  But I think it's because Ohio was such a critical state and a pivotal state in that final process, is why there's more attention being focused on it.  But I believe that there're problems with the voting systems throughout the nation and that we really need to have--we talk about presidential commissions, I think we need a commission to take a look at this process and let's fix that.  Other things, some people say that perhaps what you should do to encourage voter turnout is to, in fact, have a national holiday on voting day and perhaps that's something that we need to investigate.  And if that would help in terms of getting people, turning out in greater numbers, but what we really have to do is get a more informed public and help people literally getting educating on what are the issues and why are they are to vote.  I served as fore person of a grand jury and any number of people will say, well, why should I register to vote?  But in this nation, where juries are chosen from the list of registered voters, there are more reasons to become registered voters just other than, just that you vote on election day.  There are so many decisions that are made in terms of the judicial system where those people who are tapped to make those kinds of decisions and judgments for juries are taken from the list of registered voters.  So we really have to, we have an education process, but we also have to fix the problem.  No doubt about that.
Speaker 1: I read an interesting story in Sunday 'Plain Dealer' [Cleveland Plain Dealer Newspaper], our major daily here in Cleveland.  One voter activist suggested that the solution to the problem was to have paper ballots where people can mark an "x" by the candidate's name.  Is low-tech the answer, as a scientist?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you one thing.  There certain would be traceability (laughter), all right.  And the process would certainly take a lot longer, but we believe in audit and audit trail.  There're, in terms of technology, though, it would not be unreasonable to have a system where you could do electronic voting where there would be a record there as well.  So I think that we can, we can fix it without having to go back to old paper ballots, marking an "x".
Speaker 1: Okay
Story_ID: 31519
Speaker 1: I, there's something else that I want to ask about also because I've read a lot about your running marathons.  Did I read 10,000 miles?
Speaker 2: In the past five years (laughter).
Speaker 1: In the past five years, you've run.  When did all this start?  And was that during the schools days or after graduation?
Speaker 2: It started after graduation.  I was not an athlete in high school nor in college.  I played intramural sports.  But I loved to play basketball.  And when I came to Cleveland, I used to play basketball and softball in leagues, both here at NASA and out in the community.  But once I started traveling, that started to interfere with my ability to play basketball and to play softball.  You need a ball, you need a team.  So I started running because no matter where I was, all I needed was my running shoes and my shorts and a singlet depending on the weather.  So I just got started with that.  Then I ended up carpooling with two friends, Lonnie Reid, who retired, Dr. Lonnie Reid.  Even though he's an Alpha, he's a great guy, (laughter) all right.  But Lonnie and another fellow named John Moss, they were marathon runners and they suggested to me that I should start training to run a marathon.  And I told them, there's absolutely no way I would run 26.2 miles.  You have to be crazy to do that.  And they said, you don't have to be crazy, but it helps a little bit if you are.  But they started training with me, and got me started.  And I ran that first marathon, and at the end of that marathon, I promised I would never in life run another one of those races because the next morning, I could hardly walk.  The marathon was on a Sunday, Monday, I could hardly walk, Tuesday, hardly walk.  But the end of the week, I was back running, and the following week I was saying, you know, I think I could run a better time than I did with that.  And so by that time, I was hooked, and that's when I started running.  And the 10,000 in the past five years only means that I run about 2,000 miles a year.  So I run about fifty miles a week.  That's, that's all.  It sounds a lot when you put it in 10,000 miles, but fifty miles a week is what I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it helps mentally.  It really does, all right.  I maintain that you learn a lot about yourself, when running, especially when running a marathon because at the beginning everybody's fresh and everybody feels good.  Then when you get to the 20-mile marker, that's when the race really starts.  And it's more mental than it is physical.  And I think that those kinds, that kind of discipline that's required to run every day helps you in terms of mental toughness that you need for your job.
Story_ID: 31520
Speaker 1: Dr. Earls, I also wanted to ask about another NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] scientist who, and I know that you all had the opportunity to work together because the last time I heard you speak publicly was at a memorial service for him, for Dr. "Karimi" Willie Ray Mackey.
Speaker 2: Mackey, yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about your work with him and his work with NASA?
Speaker 2: I met Willie when he first came to work for NASA, and, in fact, Willie was just a super human being.  One of the things that I asked him to do several years ago was, when I was contacted by Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio] one of the nation's historically black colleges and universities, Wilberforce wanted to start a program in astronomy, and they asked if we could help them.  So I contacted Willie Mackey and asked would he be willing to support Wilberforce University in that regard.  And he agreed to do so.  And he agreed to take one full year and leave NASA and go spend that year at Wilberforce, helping them get their astronomy program in place.  And they so loved what he did, they wanted to keep him there.  And Willie contacted me about staying another year, and I said, Willie, no, you have to come back here to NASA.  And he came back.  Years later, just about three years ago, we started something called the NASA Administrators Fellowship Program, where we would ask our scientists and engineers to, in fact, go spend some time on campuses of historically black colleges and universities, of tribal colleges, Hispanic-serving institutions and help them with programs.  And I contacted Willie about doing that.  And he agreed to go to Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] in Pennsylvania.  The next thing I know Willie was working at Lincoln University in Pennsylvania.  He was working at Cheyney University [Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] and Penn State University [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] and put together programs for all of them working together, gave 100 percent in terms of getting quality programs there and putting programs together there that were outreach to the community and the whole process.  So he was just absolutely a super human being, and never asked for anything, was always a giving person and one of the most brilliant physicists, had an undergraduate degree, was from, not Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College, Berea, Ohio], Oberlin, Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] in math and physics and his Ph.D. was from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and taught African American dancing.  And every time we had a Black History Month program here, Willie would play the drums for our programs and so forth and was just, just absolutely super.  And it was a tremendous loss to us when we lost him at such a young age.
Speaker 1: So he was not unique in being a scientist, going out into the community.  NASA does that for other scientists as well.  You mentioned the tribal colleges?
Speaker 2: Yes, what we do is we try to encourage our people, our scientists and engineers to be humanitarians as well as scientists and engineers.  And part of the mission of NASA is to inspire the next generation of explorers.  So we encourage our scientists and engineers to do that.  But Willie took it to the next level.  He started working with the African American Heritage Museum here in the Cleveland, Ohio area, came up with the concept of a Solar Village that became a part of the African Heritage Museum here and just always thinking outside the box and was just well respected within NASA for his technical contributions and within the community for his contributions to education and to the museum and all kinds of humanitarian efforts and community efforts such as that.
Speaker 1: So, well, how does a program like that work?  Are they like on a sabbatical year, still receive some salary from NASA?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  For example, the Administrators Fellowship program works both ways.  We will have our scientists and engineers going to the universities.  We will also have professors from the universities who come to work for NASA.  And we continue the salaries and pay the travel.  And after they've spent that time there, they will spend time at NASA headquarters and oftentimes, they will spend time at another field center.  So it is part of what we call our Development Program for our employees.
Speaker 1: And how long has that program been in place?
Speaker 2: That program has been in place about eight or nine years now.
Story_ID: 31521
Speaker 1: It sounds really exciting.  I wonder now, we've been talking for a while about various aspects of your life, public and private, if there are any aspects of your history that maybe we've glossed over.  Is there anything that you especially want to make a part of this record that's gonna be archived at the headquarters in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, I kind of think that one of the things that I'd like to do is to make sure that whenever I retire from NASA that there are people who will say that Julian Earls made a difference, a positive difference in my life or in my career.  So what I attempt to do is to make sure that I mentor employees and that I encourage the youngsters who come to NASA during the summers on internships or for co-op programs, to make sure that they understand that they can come and sit and talk with me because if I leave NASA and no one can say that anything positive happened as a result of my being here, then it has been a total waste and a wasted position, and I have not done what my mother and father, dearly departed mother and father insisted that all of us do, and that is to make sure that we are contributing members of society.
Speaker 1: Dr. Earls, I heard you mention earlier, and I don't think the camera was rolling at that point and time, that you always go home as often as possible.  And it seems to be, that based on what you've said in the last couple of hours, that you've made quite a home for yourself here in Northeast Ohio.  But where is this other home (laughter)?  What is it about getting away from Northeast Ohio that seems to bring you so much joy?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think that people from the South tend to always say "home" is wherever they were born and reared.  The fact that I left Norfolk [Virginia] in 1964 when I was twenty-two years old and that I've been Cleveland [Ohio] almost forty years, until you mentioned it, it never dawned me that I always said, "home" in reference to Virginia (laughter).  But I love the Cleveland area.  There's no question about that.  Virginia will always be home to me, but so is Cleveland.  Our sons grew up here.  Our friends are here, and often people retire and move South.  I really don't think that when I retire I'm gonna pick up and relocate.  I may travel South for a few weeks to break up the Cleveland winters.  But this is where my home is now.  There is where my heart is and this is where I really want to stay.
Story_ID: 31522
Speaker 1: I just had to ask that because we talk so much about this great black migration, especially since World War II, that brought so many African Americans to centers like Detroit and Cleveland in search of jobs and other different kinds of opportunities that weren't necessarily to be had in the South.  But this reverse migration that I hear so much about is interesting too, with people going back home (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --as you say, after they retire.  But, and there's talk too of a New South.  Have you heard about any of that happening in Virginia?  Is there a New South now to be experienced in Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, what many people maintain is that as organizations make decisions to relocate and leaving what we're now calling the "rust belt", you will find any number of companies moving down around the research triangle park in the Carolinas, companies moving down to the Florida and the North Carolina regions and so forth and in many of those areas, bragging about becoming the new educational centers or the cultural centers of the nation and so forth.  There is a very real threat to cities like Cleveland and Cleveland's like--cities like Detroit in terms of loss of jobs, loss of major corporations and so forth.  And we really have to figure out how can we, in fact, reverse that trend.  When I came to Cleveland, I will tell you that I met any number of individuals in my age range who had not attended college.  When we grew up in the South, the understanding was sort of the way out was education, the way up was education.  So when we graduated from high school, it was pretty much expected that we would go on to college.  We didn't have the options many did here in the Cleveland area and Detroit and so forth, weren't gonna graduate from high school and go work for the automotive industry or go work in the steel companies and make a very, very nice substantial income.  And people went to those positions and did those kinds of jobs and then when the trends started to change and the bottom fell out because they didn't have educations, they didn't have those kinds of options.  That education is the key, that education is the key, is something that was understood and appreciated in the South.  I think now it is clear that that provided more options even though there wasn't the immediate gratification or the same level of income in many instances.  Now, what we're starting to see is people start to move back South because I do believe that in many of those areas, that education now is not only the key, but it's also the bank, if you will, and provides a level of income, a level of comfort for people.  They still have families, extended families who are there, and in many ways, they do look at it as going, going back home.  We need to understand that we can bring more people to these areas, but we have to be aggressive.  One of the things that I do is when I'm looking for students to perform a sort of cooperative education experiences at NASA in Cleveland, I try to find students who are from Cleveland, Ohio who are attending those schools, get them to come back and do the internships here because now, once they finish those internships, since their families are here, I stand a greater chance of getting them to accept employment here in the area.  Also, we are starting, as we're going into the space exploration business, as we look around and companies are now starting to get into biotech and so forth, we're able to bring people here to be in those industries, in those fields that require considerable education.  We've been fortunate to bring back to NASA people who've come from California, people who've come from Alabama.  People will come if there is meaningful work for them to do, but it's quite a challenge for us.
Story_ID: 31523
Speaker 1: Science and technology, is that a growth area within our economy?
Speaker 2: I believe it absolutely is.  In fact, any nation that has made any kind of economic progress and has been able to sustain it, has done it on the basis of technology.  Other nations, even subsidized, that are government subsidizes, technology and science, technological developments so that they can continue to grow and continue to be a major player in the nation's economy.  And that's what we have to do here in this country.
Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Earls, I have to ask, because I know that so many communities across the globe, where folks are still reeling psychologically from the impact of the tsunami.  That's how it's pronounced, the title waves and all of the death and all of the devastation experienced by those communities, especially in Southeast Asia and some parts of Africa too, but I hear a lot of people saying, you know, why weren't we warned, you know.  There was no way to predict that that problem was waiting to happen, no way to warn people.  I don't know where they were supposed to go, to higher ground or away from the coastal areas or something.  Sometimes it seems that we want technology to tell us too much, and then we recognize that even our scientists, you know, have limitations.  I just wondered, you know, if there was any commentary that you could offer to the viewers of this tape about technology at the dawn of the twenty-first century?
Speaker 2: I honestly believe that we have made advances in technology.  We have satellites.  We've made advances in weather detection.  We can often be quite predictive in things that are going to happen.  What we need to do is to make sure that we have communication systems that, in fact, get that information from one organization to another.  Do we have satellite communications systems from a NASA that we can share information with a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration [NOAA], that can share information with an international agency that deals with world health organizations and so forth.  Those are the kinds of things that we need to look at in terms of having that information, and information sharing and sharing in a manner.  Also, do we have programs where we have emergency preparedness because it's one thing to have information, but it's another thing to have systems in place that once you know that an emergency is imminent, how do you prepare?  How do you respond?  How do you react and so forth?  And that, that's the challenge.  We need to stop now that we've seen this happen and see what lessons we can learn and find out if, in fact, through whatever systems are there, there was some kinds of warnings that were available, that were acknowledged or how did we get the information, how do we share the information and what could we have done because often these things are so instantaneous.  And if that's the case, how quickly can you react and how do you react appropriately.  And now the challenge is the health impact and the diseases and so forth that will result now that we've had that disaster occur.  There are many scientists who will speculate there will probably be as many deaths, long term, from the disease and the health impacts than occurred from the disaster itself.
Speaker 1: I wanted to stay with this theme of technology, especially now when we've been in this era for a while, sixty years, post-World War II era, the era of the Atomic Bomb..  And maybe we can start as we get ready to start another segment, start with peaceful uses for technology, ethical uses for the technology that seems to be available to us as a nation or perhaps in a global community in the next segment.
Story_ID: 31524
Speaker 1: Dr. Earls, I said at the close of the last segment that I'd like to talk for a while about science, technology and ethics and especially, the call for peace in the global community and peaceful uses for technological developments.  Is there a body at the federal level that monitors uses of technology like the kinds of technological innovations that result from experiments conducted here at NASA?  Is there a body that watches that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think there are several.  Many of them are the trade societies, however, and there is an organization with NASA itself that deals with the ethics and there is an office of government ethics as well that is federal wide.  What we have to do, though, is we have to have, as far as I'm concerned, in the educational process where we're training our scientists and training our engineers, we have to make sure that we have courses that deal with ethics in that particular environment because it is extremely important that we make sure that technology serves humankind and with respect to the peaceful uses, but uses that will have spin-off as a matter of fact, for many of the things that we're doing within NASA.  For instance, in some of the technology, we've done and developed with lasers has impact in terms of cataracts and current treatment of cataracts and so forth.  Some of the work that we do in terms of micro-gravity and fluid flow when we look at how fluids behave in the low gravity environment, they have impact and transferability to some of the things that happen with the blood flow in the bodies so that we can it for medical applications there.  We're trying to look at the use of space station now to look at long-term health effects of weightlessness and radiation for astronauts who will be long-range, long-duration missions.  But much of that will have transferability and applicability and tech transfer to human health effects here on earth.  So what we have to do is to make sure that every opportunity we get to seize some knowledge or some development or some patentable, if you will, idea that comes out of what we're doing in technology, seeing how it has applications to improving health and improving the well being of people here.
Speaker 1: Can I ask you about two extreme cases of technology in the news in your lifetime?  You said you were born in 1942?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The atomic bomb was used in August of 1945 to end the war [World War II] in the Pacific, and the United States had perfected that technology and then used it in Japan.  I heard a scientist say, who had worked on that project, that--and he's the most peaceful man that I know, (laughter) a peaceful chemist in Northeast, Ohio, he said, that he was very glad that the bomb was available and that America used it to end that war because it saved lives.  How do you reconcile that as a scientist, that so many lives were lost in Japan and yet, there're still folks who are comfortable, sixty years after the end of the War, saying that it was a good thing that the bomb was available?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that there are people who will reduce things to numbers and probabilities and make those kinds of decisions based upon the number of lives that were lost as a result of the bombing of Nagasaki and Hiroshima and then, the potential loss of lives if the war had continued.  Then there's a school of thought in people like me that say even if we had developed that technology, and developed those bombs, was there a way that we could have dropped those bombs in an unpopulated area just to demonstrate that we have that capability and then forecasts we will drop those bombs on populated areas if, in fact, you do not cease and desist and so forth.  Now, maybe that's a little bit naive on my part, but maybe there was a way--and the problem is, this twenty-twenty vision by hindsight, but I'm one who believes that perhaps we should have been willing to give it the old college try before we actually dropped that bomb, those bombs on populated areas, okay.
Story_ID: 31525
Speaker 1: That's the one extreme for early on in your life.  Now, as a mature scientist, we have the technology that allows for cloning.  And I read in the paper not too long ago that a very well-to-do woman had her kitty cloned, I think for $50,000 (laughter) and I'm wondering about if that kind of cloning is available for animals, you know, is there a way to ensure that that kind of scientific knowledge will be used in an ethical fashion when it comes to dealing with infertility perhaps in human beings.
Speaker 2: I would hope so.  I would hope that, that we're smart enough to know how to do things, but that we have the moral fiber to make sure that we do the right things for the right reasons.  And I really believe that there's some healthy debate to be held in terms of ethics and technology and that we really need to have our best and brightest come to the table and come up with some policy that can be embraced by the general populaces.  We understand why and we can support that.  It is not easy but it's the toughest things that really bring out the best in people.  But we've got to wrestle with it because we cannot stop that train of technology.  These scientific developments are going to occur.  But we have to make sure that they're in the right hands and that there's a right kind of guidance, a right kind of policy, the right kind of procedures and the right kind of oversight to make sure that those things are done ethically.  And if someone discovers that the almighty dollar is gonna be what's gonna drive this and they go where they can get the greatest return on investment, regardless of the ethical implications, of the moral implications, then I believe we're on a slippery slope and that we will not only not succeed, but I think that we will collapse as a nation if we don't bring the moral fiber.  I think it was Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] who said, that there's no conflict between technology and theology, mentality and morality, and we have to make that a reality.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.  And on that optimistic note, I'd like to say that we'd also like to capture some of the images from the photographs that you have available in the office today and ask you to narrate some of those and tell us about those moments in your personal history and what they've meant to you.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Regina, what about--
Speaker 2: He has the photos?
Speaker 1: They're in the next room over.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Do I have to go get them or?
Speaker 1: I'll get them.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, all right, fine.
Story_ID: 31526
Speaker 1: All right, Dr. Earls, in the, as we prepare to look at the photos, there's two other questions that I'd like to ask you.  The first having to do with your legacy and how you'd like to be remembered.  I know you talked about the day when you retire from NASA, what folks will look back and say about your career, your years here at NASA, but what about overall?  What do you hope that your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: I hope that people would say, wherever Julian Earls had power and influence, was that he used that power and influence to help people, that whatever tools he had available to him, that his primary focus was to make sure that he created an environment for people where they could grow and where they could develop and where they could contribute.  I really think that that would, that's maybe a little bit pie in the sky, but that's what I strive for.
Speaker 1: And my second question, it has to do with your work as an African American man in a field where there aren't necessarily great numbers of African American people.  But for someone who had so many firsts associated with his career here at NASA, what do you believe has been your greatest contribution or what do you hope that your gift will be to the African American people when your work here at NASA is finished?
Speaker 2: I would like to have more African American scientists and engineers who are there because of something I said or something I did or some help I gave.  I get gratification when I'll get a note, an email or letter from someone who says, you taught me at Cuyahoga Community College where I taught for about 25 years, and the student, a former student will say I'm now in a discipline or I went on to college and you had some influence in that.  I give a lot of presentations around the nation for commencement exercises and into schools for assembly programs and so forth.  If there's any way to trace some impact that I've had upon students making decisions to either work harder, study harder or go to college or go on to some school beyond high school or for college students to get graduate degrees, I really would like to be considered or given some kind of credit for being of some influence in that regard, tough to measure.  And often I tell teachers, you don't know how many lives you've touched because often you don't get that kind of feedback, but you do it because it's the right thing to do.  And somehow in your heart and in your mind, you know that you're making a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: And I almost feel apologetic about mentioning this, but there is--
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, well, you know, I didn't have the script in front of me cause I thought I had memorized it at this point (laughter).  All right.  But, Dr. Earls, do you have a favorite phrase or motto or saying that sort of guides your life and your work?
Speaker 2: Yes, and it comes from growing up in my church where one of the deacons used to say, "God did not give anybody everything, but he gave everybody something."  And that has been a guide for me because it says that everybody has something to contribute.  It also means everybody is ignorant except on different subjects.  And what we have to do is understand and appreciate that everybody brings something and we have to make sure that we learn to seek it out, to cultivate it and to appreciate it.  But, yes, I dearly love to quote that in any number of settings.
Speaker 1: Thank you again.
Story_ID: 31527
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Give a description, just enough to provide a caption.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: It's Julian M. Earls.  The year is 1976 in the laboratory with an instrument that is used to measure background radiation levels. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Great, next.  Okay, and this is gonna be fine.  And go ahead, sir.
Speaker 1: That is Julian Earls with Congressman Louis Stokes.  That was taken in 1992 at an occasion where Congressman Stokes was being honored for his contribution to the Small Disadvantaged Business Program at NASA. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Great, next.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is, from left to right, Julian Earls, Mrs. Annie Glenn, former Senator and Astronaut, John Glenn, and former NASA Glen Center director, Donald Campbell on the occasion of the NASA Louis Research Center's name being changed in honor of Senator Glenn, John Glenn Research Center at NASA Field.  The year was 2000. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Perfect.  Next.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is former NASA administrator, James Fletcher, Julian Earls, on the occasion of Administrator Fletcher giving Julian Earls the NASA metal for achievement in Equal Opportunity programs.  The year was 1975. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Great, next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is taken at Anton Gradina (ph.) Elementary School on the occasion of the first NASA Glen grant being given to the historically black colleges and universities.  Wilberforce University, pictured in the photograph; seated to the lower left is NASA administrator, Dan Golden, in the middle is John Anderson, Dr. John Anderson was the president of Wilberforce University.  To his right was the NASA Glen Center director, Larry Ross, standing on the left is Dr. Al Hepp (ph.) who was the architect of the statement of work for the program, Julian Earls in the middle and Dr. Ronald Alexander, the Vice President for Academic Affairs at Wilberforce University. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Great, next.  Any time you're ready.
Speaker 1: This is the year 1999 with Julian Earls sitting on the right and the administrator, current administrator of Kennedy Space Flight Center, John Kennedy, Jim Kennedy, sorry, Jim Kennedy who is seated in the middle. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Great, next.
Speaker 2: Julian Earls, the year is 1977, giving a demonstration before the Centaur, upper stage launch vehicle in celebration of a program at NASA honoring those contributors to the Centaur program. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Great, next. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: This is Julian Earls with Hollywood actor, Ed Norton on the occasion in the year 2004 of the scholarship program for Cuyahoga Community College in Cleveland, Ohio. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Great, next.
Speaker 2: This is the year 1981, seated on the left is Dr. Julian Earls' mentor, former boss, Edward Richly.  To the right of Julian Earls, to the left of Julian Earls, the right of the look at the photo is, oh, my God, I forgot his name already, oh, Leroy McCreary who was the human resources manager at Glen Research Center.  To the right is an unidentified participant. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Okay, great.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry about that.  This 1978, Dr. William Ford, Nuclear Physicist at NASA Glen Research Center with Julian Earls.  Dr. Ford had nominated Julian Earls for an Outstanding Citizens Award from the Cleveland JCs and this was the award presentation. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Great, next.
Speaker 2: I like those telephones, two.
Speaker 1: We had two phones.  And I tell you, it took a long time to get there, but this is Julian Earls in 1982 seated at his desk at the time he was Chief of the Office of Environmental Health at NASA Glen Research Center. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Julian Earls.  The year 1977, giving a demonstration and lecture on the sky lab science project that was launched in space by NASA. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Hold on for a second.  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is Julian Earls on January 1, 2002 carrying the Olympic flame for Salt Lake City, Utah Winter Olympics on its travel through Cleveland, Ohio. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  All right, good.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's Madison Chandler Earls, grand baby at the age of three and a half, lives in Macon, Georgia. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Okay, and what year would that be?
Speaker 1: Ghee, that was last year, 2004, yeah, 2004. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Okay, next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This was taken in 2004 at a Delta Sigma Theta convention in Los Angeles.  This is my bride of over 42 years, Zenobia Earls. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Great, next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This was the year 1993, Gregory Earls, son of Julian and Zenobia Earls, whitewater rafting, somewhere in California. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Okay, next, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Julian Earls in the Retro Cleveland Marathon on May 17, 1987. (OFF-CAMER VOICE):  Great, next.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a cartoon from "Crain's Cleveland Business", the year was 2003 when Earls became Center Director of NASA Glen Research Center.
