Story_ID: 598971
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm Lloyd Charles Elam [HistoryMaker Dr. Lloyd C. Elam], E-L-A-M. And Lloyd is spelled with two Ls, L-L-O-Y-D.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Little Rock, Arkansas, October 27, 1928.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a psychiatrist, I spent most of my career in education.  And, of course, I'm essentially retired now even though I still work a couple a days a week.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 14, 19--excuse me, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're sitting in a building on the campus of Meharry Medical College in Nashville, Tennessee.  This building is the mental health center and it's named the Lloyd C. Elam Mental Health Center [Nashville, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 598972
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.  The first one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Black eyed peas.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'd like for it to be Hawaii but I don't get to go very often.  But I guess that's, that's, that would be my favorite if I could go more often.  No other place.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or a saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 598973
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family first then I'm gonna ask about your father's [Harry Elam] side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I'll ask about both of them. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay. My mother's name was Ruth Davis Elam, R-U-T-H, Davis, D-A-V-I-S, E-L-A-M.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her birthdate was June 14, 1899, and she was born in Arkadelphia, Arkansas, A-R-K-A-D-E-L-P-H-I-A.
Speaker 1: All right, now, what do you know about your mother's ancestors?  How far back can you trace that group?
Speaker 2: I haven't traced them at all but her aunt told me that the family came from Nigeria, from the Ibo tribe in Nigeria.
Speaker 1: That's I-B-O?
Speaker 2: I-B-O, Nigeria and I don't know anything about the family during the years of slavery or anything else.  They--that family somehow lived in Arkadelphia, Arkansas and I knew three generations there, my, my mother's mother, grandmother and an older aunt.
Speaker 1: Would this be a great aunt?
Speaker 2: Great aunt. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your grandmother I guess and your grandmother's sister and her great-grandmother's sister?
Speaker 2: And great-grandmother's sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so that's, hm, so did they--so they say--do you know how they, you know, how they perceived they were related to the Ibo?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know that.  The, the great-grandmother--a great-grandaunt is the person who told me about this and she just told me names of people.  But she also told me that they came by way of slavery and she didn't know anything about--she didn't tell me anything about the slavery years.
Speaker 1: Can you remember any of the names she told you from, from way back?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, those would be interesting if you could remember--if you ever remember them, you should write them down probably.
Speaker 2: Okay, and I'll talk to my cousins and see if they have them.
Speaker 1: Okay, are any stories about Arkansas?  Now, the families--it goes back three generations, they must go back before slavery was over, right?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my brother's grandmother [sic. paternal great-grandmother] was born a slave and she talked to us about slavery, but she was born about 1854 so she was still a little girl when it was--slavery was over.  And she talked to us about it, but nobody--none of my maternal ancestors talked about slavery.
Story_ID: 598974
Speaker 1: What did your [maternal] grandmother or mother [Ruth Davis Elam] say about growing up in Arkadelphia [Arkansas]?  What was Ar- Arkadelphia like for them?
Speaker 2: Okay, Arkadelphia was a very small place, everybody knew everybody.  The black people lived in one section and all of them lived as though they were one big family.  They were essentially farmers.  They would--the males would get various other jobs but they were essentially farmers.  And when I went down to visit them, it would be a matter of visiting on the--where the horses were or the hogs or other animals.  And that was, that was their life, was that and the church.  And I guess that was about the way the life went there.  It was very small at that time and you have the impression that people were poor except they didn't think of themselves as poor.  They just thought of Arkadelphia as poor, but they were doing well and had aspirations to go on to college and everything.  But, that's, that's all I know about their living in Arkadelphia.
Speaker 1: Did they have a black school in Arkadelphia?
Speaker 2: They had a black school, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a special name for it or
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, you don't know the--what the name of it was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know the name of it.
Speaker 1: So, did your mother have a chance to finish school there?
Speaker 2: My mother finished school and went to a Presbyterian academy in some other place.  And then taught school for a short period until she got married [to Elam's father, Harry Elam].  But she did not have a bachelor degree, she just had a, a, a training to be a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she had what they called a normal school degree (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Normal, yeah, normal.
Speaker 1: And you don't remember the name of the Presbyterian college?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't think I ever knew it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, now, any other stories from that side of the family?  Did she tell any stories about growing up or about race relations there, or, or--
Speaker 2: Nothing about race relations, people in Little Rock [Arkansas] just--I mean in Arkadelphia just felt that the other people lived on the other side, lived on the other side of town and all of the black people lived in the west end.
Story_ID: 598975
Speaker 1: Well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name is Harry Penoy Elam [Harry Elam].  P-E-N-O--H-A-R-R-Y, P-E-N-O-Y, Elam. And he was born in Marshall, Texas and grew up there.  His parents were from Louisiana and his grandfather was a white judge in Louisiana.  And when we tried to do a study of, of our ancestry on my father's side, my brother only got to the next generation, you know, past grandfather.  So we don't know about the--and, and that was not accidental.  They just--he just--they just refused to give us information.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there a story behind the name Elam?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Was that the name of that judge or was?
Speaker 2: That was the name of that judge, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a biblical kind of name.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a biblical name and there was a little country in Saudi Arabia named Elam, and there was a group of people--Elam's in the area that is in Mesopotamia, in that area close to Iraq.  But we don't have any direct knowledge of relating to them.
Speaker 1: Now his middle name, Penoy, is that a--
Speaker 2: Don't know about that name, never occurred to me to ask about that name, Penoy.
Speaker 1: So, did your father know his father and, I mean, did he--
Speaker 2: My father knew (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean your father, well, no, his grandfather's father [sic.] was white was the judge, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.  Did he know his grandfather?  He knew who he was but I, I do not have any information about them having much contact.  That person did acknowledge the black children and helped support them when they were growing up.  But no other information.
Speaker 1: Well, that's interesting there that the judge acknowledged he had children and did try to do something for them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For--as far as support and education.
Story_ID: 598976
Speaker 1: So did your father [Harry Elam] have a chance to go to school out of Marshall [Texas]?
Speaker 2: He only went to the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The family moved to Little Rock [Arkansas] as a matter of fact and he--his last few years of schooling were in Little Rock in the Catholic school.
Speaker 1: Okay, he was Catholic?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Just--okay, okay.
Speaker 2: That's the only school.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Now, what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: Basically, he was a carpenter.  He did other kinds of things but basically he was a carpenter.
Story_ID: 598977
Speaker 1: Now when you--is there a story that's told about how your parents met?  Do they, they tell a story how they met and got together?
Speaker 2: My parents--let's see, my father [Harry Elam] was married before and lived in Chicago [Illinois].  And the family in Chicago owned a hotel, and my father was religious and sometimes when you run a hotel you have to put people out.  So this one night he had to get a pistol and go up and tell somebody they had to leave.  And he was so religious he just decided that that was not for him.  And besides that, his wife was sick and it turns out she had tuberculosis and they decided that going south would be better.  And so they went south.  She died and my mother [Ruth Davis Elam] was going to the same church and they met after his first wife died.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they meet in Arkadelphia [Arkansas] or--
Speaker 2: In church, no, in Little Rock [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Little Rock, okay.  So they met in Little Rock.  So was your father considerably older than your mother?
Speaker 2: No, it's just a few months' difference.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Both of them were born in 1899.
Story_ID: 598978
Speaker 1: Now, when you, when you reflect on your parents' personalities, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I'm very much like my father [Harry Elam] as far as my personality is concerned.  As far as my ambition is concerned, I think that was groomed by my mother [Ruth Davis Elam].  My father just wanted us to get an education.  For example, my mother said, "I want you to go to several colleges, don't just go to one."  And that--I didn't know I was following her advice when I ended up alumni of several colleges which is expensive (laughter).  'Cause all of them you have to help support.
Story_ID: 598979
Speaker 1: So did your mother [Ruth Davis Elam] basically remain a housewife when, when--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was always a housewife.  She considered herself a teacher because of that short period that she taught school and she was very interested in language and so on.  But as, as we grew older, as--I was born in 1928, so the Great Depression came when I was very small.  And during that time, there wasn't very much carpentry work.  My father [Harry Elam] bought a truck and he would buy timberland, just the timber, and had a crew that would cut it up and we would sell it for firewood or for lumber.  You know, the big logs for lumber and the rest of it for firewood.  He did that for years and then he finally worked in the school system.  But, basically, he was a carpenter and whenever there was carpentry work he would do that.  It was very interesting how that played into my upbringing because when I was four years old, I tried to go to school because my birthday would be in October so I would be five the next month.  And somebody reported this to the teacher so I had to lay out for a year, and I would go with my father.  He also, in addition to selling this--these logs for lumber, they would let him collect the sawdust and he would sell the sawdust to, to merchants to stores and they would put it on the floor in the meatpacking area.  And I--so I would go with him, that was the greatest year of my life.  I really loved that year (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now how old were you when you
Speaker 2: Four.
Speaker 1: About four years old?
Speaker 2: Four to five, yes.  When I was five, I did start to school.
Speaker 1: That's something, that you remember that, you have a vivid memory of that at four years old.
Speaker 2: It's, it was such a great year.  It was a great year.
Speaker 1: Did you have to kind of watch out so you weren't in the way?  Little kids seem to just be magnetized by trouble when they're that age.  They walk right--when people are lifting things and moving things.
Speaker 2: I probably got in the way, (laughter) I never got hurt.  I don't know that I ever got in the way.
Speaker 1: That's great, well, it's good you didn't get hurt.  Yeah, the sawdust, you know, the image you get is the sawdust floor of those speakeasies and other joints, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, that's what we did everywhere.  Oh, and, and also with his truck, in those days, they didn't have electric refrigeration so we would go and get ice and deliver ice to all the people in the neighborhood [in Little Rock, Arkansas].
Story_ID: 598980
Speaker 1: And that w- that's the first time I ever remember getting mad about something related to racism, because the merchant that we bought the ice from would call my father [Harry Elam] boy and expected him to call him Mr. and, as a little boy, you know, that made me mad.  And that's the first thing I remember about any racial things.
Speaker 2: I mean, would you encounter white people very often in, in your neighborhood growing up [in Little Rock, Arkansas]?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, people on--I lived on the corner and the people on the other two corners, as I was growing up, were white.  And we were friends and, you know, played marbles and ball and everything.  And across the--on the other corner there was a vacant lot and that's where we played softball and football.  And the whites and blacks gathered together and we, we played.  That's how I got this scar, (laughter) played football.  Yeah, it was, it was a great community, we didn't have any problems--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --socially.
Speaker 2: So it wasn't a matter of people calling each other boy and Mr. in that neighborhood or did you have to do that?  Was that the protocol?
Speaker 1: I tell you, I don't ever remember anybody else calling my father boy.  I don't remember anybody calling my mother [Ruth Davis Elam] by any name other than by her first name.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the neighbors basically treated each other with respect?
Speaker 1: Yes, right.  And, and the other thing is financially we were probably, even though (laughter) you would consider us very poor, we were probably better off than those neighbors.  And so it was, it was just one big neighborhood.  It didn't make any difference whether you were black or white in terms of--or financial, everybody just lived together.  Some period of time, my mother worked in the house of one of the neighbors and we didn't think of anything--that was anything, but we didn't think of that in any way except Arkansas law (laughter) didn't provide very many jobs.
Story_ID: 598981
Speaker 1: My father's [Harry Elam] father lived in Arkansas for a little while.  I don't know how long he did but he was--his hobby was stagecoach racing.  And he held the record in Arkansas for I don't know how long but for some years, for the fastest stagecoach.
Speaker 2: Really, now, now this is something we see stagecoaches in Western movies and such but were they still operating stagecoaches when you were coming up?
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know anything about it but his--my father's father was the stagecoach racer.  His job was as a scribe, they gave him a, an office in the state capitol building so that--'cause many people couldn't write and if there were documents to be written and to be signed, and notarized and things like that, this is what he did.  This is the way he made a living and the stagecoaching was sort of like a hobby, just race, race those.
Speaker 2: Okay, I never heard of that before.  They would actually have stagecoach races.
Speaker 1: Stagecoach races.
Speaker 2: Did you ever get a chance to see him race in one?
Speaker 1: No (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, just heard the stories?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So he, he had a decent education apparently to have a government job as a scribe.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 598982
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Not a good one.  My earliest childhood memory was when I was two I had a sister born and she was a blue baby.  And wasn't taken to the hospital and she seemed to me to have cried all of her life.  And she only lived twenty-three days, and she died.  And my father [Harry Elam] being a carpenter, and this was the middle of the Depression [Great Depression], made a casket for her and she was buried.  That's my earliest memory.  My next earliest memory wasn't very good either.  And that was, I went to kindergarten--this is before that four year old there's a--went to kindergarten and as I have told it, I remember this was a Catholic school and they had kind of routine what you would do.  I remember going to church and that didn't bother me but we were going on a field trip, we were gonna go on the streetcar and she was white so she would sit in the front and we would sit in the back.  And that night I told my mother [Ruth Davis Elam] that, "Now we have to call her sister and sits in the back and we have to sit in the--." I mean, "She sits in the front and we have to sit in the back.  That's too much like a fox." (Laughter) Don't know where I got that but I wouldn't go back.  And so that's how I started hanging around with my father on his job.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started kindergarten but then stopped and--
Speaker 2: I started and start playing hooky and rather than let me stay at home by my--I guess I would have been by myself.  I don't know but anyway I would go over to where my father was working--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as a carpenter--
Story_ID: 598983
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the--now, how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: Did I have?
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you have?
Speaker 2: There were four boys and two girls [Margaret Elam Broadnax and Harryette Elam].
Speaker 1: And where did you fall in that order?
Speaker 2: I was in the middle. I had one older brother and sister.  Oh, I had two older brothers and one older sister.  And one younger brother and one younger sister, so I was right in the middle.
Speaker 1: So did your household consist of the five children and a mother [Ruth Davis Elam] and father [Harry Elam]?
Speaker 2: There were six children.
Speaker 1: Six, okay.
Speaker 2: And mother and father.  And, at one period, we would--she would--my mother would have her sister--one of her younger sisters come to live with us or--well, it wasn't the same sister all the time but there would usually be six children, one of mother's--there were seven and my father and mother so there were nine in the household most of the time.
Story_ID: 598984
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Little Rock, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: (Pause) When I was--the Great Depression was a very important thing.  And my parents [Ruth Davis Elam and Harry Elam] were very concerned that the baby would have milk so they bought a cow, and that must have worked out pretty well.  And then they bought some chickens and rabbits and, as I was a little boy, I thought these were pets and I gave them a name and played with them.  And then they were for dinner.  One of them was with dinner and when you kill the chicken, the eyes don't close.  And same thing about rabbit.  And I felt that the rabbit would see me eating him and I knew his name and all of that.  So I stopped eating meat until I was twelve years old and it became kind of a problem at school 'cause sometimes they wouldn't have anything to eat if you wouldn't eat any meat.  So I started back to accommodate the people at school.  But that, that was a nice thing.  And then that got encouraged because they could buy five cents' worth of black eyed peas and that would be protein for me, for the whole week.  Where everybody else was having to eat meat which cost (laughter) considerably more.  So they encouraged that.
Story_ID: 598985
Speaker 1: You were saying you were a youth vegetarian.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because of that bad experience with the pets being--the animals that you named anyway?
Speaker 2: And enjoyed it and still have as my favorite dish, (laughter) black eyed peas.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now there was a story there and I didn't think to ask it in the beginning but I'm glad we got to it.  That's, that's interesting.  So they didn't bother you about, you know, people didn't try to make you eat it or--eat meat or suggest that you weren't gonna be as strong if you didn't eat meat, none of that?
Speaker 2: No, no, they did teach me about protein, that you--if you're gonna be vegetarian you had to eat things that were high in protein like peas and beans and things like that.  But that was very easy to do.  And in those days, you didn't eat very much candy.  You got candy at Christmas or something like that but candy wasn't in your diet.  So, it, it worked out real well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you said when you were growing up you had plenty of vegetables to eat?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had plenty of vegetables.
Speaker 1: I know a lot of people that grew up during the Depression [Great Depression] say--talk about having lots of food even though they didn't have any money.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So it was money that was more scarce than, than food I guess.
Story_ID: 598986
Speaker 1: You know, children now a days expect to have some spending money.  We didn't have spending money and didn't, didn't occur to us that we should have.  I--we, we lived two miles from Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas] and we walked, and even in the rain, (laughter) we walked.  I don't ever remember riding public transportation to, to school.  Probably did once in a, once in a while but I don't ever remember it.
Speaker 2: So Dunbar was two miles away from where you lived?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, and that was the only school.  Now the people who lived further out about five miles from school, they--one of, one of my family's friends had a bus and he would bring them in and the school system would pay him something like ten cents a child to bring them in.
Speaker 2: Ten cents a child, that really sound, you know, these days, you know, when you think about ten cents sounds like a little but I guess in those days it was about worth a dollar, I guess ten cents is worth about the same as a dollar is now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It could be worth that now, but he did quite well and he continued that even until I became an adult and was working in the school system because it was my job to keep up with how many children rode his bus every day (laughter).  And so he would get paid the proper amount, when I was a clerk in the, in the school.
Story_ID: 598987
Speaker 1: So we were talking about sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: (Pause) The--I, I, I don't, I don't have any memories except when we would go down to Arkadelphia [Arkansas] to visit my, my [maternal] relatives down there going over to where the hogs were and where the cattle were and so on, and the trip down which was seventy-five miles and it would take three hours to drive (laughter). So, we would see everything along the way. Right now that whole area is beautiful but then it wasn't, it was just woods.
Speaker 1: Okay, now seventy-five miles but it took three hours to drive it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Which implies different, you know, speed relationship I guess, you know, in those days, you know, then what we're used to now.  I mean now a days you get on the expressway and you--and who knows what it's gonna be when people see this maybe a hundred years from now.  But, so in those days what kind of car did you have?
Speaker 2: Well, we always had a vehicle and we never bought them new, so we would change every three or four years.  And sometimes we had a truck instead of a, a car.  We'd still take those trips with the whole family.  But most of the times we had--when we started off we had Model T Fords [Ford Model T].  And we continued to have Model T Fords until about 1936, so during--when I was small we had Model T Ford then after that we would get a Dodge and then a variety.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so it was like a two lane highway going to Arkadelphia?
Speaker 2: Two lane highway and those weren't very good.  (Laughter) Yeah, going to Arkadelphia.  And I don't think I ever went anywhere except Arkadelphia when I was a child.
Story_ID: 598988
Speaker 1: The first time I went somewhere is when I was a senior in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas], we went up to New Jersey to work in the asparagus farms.  Turns out we didn't work in them but that's what we went for.  They had recruited people down south to come up and do it during the war [World War II, WWII].  But when we got there the living conditions were so bad that we refused to work--to take the job.  What they had for itinerant farmers was a bricko-block building about twelve by twelve and two, four, six, eight people would be in one of those buildings.  It had no water, you had to go somewhere to the latrine and--
Speaker 2: A twelve by twelve?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so they had a bunk in each corner, a double bunk in each corner.  And we, we protested.  That was my first protest I guess, and we went over and hired on at DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company] for the rest--for that summer, going back home.
Story_ID: 598989
Speaker 1: Where did you go--start school, what, what Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas]? Was it Dunbar?
Speaker 2: That was, that was junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Stephens School [Stephens Elementary School, Little Rock, Arkansas] was our co- in our (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Stephens.
Speaker 2: Yes, was our community.
Speaker 1: S-T--
Speaker 2: S-T-E-P-H-E-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was it named for a black educator in town or--
Speaker 2: Yes it was, and I, I don't remember the history of, of Stephens now but it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went there until I went to Dunbar.
Speaker 1: Okay, about how many students were in Stephens, I mean, was it a big?
Speaker 2: It was six grades.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, so it had eight classrooms and later on it had a, another little building for kindergarten.  And didn't have an auditorium come to think of it, because it had a huge hall and that's what we would use for an auditorium.  And I did not go--my parents [Ruth Davis Elam and Harry Elam] would not allow me to go to movie theaters because they were segregated and so the principal of that little Stephens School would rent movies to show to the children so that they wouldn't have to go to the segregated theater.
Speaker 1: Would he show them after school hours or during school?
Speaker 2: Not during school, I don't know if it was after hours or on Saturday or Sunday.  I just remember seeing 'Emperor Jones' ['The Emperor Jones'] when I was, (laughter) I was in the primary school.  And I was so impressed I never forgot about that one.
Speaker 1: That's with Paul Robeson.
Speaker 2: Paul Robeson, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you--well, what did you--so you were very impressed with the
Speaker 2: I was very impressed with him and he was my hero until he died.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I liked math so probably that was my favorite subject but I was good in, in my classes so, you know, I liked them all.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a good student?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 598990
Speaker 1: Did you read a lot outside of class? Or outside of the school [Stephens Elementary School, Little Rock, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: I don't think I read novels hardly at all but I would read anything else.  In my home, we had a ritual that in the morning we--the family would gather and we would have prayer and we would read over the Sunday school lesson every day all those years.  And when the last person comes in at night, we would have (laughter) prayer again.  And so we didn't have to have rules about people coming in on time or anything like that 'cause you knew that if somebody was late coming in everybody would have to get up.  And so your brother would see to it that you didn't come in late anymore (laughter).  So we didn't have any rules, just knew that whenever you came in everybody was gonna get up.  And that went on even when I was off in college [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] and I would drive from Chicago [Illinois] to Little Rock [Arkansas], get there about one o'clock in the morning 'cause it costs thirteen hours to drive in those days.  And everybody had to get up and have prayer, and then we'd go back to bed (laughter).  But that was--so that we, we were a reading family, didn't have very many books but we read what we had.
Story_ID: 598991
Speaker 1: Did you get papers like the Defender or was there a local paper?
Speaker 2: I started selling the Defender when I was five, bought my basi- first bicycle by selling Chicago Defenders, later on sold Pittsburgh Couriers [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] too.  And that was nice because it meant that I would--I had a lot of, lot of freedom, 'cause anytime I wanted to (laughter) get out of the house I would have something to do with my papers, either to deliver them or go and collect for them or something.  And--on my bicycle--so I really had a lot of freedom.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's interesting, all right.  So the Defender and the Pittsburgh Courier--so did you read the Defender and the Courier?  I guess you would have to and you probably would want to I would guess.
Speaker 2: Only, only read the headlines and the kind of national news of interest.  You know, they also had a lot of, of social things in there that I wasn't interested in.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite section of the Defender at all, I mean, the sports or comics, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just the front page and, you know, the national news part of it.
Story_ID: 598992
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite teacher at Stephens [Stephens Elementary School, Little Rock, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: LeRoy Christophe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He just died a couple of years ago.
Speaker 1: (Pronunciation) Christophe, huh?
Speaker 2: Chris--C-H-R-I-S-T-O-P-H-E.
Speaker 1: Like King Christophe [Henri Christophe] of Haiti, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he just loved his job, he loved the kids, he knew all of them.  His job wasn't just at the school, he felt that his job was to see to it that everybody--that everything happened well.  As a matter of fact, my mother [Ruth Davis Elam] tells me--would tell me that one time they sent somebody snooping at our house to make sure we had enough (laughter) food to eat.  This was, again, during the Depression [Great Depression] and she was surprised 'cause we never went, you know, for lacking of food.  But there were a lot of us so the teachers wanted to be sure that, you know, we got enough food and we, we were not on WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] or whatever the welfare situation was.  So she--they were concerned.  But Christophe was a great motivator and he was my principal at, at Stephens.  And when I went to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas], Dr. Lewis [John H. Lewis] was the principal but later on Dr. Christophe was the principal and then he followed my life until after I was in my, my last career.
Story_ID: 598993
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to middle--you went to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas] for middle school then after the sixth grade (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were--we didn't have middle school, we went had--had sixth grade and then you went to junior high school, which is seventh and eighth grade and then high school.  All of that was at Dunbar.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite teacher at Dunbar? Mr. Christophe [LeRoy Christophe] is eventually up there too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he eventually was.
Speaker 1: Any others at Dunbar?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's interesting.  I never thought about that.  One of--not because of his teaching but one of my teachers became Alexander Cann was a sociology teacher and he became my great friend.  As a matter of fact, I had thought I wanted to be a farmer when I grew up (laughter) and Dr. Cann gave me a--all the information--the financial information about being a farmer in Arkansas.  You know, we have some successful farmers in Arkansas and the big rice farms in Arkansas were grossing about ten thousand dollars a year.  And he said, "You don't want to go and do that kind of--'cause it'll take you a long time to get to that point." And, but he became my great friend.  I guess he would be my favorite other than Christophe.
Speaker 1: What was his last name?
Speaker 2: C-A-N-N.
Speaker 1: C-A-N-N?  Okay, okay, Alexander Cann, right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he just died last year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so in high school you had aspirations to be a farmer?
Speaker 2: When I started until I came in contact with Cann and he told me--taught me about the economics of various occupations.
Story_ID: 598994
Speaker 1: And you said earlier before we started that most people--I mean, most of the people that you knew had aspirations to go to college. They (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --they thought it was something important to do.  Education was very important in Little Rock.
Speaker 2: That's right and that would--if I had become a farmer, I still would have gone to college.  That wouldn't have interfered with that.
Speaker 1: It seems that--and I guess you could confirm this that there are a number of black professionals in Little Rock, Arkansas in those days.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And how many black doctors would you imagine that you had there in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, that we had at that time?
Speaker 1: In Little Rock?
Speaker 2: Physicians?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Four.
Speaker 1: Four?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had some dentists, I think two or three dentists.  But, you know, very interesting, it never occurred to me that I couldn't be a doctor or anything else, you know, that I wanted to be.  One of my friends, I saw her in, in San Francisco [California] a few years ago, she had been one of the two people who had dropped out of school and she told her mother that she wanted to drop out of school.  Her mother said, "Okay, that's fine.  I'll just take in some more washing." And so she had to help her mother do washing and ironing.  And the next year she went back to school, didn't stop until she had her Ph.D. (laughter) 'cause she wasn't gonna do that washing and ironing.  But that's sort of the way things went.
Story_ID: 598995
Speaker 1: Now how was high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas]? Were you active in clubs in high school or student government or sports or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I went to all the football games but most of the people in my--most of the guys in my class were active and I was not.  I enjoyed studying (laughter).  As a matter of fact, the way I got interested in medicine I was thirteen and kind of browsing in the library one day and saw a little book and the title of it was 'Physique and Personality' [ph.] and I said, oh, that sounds interesting.  I read it, it was fascinating and it went on to show how whatever kind of physique you has, you have determines what kinds of adjustment possibilities are open to you.  If you're a little athletic boy and somebody does something on the playground, you might hit him or push him or something and he stops doing it.  And so you figure that works and so you become that kind of an outgoing person.  If you are a little thin, scrawny guy and you try that, the guy will hit you back and say that, that won't work.  So you decide to go to the library, (laughter) read books and so that determines your--another little boy on the playground tries pushing, gets hit, tries studying, reading, he's not smart so that doesn't work.  So he becomes the jokester and so the little fat boy becomes a jokester.  And so it was fascinating the way he wrote the book but it has some motivational kind of lesson.  And his students really tried to, to do a scientific study of all of this but they went too far.  But as you know, your physical does affect your personality.  But that's how I got interested in psychology and then found out, if you're gonna do research in psychology, you should go on and be a psychiatrist so you can do all kinds of research.  And that's how I got interested in that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so at age thirteen you were aware of what a psychologist was and--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in terms of that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because of that study?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 598996
Speaker 1: Did you identify any psychologists later on as, you know, know the names of some of them and--or ever meet any?
Speaker 2: Psychologists, well, it was--when I was sixteen is when I decided to be interested in medicine and psychiatry instead of psychology.  Did I meet any psychologists?  No, I didn't. I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, or did you know of any at all, I mean, from their work reading?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I remember my father [Harry Elam] telling me about Freud [Sigmund Freud] but that's all.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting, I mean, not everybody would necessarily know about him then but he was the, you know, I guess then and now probably the most famous psychiatrist.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he was a pioneer in the field, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, anybody else?  Did they ever discuss psychiatrists in school?
Speaker 2: No, no, they didn't.  Let's see, where did I have abnormal psychology?  I didn't have that 'til I got to, to college [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois].  No, I don't remember coming across any psychiatrists.  Well, here's something that happened.  My mother [Ruth Davis Elam] during this period was--did volunteer work and the place that she did volunteer work the most was at the state mental hospital.  In Little Rock [Arkansas] they had two big buildings, state hospital.  One for the whites and one for the blacks.  There was only one psychiatrist though so--
Speaker 1: Was it a--oh, okay, it was a white psychiatrist I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was white psychiatrist and he spent most of time in the, in the larger of the buildings.  My mother worked in the other one as a volunteer but, of course, she would, she would encourage my interest in psychology and psychiatry.  And I guess maybe that's why I said that she had more encouragement about the direction that I went in.  Oh, the other thing that happened in that area was when I was very small, I would be between six and ten, one of the ladies on the other end of our street who, whom I would always go to the store for and she would give me a nickel or something like that, had to go to the hospital.  And I always remember that 'cause she never came back.  I mean those days when you went to the me- state mental hospital, you didn't expect to leave.
Story_ID: 598997
Speaker 1: What was the--I guess the popular notion of mental health in those days?  I mean, do you--when you reflect back on it, what did people really think about mental health in those days?  Did they have a--
Speaker 2: Well, they only thought about one kind of mental problem and that's if you got crazy.  Everybody else, you know, just little different or they didn't think of it as mental illness.  But if you got--if you became psychotic and that's what they call crazy, you'd go to the hospital and that was it.  There was no medicine for most of the illnesses so it's true, people did stay.
Speaker 1: Did they tend to--you know, you hear people talk from that era that--I don't know, they--I don't even know how to ask--how did people see the motivations of others I guess, I mean, in those--I just wanted you to try to just reflect since you're a doctor now and you can look back on this.  I know often in my family I've heard people describe--older people describe people as being crazy or they'll describe someone as just being evil because they did something or, you know, maybe even as far as to say, you know, the devil got to them or something.  I mean it's so many, you know, how people reflect on motivation is--was different then than it is now for the most part I would think.
Speaker 2: People had different ideas about then.  When people would read in the Bible about somebody demon possessed they would think about some, some kind of a mental illness and would think that this was the way they were describing the mental illness.  Or, if the person would have seizures, they would think about this is being related to mental illness.  When people were depressed, they didn't think of that as mental illness.  They just think--thought of that as something that happened to a person and that you should find out about it.  Some people thought that, that depression was due to something religious.  But those were--
Speaker 1: That's a phone buzzing but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh.  Those were the kinds of things.
Story_ID: 598998
Speaker 1: We were talking about your early exposure to psychology and psychiatry and mental health (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And my family, we thought, we thought that everybody did the best that they could.  And if a person was having certain kinds of problems, 'cause they didn't know any better.  They didn't know how to do any better and we felt that most of them just needed education about how to, how to adjust to the various vicissitudes of life.  But many--if you became psychotic that was different thing, something was wrong with you.
Speaker 1: I often heard people described as being strong minded or weak minded.  I mean, these are general things that people say--women being hysterical and, you know, I don't, you know, it was lots of different ways people would describe the behavior of other people and differentiate between them.
Speaker 2: We knew that the people in the country believed that people would get fixed and hoodooed and things like that, but in the city we didn't, we didn't believe in any of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in Little Rock [Arkansas] itself there's very little hoodoo belief.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was more in the country.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So the people in west Little Rock or (laughter) really in the country (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, in the country not in the city.
Speaker 1: Did you hear many stories about that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh, jokingly, yes.  Sometimes for entertainment people would talk about people getting fixed and so on, yeah.
Speaker 1: It seems to be persistent to the point, I mean, I would guess today, I mean, that I could go out and find some people right out here within five minutes that really believe in hoodoos and--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, people in Haiti believe in--that there are evil spirits and people are possessed by these spirits.  And if you get possessed by it, you take on the personality of that spirit.  And there are certain rituals that you have to go through to get rid of that particular spirit.  But we didn't grow up believing in any of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I guess my point was that today I could walk outta here in--
Speaker 2: I'm sure you can (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Nashville [Tennessee], would take me about five minutes to find somebody that does believe in that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I was in a family discussion two weeks ago where somebody brought it up.  I said, "Well, I don't believe that," and they were shocked that I didn't believe it.  But it's, it's--so I would just guess it would be more persistent in the past then it is today, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Story_ID: 598999
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation [from Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas], did you know then you wanted to be a psychiatrist?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think, I think from about age sixteen on I knew that I wanted to do--I wanted to go the medical route.  And I wanted to either be a psychiatrist or neurosurgeon simply because I wanted to do research and that would be the direction.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you choose a college?  Did you--I mean what was the process?
Speaker 2: I went to Chicago [Illinois], which was the natural thing for people in Arkansas.  If you were going to leave, you would go to Chicago you would not go to New York [New York] or California usually to school; you would go to Chicago.  I went to Chicago and one of my acquaintances whom I had met some years before was going to Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois].  Roosevelt was a new school at that time and it was founded because all of the schools had quotas.  And every time you would sign up for a class they would--if you were not--if you were black or Jewish they would fit you into the quota.  And people didn't think that this was right so Roosevelt was started out of the YMCA school [Central YMCA College, Chicago, Illinois].  And it was only a couple years old when I went.  But this young lady was going and I thought, well, I'll go there and that's how I (laughter) chose.
Story_ID: 599000
Speaker 1: Okay, let me go back a little bit 'cause I think we may have skipped a couple of years here.  Now when did you graduate from high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-four [1944].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1944.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you go directly to, to Chicago [Illinois] after graduation?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I was fifteen when I, when I graduated from high school.  And my mother [Ruth Davis Elam] thought I was too young to go off to school so she--let's see, I, I think I had a hernia operation, and in those days you had to take it easy.  I think I was out for a year with that.  No, I know I was out for a year and I think it was right after high school.  It was either--and I went to a junior college in Little Rock [Arkansas] for that period after, after my recuperation from the operation.  And it was after that, that I went to, to Chicago.
Speaker 1: We skipped that episode and the New Jersey episode with the asparagus picking.  So you spent the summer--was it the summer right after high school in--
Speaker 2: I was still--I think I was still in high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In high school.
Speaker 2: I was fifteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's when you worked for DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company] for a summer?  What, was it just the summer?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Right. Just the summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So, so after junior college--
Speaker 2: Let's see, I can figure out where, where I was.  Let's see, that was in 1945, because while I was up there the war [World War II, WWII] got over right at the end, so that would be 1945.  And in 1945 I would have been fifteen, seventeen, so, no, that was, that was later on.  That wasn't right after, right after high school.  That was after that recuperation period and all.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was, that was in junior college.
Story_ID: 599001
Speaker 1: So 1950--you went up--did you have relatives in Chicago [Illinois] to live with or how did you--
Speaker 2: Yes, I had relatives in Chicago.  I lived with relatives for several months 'til I found a job and found a place to live.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Roosevelt University [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University], it's in Chicago.  It's known for producing activists in the black community.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage became a congressman, went to Roosevelt.  Did, did--was he in school with you?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Or--he became student body president when he was in school.  And Harold Washington was
Speaker 2: Much after me.
Speaker 1: Much after you?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But, but Roosevelt was an activist school, about 40 percent of the students were Jewish and about 40 percent were black.  And the founding of it was related to civil rights and it was named after Eleanor Roosevelt not (laughter) FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt].
Speaker 1: I didn't realize that until today, I remember--Eleanor Roosevelt, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was named after her because she was the one who was pushing an agenda for changing civil rights.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Roosevelt emerged out of the Y--
Speaker 2: YMCA school [Central YMCA College, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) MCA, okay, okay.  Now, 40 percent black and--
Speaker 2: And Jewish.
Speaker 1: --and Jewish?  Okay.  And those were the primary activists in those days I would think.  You know, if you go back through the--now, did--this is also the time of the, the Red Scare and all the McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy] era type activity.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did your student life suffer from any of that kind of a, a scrutiny?
Speaker 2: I don't know, 'cause I wasn't involved in any of it--any active, activity and didn't really know what was going on in school.  I lived in Harvey, Illinois, which was twenty miles away and worked in Harvey, and would get on the suburban train every morning and come into school and go to class, and then go back and work a full shift.  I tried that part-time working but that didn't, didn't suit me 'cause number one you didn't make enough money and it was hard work.  Not hard work, it was demeaning work.  But I worked in an automotive plant in Harvey so that was fine.
Speaker 1: So, which one did you work in, in Harvey?
Speaker 2: Maremont, Maremont Mufflers [sic. Maremont Muffler].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was quality control.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did that until I finished school--finished Roosevelt.  And, by that time, it was 1950 and I signed up for the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your major at Roosevelt?
Speaker 2: Zoology.  By that time I knew I was gonna go to medical school, no question.
Speaker 1: So you had a B.S. in zoology?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Were there any teachers at Roosevelt that you really--that really looked out for you or were a mentor to you?
Speaker 1: No, but there were teachers that I really admired.  The best teacher I had--isn't it--well, Sievers [ph.] was a one that I admired greatly but the best teacher I had was my chemistry teacher [Edward Chandler] who was black, had come from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to Roosevelt, and tonight I can't remember his name.  Oh my, goodness. I can't remember his name. But he was really the best teacher.  He taught me organic chemistry.  He had an exam every day--a quiz I should say, every day.  And the quiz would cover all of the material we had up to that point plus one question on what we would be covering in that lecture.  So you had to go over all of the past material and, and, and read over the new material.  And the, the thing that you were trying to do is to make a hundred percent every day, which, which wasn't impossible.  And it was, it really was fun, (laughter) organic chemistry.
Story_ID: 599002
Speaker 1: Well, when you finished Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Went into the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: --you went into the Army?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is the Korean War, 1950.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you stay on state--stay stateside or did you go to--
Speaker 2: Yes, I stayed stateside.  I had--my experience was that we went down to Fort Leonard Wood [Missouri] for basic training and the day I went I said, I'm gonna do everything you're supposed to do 'cause I don't want to have to stay in one day longer (laughter) than my two years.  And so, you know, I just made fun of the, of the training.  All of the guys were concerned about having to crawl in the mud or under the barbed wire while they were shooting machine guns over your head.  I said, I'm going through one time, I'm not scared of that.  If--as long as he keeps it going over my head, I'm gonna be--and, all of that, you know, I just went through it with--like it was fun.  And then I went out to Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] for classification, and went into the Medical Service Corps and then to Madigan hospital [Madigan Army Medical Center] for the rest of my service.
Speaker 1: Which hospital?
Speaker 2: Madigan hospital is in Tacoma, Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was in the, in medical laboratory and of course you do all of the kinds of tests that people have, that you do in a hospital.  But I was in charge of the serology, which tests serum for various antibodies or to see if people have picked up certain diseases.  And we'd look for, for people who had been over and had come back, for malaria.  And we would train people to go to Korea to set up laboratories.  So that was my, that was my experience there.  Very interesting that we lived in nice barracks because we were Medical Service Corps.  And the guy who was in the next bunk from me was a fellow who read a book every night, read an entire book every night.  And that was so impressive to me, I tried to do it but I've never been able to do it (laughter).
Speaker 1: What, what period of time would he give himself to do this?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you'd get through work at about four o'clock and he'd immediately go and read a book.  He'd get through sometime in the middle of the night.  But, I was--we had some bright guys in that med outfit.  You would like to have a college class made up of our outfit 'cause they were really good, good people.  I did apply to go overseas but I think that would have been to Germany and I didn't, I didn't get it so I just stayed there until I was out.
Story_ID: 599003
Speaker 1: Now you ended up attending the University of Washington medicine [University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, the University of Washington again was new at that time.  They had graduated two classes and it was a beautiful school, and I just decided that if they were putting that kind of money in it, they were gonna have a good school.  So I applied back in Chicago [Illinois] and Seattle [Washington], that was the only two places I applied and was accepted at both of them but stayed out to Seattle.
Speaker 1: Okay, how was that experience?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was just excellent, University of Washington med school.  And I've been out fifty years now, I'm going back to celebrate my fiftieth.  I never had any, any difficulty.  I must have--well, I lived in the fraternity--in the medical fraternity house so that you had, (laughter) you know, some automatic friends there.  But everybody was friendly and it was just a matter of recognizing, you know, you had been smart every--all the way through school, you didn't have any trouble being at the top of your class then you get to medical school and you find out (laughter) everybody else was top of their class too.  So it was competitive thing there but that was, that was nice.  Dr. Holmes [Thomas Holmes] was doing research on stress and I tied in with him my second, third and fourth year. And did research in stress and its role in causing disease.  The disease that I studied was tuberculosis.  I don't know if it was related to my historic past or not but at any rate--but he was a psychiatrist too.  And I wanted to be, you know, working with psychiatrists.
Story_ID: 599004
Speaker 1: Was introduced to a nursing student--I lived with my cousin for first year and she introduced me to her friend's niece who was a nursing student.  And we would talk on the phone every, every day.  (Laughter) That's the person I married.
Speaker 2: Okay, so met a Seattle [Washington] nursing student and, okay.  What's your wife's name?
Speaker 1: Clara [Clara Carpenter Elam].
Speaker 2: Clara. Okay.
Speaker 1: C-L-A-R-A.
Story_ID: 599005
Speaker 1: Now were there very many--I guess there were--I don't know--well, how many black students were in your--
Speaker 2: I was the first black school [sic. student] in, at University of Washington [University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington].  And it's only been recently that they've had more than one or two.
Speaker 1: So, just until recently have they had more than one black student in the medical school at the University of Washington?
Speaker 2: You mean per year?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I guess that.
Speaker 2: One or two per year (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Per graduating year, okay.  So there might be four there but they came in (laughter) one a year.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So this is the '50s [1950s], I mean, were you--how were you treated?
Speaker 2: I was treated fine, but--oh, one of the things that I did was to go to a--to Mount Zion Church [Mount Zion Baptist Church, Seattle, Washington] and there, you know, you met lots of black people.  And other than that, I didn't ever see any black people.  I missed them too, but I was in Tacoma [Washington] it was the same way.  I missed them and I would go up to Seattle [Washington] and just go in the area just so I would some (laughter).  And when, when I was in medical school, though, I just would go to church every Sunday that was enough.
Story_ID: 599006
Speaker 1: As you pursued your degree and you worked with--was it Dr., Dr. Holmes [Thomas Holmes] on this, did--were you surprised with the findings about stress, I mean, did you--was that--did you expect that stress would affect disease?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I thought that what would happen is that, if a person was under a lot of stress, he's more--he's likely to get sick.  That was not the case in the kind of sickness I was studying, which was chronic illness.  If you had been under that much stress, the next year you were more likely to get the disease.  So what was happening is that while you were under the stress, your stress hormones were active and so on, and then after it was over--after the stressful event was over, your stress hormones continued inappropriately and then you would get the disease.  That's the part that was surprising.
Speaker 1: Okay, that is surprising.  So, your body kind of--during the stressful period--
Speaker 2: It adjusts. It adjusts, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it doesn't seem to bother you but when it's over your body keeps--
Speaker 2: Keeps ready and, yeah, that's, that's still a factor.
Story_ID: 599007
Speaker 1: So did you finish as a psych- you finished as a psychiatrist?
Speaker 2: No, I finished--that's just medical school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is a medical doctor.
Speaker 2: I finished as a medical doctor.
Speaker 1: It's an M.D., okay.
Speaker 2: And then I came back to Chicago [Illinois] to internship and went to the University of Chicago [University of Chicago School of Medicine; Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] for psychiatry training.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated from University of Washington [University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington] in--when was this?
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957], okay.  And then you--did you immediately come to Chicago to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: For one year of internship, that's general rotating internship.  You spend a month or two in each of the specialties.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to University of Washing- University of Chicago for training as a psychiatrist.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did training take?
Speaker 2: I was there--is that three years or four years--let's see I finished in three years.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It has changed now. That's the reason I had to think about it.
Speaker 1: Okay so that takes you to, that's the early '60s [1960s] I guess.
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961]. All right. And so in 1961 were you now ready to practice psychiatry?
Speaker 2: I was ready to practice psychiatry. I--but before I finished my training, Dr. Roth [ph.] came up to psy- was in a meeting, and my chairman was talking about psychiatry and mental health and Dr. Roth told me that Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] needed a psychiatrist. And so he talked with me and we talked about me coming down and setting up a department of psychiatry at Meharry and that's why I came.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I came with the idea of staying here seven years and going back to Chicago (laughter). After seven years, you just, couldn't think of leaving Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay. So, so before we leave Chicago, were there any teachers at the University of Chicago or any profound subject matter in thi--
Speaker 2: Well, let me--those are two different questions.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The teacher who I admired the most was Bob Daniels [Robert Daniels], who was psychoanalytically trained as a psychiatrist. But I came in contact with a lot of people who are in--etched in my memory. Bettelheim [Bruno Bettelheim] was treating people who had autism. In those days, they thought autism was very rare and we were getting rich kids from England and all over this country to treat for the autism. And he would treat them for years. They would finally start talking and start having a reasonable life. But it was, it was thought to be rare. Now we see a large percentage of autistic children. Somewhere between 6 percent and 10 percent. It's a large number. Another--some of the other doctors. Kohut [Heinz Kohut], who was, who became the head of the psychoanalytic movement at that time was one of our research teachers. Alexander [Franz Alexander] also. So we, we had outstanding teachers. We had no, no black teachers. Matter of fact, that was true in all of my training at the school. But I rotated with one private psy- private physician Dr. Robert Joyner [Robert N. Joyner], who was practicing in Seattle [Washington]. But I guess he would be the only one.
Story_ID: 599008
Speaker 1: Just a couple things--housekeeping things, Dr. Chandler [Edward Chandler] you say was the organic chemistry te- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Organic chemist teacher at Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] who was the best teacher I ever had (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, this was a black teacher?
Speaker 2: He was a black teacher who had come from, from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to Roosevelt.  I had good teachers.  One of the other teachers--I was just impressed because he had five Ph.D.'s. He was a, a person who had been--had escaped from Germany, a Jewish scholar.  I was impressed with him for that, but the best teacher was Dr. Chandler.
Speaker 1: What was the man that had the five Ph.D.'s?  I don't wanna (unclear) but that's, that's incredible.  Five Ph.D.'s?  And I mentioned Dr. Roderick Pugh [HistoryMaker Roderick Pugh] who was in the--he was a psychiatrist as well who came out of University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] ahead of you, who you knew from Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 599009
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you discovered in psychiatric school [University of Chicago School of Medicine; Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] that was, you know, just never would have thought before or was just kind of profound to you at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, I was just fascinated with all of psychiatry.  The thing that really was interesting is how the mind works.  And that's what I was really interested in until the first drug that was specifically for a mental disorder, which was a, an antidepressant came out.  And then it was not only how the mind worked but how the brain works, and I've been interested in, in both of those ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay, give us a little background on that.  There's a--I know I--you can do a better job than--but just kind of bring us update--people--psychiatry lean heavily on psychoanalysis didn't it before they started coming up with the--
Speaker 2: With the medications (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) medici- yeah, medications.
Speaker 2: The basis of the psychoanalysis is, is that you have an unconscious and a conscious and the--what's unconscious you can't--you don't have access to but it still affects all of the conscious things, your behavior and your thinking.  And psychiatry found a way--Freud [Sigmund Freud], actually, found a way to communicate to find out some of the things that were in the unconscious and how the unconscious was affecting people.  And that was fascinating because only, only way you could get at it is either through dreams or through this free association method.  And you could really learn about a person's mental functioning that way.  Now once we started having access to the brain through imaging--well, first we had drugs and the drugs would affect certain kinds of problems.  And then once we had imaging, you can find out where the brain is--what's, what cells are working when you're doing certain kinds of activities.  If you are, if you are listening to music, it's in one part of the brain.  If you are solving a problem, it's another part of the brain.  If you're remembering a face, there're a couple of parts of the brain.  And it's fascinating.  One of the things we found out, we used to think that once you got thirty-five or so you started losing brain cells.  Now we find out that the brain can generate new processes, and if you're treated with antidepressants, for example, it creates new processes and new connections.  And there are other ways that this happens.  So all of this is working out very well to show us what parts of the brain controls other parts.  And if a part is under functioning, then the part that it is supposed to control is too active.  And that's what happens with the people who have hyperactive syndromes, that the part of the brain in the frontal lobe which is supposed to modulate what's going on down in the deeper section, it's not working as well.  So the deeper sections a person is more active has hyperactive and what you can do is to give them some medicine that stimulates the frontal lobe and calms it down.  And, apparently, a lot of students have--kids have that.  So the whole field makes you feel that the rest of the body is very simple (laughter) compared with the--what's going on in the brain.
Story_ID: 599010
Speaker 1: When you finished school [University of Chicago School of Medicine; Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], now what was the state of psychiatry in the black community?  What--I mean, how did people receive it and how was it practiced?
Speaker 2: Men didn't hardly go to a psychiatrist unless they were forced to almost.  So if you went to the state hospital, you would see more men there than women.  Women recognized that a lot of the problems were psychological so that they would, they would go to a psychiatrist or psychologist to help them with many kinds of problems.  This was not very well accepted by a large percentage of the population though, and people didn't think that you could really make a living as a psychiatrist, that's what they said to me in school.  But I, I knew that there were sophisticated people who needed psychiatric care and that they would be willing to pay for it.
Story_ID: 599011
Speaker 1: So did you--when you finished school at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago School of Medicine; Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], did you come immediately to Fisk?  I mean to--
Speaker 2: To Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To Meharry, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I stayed at the University of Chicago for a few months and then came down to, to Meharry.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your task was to develop the department of psychiatry.
Speaker 2: Psychiatry, that was why I came.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was it difficult finding other psychiatrists (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't difficult.  We had a, a very small grant so that helped me to pay some salaries and we, you know, one psychiatrist had been--was a Meharry graduate and he had been away and we--in the [U.S.] Army and came back, he was Puerto Rican.  And we hired him, Dr. Hernandez [Raphael Hernandez], and the other person just heard about us and applied.  He was from Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and he worked with us for several years.  And then we hired a--I had the idea at that time that we would have a team that would be made up of behavioral scientists.  So we hired a psychologist who was just finishing from Pennsylvania, who had been at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], and so he had his Ph.D. from Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania].  We hired him and let's see--I don't know how we got the other psychologist, he probably attracted him.
Speaker 1: So this then was a department of behavioral science?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We called it Department of Psychiatry in those times but now we call it behavior science and psychiatry [Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences].
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was called psychiatry but it was behavioral science.  You know, 'cause you have psychologists and sociologists (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and sociologists, anthropologists.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Social workers, so we had the whole, the whole thing.
Story_ID: 599012
Speaker 1: Worked very well until medicine started having managed care and they decided that you should do this without all of these other people, just have psychiatrists (laughter).
Speaker 2: Explain a little bit more of what you mean?
Speaker 1: Managed care, because the cost of care was going up so fast, the insurance companies decided that we should, we should have managed care.  They thought that in that way you could manage the costs.  And the government bought that idea and so the idea was quickly instituted that you should do it at the least cost.  And the least cost meant that the least expensive person who could do that care should do it.  If a psychologist can do psychotherapy, pay the psychologist 'cause you don't have to pay them as much as you have to pay a psychiatrist.  So, well, the psychiatrist has to--a physician has to prescribe medicine so they would pay the psychiatrist for medication management, but they will, after a person has been on for a long time, the family doctor can prescribe the medicine.  So they--and you don't have to pay him as much, and so--and that--in that way they thought they could cut the costs.  On the other hand, when you have to pay the businesspeople and the insurance people, and so on, it's seems that the cost is (laughter) going on up anyway, it's just going to different people.
Speaker 2: That's interesting, interesting scenario.
Story_ID: 599013
Speaker 1: You established this department here at Fisk in, in--
Speaker 2: No, not Fisk, Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean at Meharry, I keep calling--I'm sorry. I keep doing that.
Speaker 2: Yeah. In Meharry.
Speaker 1: But in--what was it in 19--
Speaker 2: Well, I came here in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had the department--we established one unit at a time.  First, we could do outpatient work 'cause we could do that just with, with the doctor but we then started doing day hospital where the people would come in and have their treatment and then go home.  This was a new idea at that time and--but the community accepted it.  As a matter of fact, I had one person who left and kind of got confused and didn't know his way home, and he stopped at a neighbor's house up on 26th [Street].  And she called us and said, you know, this person was there.  So we went and got him and got him home.  So, didn't have any problem, she wasn't frightened or anything.  The community accepted it, then after that we had inpatients and children, and so on.  And then we built this building.
Speaker 1: So, so the, the program here are like services surrounding community here in Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Story_ID: 599014
Speaker 1: Now, just about the time that I got all of that going the--there was progress in civil rights and desegregation of schools.  And people had the idea that all of the black schools were gonna merge into the others and you wouldn't need them so we had that kind of crisis.  And that's when I moved into administration and bunch of us met every Saturday night for a year struggling with what, what would be an appropriate approach to this problem.  It was a problem for us.
Speaker 2: The funding began to dry up or--for the black institutions?
Speaker 1: No, probably, I don't know but you know, black institutions have always had funding problems so I don't know if it was drying up or not.  I was--this is before I was in administration.  But the question is, why do you need two whatever kinds of institutions, you know, and so what we decided after that year of, of talking about the problem is that, sure enough, you did need historically black institutions [HBCUs].  If, if Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] stopped it's existence, then number of black persons going into medicine would drastically decrease and so that we did, indeed, need to continue this institution.  And that's when I went into administration and decided that, if we were going to, we needed to be a niche institution.  And we should address those illnesses and problems that were unique to the population that we served.  And, in order to do this, we had to do a number of things.  One, was to build a campus and that's what a good number of years of my administration was involved.  But the other was to establish a Ph.D. program, research programs, and so on.  And we did that.  And it's--and they are going very well in addition to medicine and dentistry.
Speaker 2: How long did it take to establish those?
Speaker 1: I, let's see, I became president in '68 [1968] so we started building campus in '69 [1969] and we started the research in, in graduate studies in about '75 [1975] somewhere in there, middle '70s [1970s].  And then it became a school of graduate studies and research in about '76 [1976].  So--excuse me, let me see, '76 [1976], yep, that's right in '76 [1976].  And now we will graduate a significant percentage of black Ph.D.'s. in the biomedical sciences and of course we still have the medical program.
Story_ID: 599015
Speaker 1: You went over that so lightly that I (laughter)--this is, this is heavy stuff.  You were director here of--you were president of Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] for, from '68 [1968]--
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968] to '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: Okay, and these are crucial years for the survival of the institution and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, especially the first few were very crucial because it was philosophical what was gonna--what should happen.  And once people accepted the philosophy and it wasn't only what we were doing here but it was partly what we were doing here, then raising money became really easier than it had been all the years before.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are the--I suppose that--well, I know that in the '90s [1990s] there was a lot of talk about closing or merging black colleges [HBCUs] with, with the white colleges.  Were there ever times when they were talking about merging Meharry with a white medical institutional or state facility or something?
Speaker 2: Not a state facility because the constitution of the State of Tennessee prevents that but they of course talked about merging it with Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] and all of that.  But we had been talking about that back in '67 [1967] for that year because we could see it coming.  So, you know, we just had to deal with it and we think we dealt with it in such a way that was acceptable to both sides.  Now we have cooperation between the two institutions, which is going well but no, no real discussion about merging them.
Speaker 1: So you're saying, I guess, the biggest accomplishment was actually forging a philosophical foundation upon which to build the institution?
Speaker 2: I think that's the case.  Now many people think the case is that we, you know, start building the campus and raise the money and all of those kinds of things but I think the real thing happened when we dealt with the philosophical idea of what should the landscape look like as far as education of doctors, black doctors.
Speaker 1: Okay, it sort of vindicates the existence of the place first.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is why we have to have this.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 599016
Speaker 1: In looking at, at the or- the institution [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] over the years, I mean, in what ways has it, you know, changed the community here in Nashville [Tennessee] in terms of having this institution here?
Speaker 2: Well, one of our students did a--some research in terms of children's aspirations.  And when you go into some communities, children don't aspire to go into medicine and dentistry, and things like that because they don't see people who look like them going into these fields.  And it was obvious that people in--children in Nashville, fourth grade, see people and they decide they want to be this.  Then she compared it with other cities and, and in those cities where there were role models, people would think of--that they would like to be a neurosurgeon or what not.  And then if you would ask them, "Do you think you will ever achieve that," in Nashville a child thinks he wants to be something he thinks he's gonna do it.  In some places they think they wanna be something, they don't think they'll be able to 'cause they don't have the money, they don't have the whatever resources are necessary.  So that's one of the things that we offer to the people of Nashville.  Of course we're concerned about their health and we do the research and, and service of their health but we think that what we do about the education and the image is probably as important.
Story_ID: 599017
Speaker 1: Just as someone who, who runs a facility like this [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] or who, who ran it for a period of time, what, what did--do you see now as the biggest health crisis in the black community and what were they, I mean, as opposed to what they used to be?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, health cannot be restricted to one community.  If people are getting tuberculosis, people all around--some of them may get a little bit more but people are gonna get it.  And when they are getting hysteria, people everywhere else will be getting it.  And so you--it, it is not static even though some genetic diseases are static, like sickle cell disease [sickle cell anemia].  That's static in the community but most things affect various communities.  Now we've been concerned about HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] for a number of years in this country because it's such a devastating disease, and that's something that all of us have to be very concerned about.  On the other hand, we're also concerned about people's dealing with their sicknesses in a way that incapacitates them rather than in a way that motivates them.  Take obesity, for example. Obesity is not confined to one community. It's everywhere.  But in some communities, people are being motivated to do something about the obesity, in other communities they are not and that's what the big problem is right now.  It's whether or not people will be motivated to do something about their various illness as the illnesses change or will they just accept it.  That's what I think. I think it's being motivated to be the master of your illness rather than letting the illness master you.
Story_ID: 599018
Speaker 1: In terms of mental health are, are black people going to psychiatrists more then--and psychologists more than they used to?
Speaker 2: Are they going more than they used to?
Speaker 1: Yeah, are they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, oh yes.  People recognize that they can get help.  Now, they have the idea that they can get help faster than they can (laughter) so everybody wants a pill to solve whatever is, is wrong with them.  But, yeah, but they, they're willing to go and get help.
Speaker 1: I know a few years ago David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] basically was challenging people around the country whenever he would lecture to, to get help for mental health reasons and, you know, it wasn't just your physical health but your mental health was tied to it.
Speaker 2: That's right, but the two are so closely related that if you get unhealthy mentally it's gonna affect your physical health and vice versa.
Story_ID: 599019
Speaker 1: Now you, you retired [from Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] in eighty--well, you were director [sic. president] until '81 [1981] but did you--what did you actually retire from?  Well you do some--you still do some things now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I retired when I was sixty-eight so that would be '97 [1997].  What was your question about that?
Speaker 1: No, I just wanted to--I was just trying to get--
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I, when I stepped down from being president, I came back to the Department of Psychiatry [Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences] and stayed there until retirement age--at the institution is for age sixty-eight.  And I retired--I continued to do the work that I was doing on boards and things like that.  I spent a lot of time on corporate boards and things until I was seventy-two.  And then I retired from them so now all that I do is, is volunteer, even when I'm doing--treating people is all volunteer.  I don't collect any money for that.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that's unusual these days.
Story_ID: 599020
Speaker 1: As we were talking off camera about the growth of the campus in terms of the student body, Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] is the second largest producer of black physicians behind, I guess, Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] or is--
Speaker 2: Behind Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay, so without Meharry or Howard, we--
Speaker 2: Well, you, you would have--these days thanks to the Civil Rights Movement largely, you have students going to all the schools.  And we hope that, that will continue because even with them going to all schools, we still have underrepresentation and we don't have as many as we need.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But what we think is that, if you didn't have Howard and Meharry, people would not be concerned about people going into--black students going into these fields.  And so, these two institutions, these three now with Morehouse [Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia], are more important than just the numbers that they turn out from their own schools.
Story_ID: 599021
Speaker 1: What are some of you hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: The need for the ba- black community is to recognize that this community can be what it wants to be, but if it's going to be that, it has to do it, has to take the initiative and push it.  You can get cooperation but if you don't do it, people--other people will come in and take the initiative.  As you see, immigrants take the initiative.  At all levels, it means that, that natural born Americans must continue to take the initiative in all levels not just the highest paying levels but all levels.  I'm very pleased to see the increased interest in writing and things like that, but we must do more.  I appall our imbalanced interests in sports and the amount that we are willing to pay for sports compared with anything else.  And of course young people who can do anything, lot of them will go that route.  But we need to have them realize that in order to have a balanced community you got to have that initiative in everything.
Story_ID: 599022
Speaker 1: You mentioned the Civil Rights Movement and, you know, Nashville [Tennessee] was really a center for a lot of civil rights activity--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and the birthplace of the Freedom Riders and it's a lot of involvement in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] with both here and James Lawson and Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel] and Diane Nash, and lots of people involved.  [HistoryMaker] John Lewis was here in Nashville.  How has--well, have you ever treated any of the people who worked in the Civil Rights Movement?  I've heard that there's like a posttraumatic stress syndrome amongst people who were involved during those days.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, no, I can't tell you who I've treated but, as you know, there were a lot of people involved in the Civil Rights Movement, and during and after a lot of these people had to have treatment.  But the civil rights activity did not create a much posttraumatic stress syndrome as all of the things that were going on before the Civil Right Movement and a lot of the trauma that's going on now.  I think we are seeing more posttraumatic stress syndrome now than ever before, and not just because of the war [Iraq War], because of all of the trauma that people are inflicting on each other now.  You see lots of, lots of it.  The time in which people were together and could tolerate more and had more aggressiveness, assertiveness I should say was during the, the days of great civil rights activity.  We acted as though we really felt good about what we're accomplishing instead a lot of what we call foolishness (laughter) now that's going on.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're saying that the positive, I guess, the positive aspect to what we were doing far outweighs the--
Speaker 2: Far outweighed any, any negative illness on the part of the people who were active.
Speaker 1: And so the victory is the balm for the, for the whatever wounds were suffered.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I'm not sure that you had the wounds.  I think it made you act in a way that you needed to act.  And you felt good about that.  And now what's happening is you are looking and feeling bad about your fellow Americans who are, are not doing as much as they need to, to continue to advance.
Story_ID: 599023
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything that you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: The, the one thing that I would do that, that I didn't do as much of is I should have was research.  It's an area that when you get involved in (laughter) civil rights and administration and teaching, and everything, you neglect that.  And that was what I loved (laughter) but other than that, I've just been very happy with my life.  I have two daughters [Gloria Elam Norris and Laurie Elam Evans].  I'm very happy one of them is a researcher at the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] in Atlanta [Georgia], and the other one is a physician, an obstetrician in Chicago [Illinois].  And I'm just very pleased, I'm pleased with my whole life.  My wife [Clara Carpenter Elam] is a nurse and she doesn't work outside the home but she volunteers everyday all (laughter) all of the time.  So I'm very pleased.
Story_ID: 599024
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look at your, at your life, what today would you consider to be your legacy?  Would it be your children [Gloria Elam Norris and Laurie Elam Evans] and--
Speaker 2: Oh, that's, that's a legacy that I'm very pleased with.  People think of Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] (laughter) as my legacy but--I'm pleased with Meharry, I'm pleased that I have no question about whether it will continue to grow.  And now Meharry is able to attract really terrific people like Dr. Riley [HistoryMaker Wayne Riley] and Dr. Rice [Valerie Montgomery Rice] and so on.  And I'm just very pleased with it, but the legacy is really those children who are just doing fantastic.
Story_ID: 599025
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't covered that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, we didn't cover what I do civically. We didn't cover my interest in the church and religious activities.  So there are things that we didn't cover but then (laughter) I don't guess they need to be covered.
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know, you can tell us something about your church activities and civic activities (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I'm just saying that I'm deeply religious. I've been teaching Sunday school in this church for about forty-five years and
Speaker 1: Now, what's the church?
Speaker 2: First Baptist Church, Capitol Hill [Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that is a very major part of, of my life, and I think that, as a psychiatrist, I have been aware of the spiritual aspect of people's motivation.  And think that society tries to get away from that.  I think that years ago black people really all were--felt aware of the importance of religion.  And as we have put other things in that place, we have suffered for it and we--and that needs--we need to have a reversal of that.
Story_ID: 599026
Speaker 1: In the same way, in my civic life, I'm--I work with groups that are interested in improving life especially with chi- with boys and so on.  As we have dropped our interest in the church, working closely in children's lives, other organizations have seen that nobody is picking up the slack.  The gangs are picking up the slack and we need to really work on that.   And I work with 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.], for example, and that's one of the things they are working on.
Speaker 2: Okay, does it matter what denomination or religion people are, I mean, in terms of that?
Speaker 1: In terms of helping children?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  You mentioned the importance of religion and I just wondered if it mattered--if you thought it mattered, you know, whether you were Christian or Muslim or Yoruba or what?
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  As far as your relationship with each other, I think that most religions support having a good relationship with each other and being concerned about children, and so on.  As far as your relationship with God, I think maybe that is where different religions have--that it makes a difference.  But relating to God--I mean relating to each other and helping children and all of that, I think all of the religious groups have a responsibility to that.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, now, what are some of the civic groups that you're--you mentioned 100 Black Men?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 100 Black Men (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know there're many others, you know, but
Speaker 1: Yeah, 100 Black Men and Frontiers [Frontiers International Foundation, Inc.], and those are the two main ones I work with.  But I work with a group that's trying to build homes for homeless, and groups, things like that.  I am not working with people who are concerned about people in religion--I mean in prison.  I used to do that, I'm not doing that right now but I'll probably try to find a way to get back.  But the homeless and the, and the prisoners, and soon the immigrants are just problems we neglect.
Story_ID: 599027
Speaker 1: Well, my last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd like to be remembered as a, a person who had no enemies, who loved everybody and could do what I could do--who did what I could do.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's say it like that.
Speaker 1: All right. Thank you very much for spending the time with us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 599028
Speaker 1: This is a picture of--the person in the middle with the red dress on is Rosalynn Carter.  When I was appointed special delegate to Peru, when Peru was getting its first democratically elected president in many years.
Speaker 2: That's back during the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 1: Yes.  That would be in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Taken at the same time with Mrs. Carter when we were on the trip to Peru.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is that a presidential appointment?
Speaker 2: Yeah, presidential, as a, a special--what do you call it (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Envoy or something?
Speaker 2: No, no.  You don't call it a delegate.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ambassador?
Speaker 2: Ambassador, yeah, special ambassador.
Speaker 1: Drawing of me when I had plenty of hair.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you have any idea about when that might have been?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Pre-presidency?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, that wasn't pre-presidency, that was in the '70s [1970s], in the late '70s [1970s]. I was president when that was done.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay
Speaker 1: I was on the cover of the Black Psychiatrists of American--of America Quarterly [The BPA Quarterly] in '92 [1992].  This is after I had come back into psychiatry after being in, in administration.  Quite an honor.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, sir, tell us about the top left one please?
Speaker 1: Okay, the top left one is the learning resource center [Stanley S. Kresge Learning Resources Center], this is a building that houses administration and the library, was built during my administration.  The one right under it is the hospital, which again was built during my administration, it now serves all of the county as Metropolitan General Hospital [Metropolitan Nashville General Hospital; Nashville General Hospital, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: The one beneath that is the basic science building, which houses the departments of basic science and the graduate school.  This one is named after the president prior to my presidency, Harold West building [Harold D. West Basic Sciences Center], and it is a, a great building.  And it seems as though it was--the picture was taken when there was snow (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Unusual.  And the stadium as well, is that what I see on the bottom picture?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's the stadium and just behind the stadium is the Elam Mental Health Center [Lloyd C. Elam Mental Health Center, Nashville, Tennessee].  We use that stadium for having graduation and other events by the students.  Now graduations have gotten so large that we do them in the Tennessee State gym [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], but that's what that was built for, was for graduation.
Speaker 2: This is a, a building for married students' living quarters, and it is here on the campus.  Turns out that a lot of students who are not married live there, but it's primarily for married students' living quarters.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, Dr. [HistoryMaker Dr. Lloyd C. Elam].
Speaker 2: This was a picture that was taken when I was inaugurated as president of Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], 1968.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a commencement and I am presiding.  It is in the--just above the bleachers and you see the mental health center behind it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, you ready?
Speaker 2: Oh, this is a very important day in my history when they named this building after me at the 116th convocation.  That's Dr. Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] doing the officiating.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And this is in 1991?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, sir, I'm ready.
Speaker 2: Here I'm making some remarks at a commencement and the background you see the crest of the school.  The crest of the school has--represents the school of medicine, the school of dentistry and the school of graduate studies.  And beneath it is written service to God through service to man.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Dr. I'm ready and it's the bottom (unclear).
Speaker 2: This is Dr. Satcher presiding and from right to left you see Dean Hill [George C. Hill] who is the dean of the graduate studies, Dr. Richardson [Dionne Richardson] who is in the dental school, and orthodontist and I am the next person and then a board member.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm holding a plaque here about the mental health center and that is my wife with--on the side of me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What is her name?
Speaker 2: Clara [Clara Carpenter Elam].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And what was the occasion?
Speaker 2: This was, again, Meharry naming the building, mental health center building.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Dr. I'm ready.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's--I'm standing in front of the mental health center.
