Story_ID: 659015
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Marla Winston.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Name is Cedric Antonio Kyles aka [HistoryMaker] Cedric The Entertainer.
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: That's C-E-D-R-I-C, A-N-T-O-N-I-O, K-Y-L-E-S.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in 1964 in Jefferson City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My occupation, I am an entertainer; I'm an actor and comedian, director, producer, writer, brother, husband, daddy, boss (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is a good question.  No, (laughter) today's date is July 21st?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Thirty-first.
Speaker 2: July 31st?  Today is July 31, 19--oh, wow.  (Laughter) Today is July 31, 2014.
Speaker 1: So many people do that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What happened?
Speaker 1: --pe- everybody does that for some reason.
Speaker 2: Where did the time go like that?
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Los Angeles, California, Studio City to be specific, on the CBS Radford lot [CBS Studio Center].
Story_ID: 659016
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have a favorite food.  It's pizza.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is chocolate brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is April, spring.  That's my birthday month.  But it's nice, and you know winter is gone and summer is coming.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination is Turks and Caicos [Turks and Caicos Islands].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have a favorite phrase: I wish a (whispers) m- fucker would.  (Laughter) Can you say it?
Speaker 1: You can.
Speaker 2: That's one of my favorite--one of my favorite sayings is: I wish a motherfucker would.
Story_ID: 659017
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Kittrell Kyles, Jr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know, so we don't get them mixed up.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Rosetta Boyce Kyles--that's R-O-S-E-T-T-A, B-O-Y-C-E, K-Y-L-E-S.  Boyce is actually her maiden name, and she just took that on as her middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth is January 4, 1944; and she was born I believe in Hayti, Missouri or Caruthersville, Missouri.  Caruthersville, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell us about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, first of all?
Speaker 2: My mother's side of the family is probably where, of course, I have the, you know, the greatest idea of our family tree.  You know, I know my--I had a relationship with my grandmother, my mother's mother.  I never met my mother's dad.  And I'm able to go back to my grandmother's mother [Katie Driver] just through some family tree stuff.  But I don't really recall names, though, beyond my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were your grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Rosie Boyce, she was originally Rosie Driver [Rosie Driver Boyce].  They called her Baby Lou [ph.]. And then her husband was Floyd Boyce, and they called him Babe [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother was a domestic.  She took care of the home of a wealthy family, and they were called the Darr family.  I remember being, you know, a young man and my, you know, we would go there to my grandmother's job as she would work for this family.  And Darr [ph.], seems as though the spelling--I'm not quite sure of the spelling.  They were in Caruthersville, Missouri.  I do remember it was two brothers, and they both were, they both were wealthy.  And my grandmother worked for the less wealthier one; but they were both wealthy.  (Laughter) That was funny.  So, and then my grandfather, who I never really met, he was more of a--you know, he was an entrepreneur.  They owned cafes and grills.  He had a little kind of gambling house, he would bring in entertainers.  There are stories that he brought in like [HistoryMaker] B. B. King and Bobby "Blue" Bland [Bobby Bland] would come to his little spot called the Sportsman's Hall [ph.], where people would--you know, the guys would gather and eat and also gamble and hang out.
Speaker 1: Okay, Sportsman's Hall, all right.  So, this is--so they were in the show--he was in show business?
Speaker 2: To a degree, yeah.  You know, it was more from the side of providing entertainment and, you know, being the club owner.  But yes, it was definitely a, you know, somewhere in the history of my makeup.
Story_ID: 659018
Speaker 1: Now, is there, is there any stories about your family being from anyplace other than that part of Missouri; or do you know any stories like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know that originally they came from Golddust, Tennessee.  So, Tennessee was mainly--everybody came over, and then through there came into Missouri.  But Tennessee was where most of my family's history started.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Is there a story about how the, why the family moved to Missouri?
Speaker 2: Not that I can recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, what did your mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] say about growing up?  Did she grow up in Caruthersville [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: My mother grew up in Caruthersville; and she was the youngest child of six.  And she was--picking cotton was one of the things that people did.  And she started, she grew up in that generation that wanted to get away from that.  So, it was something she had to do as a child, or at least her brothers did.  I don't think that she ever did it.  And, but she wanted to go away and go to college.  And so, she told me a story about how she had been sent off with one of her older brothers to Florida to become a nurse.  And she didn't want to be a nurse, and so she just got on a bus and came back home.  And when she got out at the bus station, she walked to the bank and just asked for the bank president and told him she wanted to go to college.  And he wanted to know who she was, and she told him who her mother [Rosie Driver Boyce] was and that they worked for the Darr family [ph.], and he called, checked on it.  And he thought it was such a bold move, he made it happen.  So, my mother was able to go to Lincoln University in Jeff City, Jefferson City [Missouri], which is, again, where I was conceived and born.  But that's where, that's was, you know, one of the stories I remember about Caruthersville, her desire to get out.  Now, she did go back.  Once she graduated, she taught there.  And I spent most of my young life in Caruthersville 'til I was about ten.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story, it really is (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: So, she just went to the bank (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) She was just like, "I don't want to be a nurse.  I want to go to college."  And one of her older brothers, who was--and she got the image because one of her older brothers was a track athlete.  And she just remembered an image that he had made the newspaper as this track star, but he was standing next to the president of the bank.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, that's how she made that connection?
Speaker 2: That's how she made the combination--that connection that the bank and college kind of exist.  And so, she just went and asked (laughter).  She wasn't a track athlete, though.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the bank?
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Do you remember the name of the bank?
Speaker 1: The bank was First State Bank.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, yeah.
Speaker 2: First State Bank of Caruthers- (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) First State Bank of Caruthersville [First State Bank and Trust Company, Inc.].  I can remember it was on like the main road into town.  And there was like--and then the main--it was the main road in from the freeway, which you would have to drive like five miles, you know, off the main interstate into Caruthersville.  And then the--then it would go to Main Street, which was the main street of the city.  And so, and they had the big clock.  And I remember the whole thing is that you know we would often go by and look at this digital clock that was on top of the bank which was like the big thing about that bank.
Story_ID: 659019
Speaker 1: So, your, your mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] was--so she wasn't the first person in her family to go to college, right?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Actually both of her--she had two brothers to go.  My uncle Melvin [Melvin Boyce] and my uncle Lloyd [Lloyd Boyce (ph.)], both of them went on track scholarships.  And then my uncle Melvin stayed, and Uncle Lloyd went to the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, does she have any stories about Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, I recall stories about Lincoln.  Again, her arriving at school, really having no idea--she only wanted to go to Lincoln, again, because her brothers had gone there.  She had never been to the school.  She'd never been away other than going to Florida.  So, again, she caught a Greyhound bus to school.  I think my mother--her mother, my grandmother [Rosie Driver Boyce], gave her nineteen dollars, some sandwiches.  And she had all her clothes kind of in some small bags, and she just landed on campus.  And I recall that her--she was telling me the story that my uncle Melvin was a big man on campus, so he made sure that she was okay when she first got there.  But he didn't really like the fact that his little sister was coming there.  You know, she was cute, she was--and she would, he would have to change his energy because he was this kind of hot shot athlete who was, you know, had it going on, and all the girls.  And now he's kind of making sure that these guys aren't messing with his little sister.  So, he wasn't a big fan of her coming there, and she said that he actually made it kind of hard.  He didn't really take care of her like that.  He would just make sure she was okay, and then he'd go on about his business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, interesting.  That was her--so she felt that once she got to college it was all about just getting her life together, and then she became really focused.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was majoring in education, I assume?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  And she went on to get a master's degree later on, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she went on to get a master's degree and became a reading specialist, and to be able to teach teachers how to teach young kids how to read.  And you know--just really proud.  I can remember images of her, you know.  Once--I have very slight images of Jeff City when she was in school.  I have one image of me that I know of.  I'm riding in the car.  And this was before child seats and all that stuff was necessary.  But I'm in the front seat standing up in the--(laughter).  And I got some shades on, and I just have this image.  And I know this story, and I was probably was about four.  But I had these shades on, and then I'd taken them off.  And then when I'd put them on, I said, "I'll knock that nigger down."  And she's just dying laughing.  And I don't know what that whole thing was about, but again, it was just this image of me wearing these sunglasses and I'm feeling that way.  But I can remember that moment of me sitting in the car with my mother, being, you know, this little kid, and we were in Jefferson City [Missouri].  And it was--one other memory was a place we used to go for pizza when I was a kid.  And those are the things that I kind of remember about Jeff- Jefferson City as a kid.
Story_ID: 659020
Speaker 1: Now I'm go- I'm going to go to your father's side, then we'll put them together (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My, my father's name is Kittrell Drayton Kyles.  So, it's K-I-T-T-R-E-L-L, D-R-A-Y-T-O-N, Kyles, K-Y-L-E-S [Kittrell Kyles, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind his first name?
Speaker 2: Kittrell, I'm not really sure about his first name (laughter).  It was a rare name at the time, and he's, he's got maybe--I'm thinking it was eight or nine of them; he has a lot of brothers and sisters.  My grandmother, Mary Johnson--his mother's name was Mary Johnson.  And, but I don't recall--seemed like that may be his father's name, too.  He was a junior.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he is a junior.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I've never--I met my dad's dad [Kittrell Kyles, Sr.] maybe one time in my life, and it was at the end of his life.  So I don't really recall, like, you know, getting to know him in any way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Let me see, my dad was born 12/25/42 [December 25, 1942]?  Yeah, '43 [1943], '42 [1942], somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So it doesn't have to be exactly right.  You know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as long as it's in the ballpark.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was 1942, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And where was your father born?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  In Hayti.
Speaker 1: In Hayti, Missouri.
Speaker 2: Hayti, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I've heard of Hayti before.  I've interviewed some--but it's, is Hayti a black town?
Speaker 1: It's a pretty black town.  It's in the bootheel of Missouri, very close to the Arkansas border.  And Hayti and Caruthersville [Missouri] is separated by about five miles--five, six miles, with the Interstate 55 going in between them.
Speaker 2: Right.  In the old days, I know the black section of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] in the early 19th century, in the 1830s, was called Hayti.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, this is a name--because of the Haitian Revolution--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --you know, to stay with black enclaves, black towns, black sides of town.  There used to be Little Africa, Hayti, or--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  As opposed to Haiti, yeah, it was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --pronounced (pronunciation) Hayti.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they pronounced it Hayti.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, so, once again, how far back can you trace your father's side of the family; and what do you know about what they were doing?
Speaker 1: You know, my biggest--most I can remember there is my father's mother, again, Mary Johnson.  And she lived in Hayti, had a great farmhouse, small farmhouse where she had chickens.  There was corn, there were beans.  At one time it used to be pigs.  And I can remember going over there and being--you know, it was a really, you know, rural, super rural kind of energy--gravel roads, you know.  You walk everywhere, and I can just remember that.  That was--again, I never really had an opportunity to meet his dad.  And then most of the people--he was one of the younger ones in his family, too.  So, most of his brothers and sisters were a lot older.  That felt like, you know, like you know they would be great-uncles for me.  But they were just my, you know, regular uncles.  But I don't remember nothing about her mother or anything like that.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So are there any stories that go back, like, to slavery or emancipation or anything like that on your father's side?
Speaker 1: Hm.  Not that I can recall, no.
Speaker 2: All right.  Any stories about them being from any other place other than Hayti?
Speaker 1: No, not that I can recall.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So they were probably there a long time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they seemed to have been, to have been there.  She for sure had been there a long time in that area, my grandmother, and that's what I do recall.  Seem like--I think that they may have come from Mississippi, I believe.  My dad was just telling me a story about that where some of his relatives called to tell him that his mother--yeah, his mother's mother had--no, his mother's father had land in Mississippi that they've been given generationally, and it's like a hundred acres.  And they was telling my dad he can get him a trailer and just come and just live on the land for free.  (Laughter) He wanted him to come and get him like a, like a trailer home.  And he was like, "I'm not doing that," like--but the land is still in the family, so.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 659021
Speaker 1: What did your father [Kittrell Kyles, Jr.] say about growing up?
Speaker 2: You know, again a small town, rural town.  He, you know, lived and worked, you know, as a part of that kind of sharecropper culture.  And, but he was a tall kid, athletics were a big deal at that time; and he ended up going to Jefferson City [Missouri] on a basketball scholarship.  And--
Speaker 1: To Lincoln?
Speaker 2: To Lincoln University, yeah.  So that was, that was, you know, that was the most he would ever really talk about that.  He was always, you know, interested in, you know, getting beyond Caruthersville [Missouri] and trying to, you know, live a bigger life.  That was the--definitely the start of that generation of kids that wanted more from just being in those little rural towns.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how tall was your father?
Speaker 2: He's 6'4".  So, in high school I think, you know, he was easily somewhere close to that 6'2", 6'3".  So, he was above average at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did he--so I--he played for Lincoln's team then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he played for Lincoln's team for a couple of years, I think.  He was, you know, a couple of years before my mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles].  Once my mother got pregnant, he decided to work.  So, he didn't finish school at that time.
Story_ID: 659022
Speaker 1: So, they met at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri]--that's pretty clear.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And is there a story about how they met, or how they were attracted to each other?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, she was, she was kind of telling me the story.  He was the athlete, they had knew each other because he was popular, you know, in Hayti [Missouri].  And he was a couple years older than she was, and there would be these kind of games and rivalries.  So, she knew who he was.  And so when she got to Lincoln, he was one of the people she was kind of comfortable with because it was somebody that she knew.  And he was a big deal, he was playing on the basketball team, they started to date.  It was not necessarily like a love thing, but a comfortable thing.  And then, you know, of course, in college you start to mature a little bit more, start to feel like--love, and you're in love.  And, you know, and that's how they really started to date.  And then she--they got married and she got pregnant, and then, you know, it lasted for a little while.  They didn't stay married too long.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were born in Jeff City [Jefferson City, Missouri] then, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --right there near Lincoln.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was exactly during that period when they were all in college there.  And I was, you know, conceived and born in Lincoln.  And then shortly after, I guess my mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] returned back to Caruthersville [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And your father [Kittrell Kyles, Jr.] went on to work for the railroad, right?
Speaker 2: Well, he went, he worked for a Western Union [Western Union Company], which was more of the telephone company.  People think it's the railroad, because they mix those up.  But it was the wiring for the telephone companies when they were really expanding.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Eventually turned into AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph Company; AT&T Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, did your father stay in your life?
Speaker 2: Not so much.  I can remember, you know, definitely seeing him throughout my childhood, like coming by.  But you know, my mother was, you know, she raised us.  And then, well, I had a sister [Sharita Kyles Wilson]--they stayed married 'cause we--I had a younger sister like three years later.  So after my sister was born, I think that was it.
Speaker 1: That's when they split?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Excuse me.  So that--
Speaker 1: So it was about four or five years they were together, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say probably closer to six.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my, once my sister was born, then they just kind of spilt.  And so that's when she got her degree and moved back to Caruthersville to teach; and then we stayed in Caruthersville.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think, I recall going back living with my grandmother [Rosie Driver Boyce] while my mother finished school.  So, I may have been there a lot--you know little bit before she actually completed that.  But I don't remember large periods of me being without my mother, not for real.  But my dad just kind of went on to do his own thing, trying to find his way.  And he would show up from time to time, and I just have those images of him coming to visit and making--taking us out to eat, and kind of hanging out like that.  And then a larger period in--once we moved to St. Louis [Missouri] where it was a larger gap, because I think his job moved him around quite a bit.  He moved to Omaha, Nebraska and then out to the Bay Area of California [San Francisco Bay Area].  And it was those big large gaps where I wouldn't really see him at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 659023
Speaker 1: So when you think about your parents' personalities, what they look like, how they walk, how they talk, their talents, their interests--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, I take after my mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles], (laughter) for sure.  I mean, you know, she's an avid reader.  She has a really quick wit, you know, and was real fun; loved music, you know, and pretty joyous kind of personality, liked to have a good time, enjoy life, but also a serious personality as well.  I never--she, she's more red head with freckles, I didn't get that.  I got more of my dad's skin complexion, but I didn't get the height.  I didn't get none of the height.  My sister [Sharita Kyles Wilson] got the height.  I was like, "Dude, I can use some of that 6'4"."  Like so, but I think overall, you know, the combination.  And you know, in getting to know my dad [Kittrell Kyles, Jr.], he also has a pretty quick wit.  And you know, so I would say that it's, you know, a really fine combination of the two.
Story_ID: 659024
Speaker 1: Tell us about your sister.  Now your?
Speaker 2: My sister is Sharita Kaye Wilson, she's married, but Sharita Kaye Kyles [Sharita Kyles Wilson].  It's S-H-A-R-I-T-A, and the middle name is K-A-Y-E.  And she is, you know, again, you know, this is that small family unit.  So, she was my little buddy, you know.  She was my younger sister growing up--three years, we're three years apart.  I always called her the grownest, even though she was younger than me.  She always, once she mature- she always had a mature energy and treated me like I was her little brother (laughter).  So, so, that's been the nature of our relationship throughout my life for the most part.  I even send her Mother's Day cards sometimes.  When I was like in high school [Berkeley High School, Berkeley, Missouri], I used to send her Mother's Day card, too, like, yeah, there's one for my mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles], and then for you.  Like, you know, so--but she's married with two boys, fourteen and eleven [years old] I believe.  So it's--and our kids are very close in age, and so we've kind of, you know, stayed stride in stride with things.  And she now lives in Memphis [Tennessee], which is where my dad [Kittrell Kyles, Jr.] lives as well.  So it's great that, you know, that family synergy is still there.  And she is an educator as well.  She went, she wanted to, she went to college.  She was very bright, and got her, you know, also has her master's, and wanted to go on; and she now teaches in the Memphis college community.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, she teaches communications, is that?
Speaker 2: Communications, yes, speech communications, public speaking--any of those kind of jobs that--any kind of those classes that are related to, you know, pulling that out of a kid to speak publicly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she's also the director of the Cedric The Entertainer Charitable Foundation [Cedric The Entertainer Charitable Foundation, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, we started that foundation in 1996 in St. Louis [Missouri].  Again, it was something that--again, being raised in a single parent household, I thought it was very important to be able to help kids that wanted to go to college, you know, who had the desire but didn't necessarily have the means.  And you know, we can recall the hardships that my mother went through to, you know, to make sure that both my sister and myself went to college.  And we were, you know, again, three years apart.  So, at some point in time we were both in college at the same time; and you can imagine the burden that is on one parent.  And so we started this scholarship program, the foundation's for that; and we've been going strong since 1996.  And she is a great director of that to make sure that we--she interviews and talks to the kids, and qualifies them for who we give scholarships to.
Story_ID: 659025
Speaker 1: Tell us about the neighborhood you grew up in.  Now, well, you grew up in a couple places, right?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  I started out in, you know, in Caruthersville, Missouri, small town.  I think at that time probably seventeen, eighteen thousand; it was a small number.  I just remember you know it's the kind of town where--lived in my [maternal] grandmother's [Rosie Driver Boyce] house, a lot of relatives lived in and out of there.  They would come, you know, and be a part of it.  But it was a cool neighborhood, where there were kids across the street, you know.  And I remember one family of kids I grew up with.  Their last name was George [ph.], but they lived with their grandmother, Miss Shelby [ph.]; and they had a big front yard, and that's everybody would go.  And there was--basically you'd come out of my grandmother's house and go kind of cattycorner.  And they had a big front yard.  You'd play football, you did lawn darts, you threw Frisbees.  And usually it was chitterling tops--it wasn't a real Frisbee.  (Laughter) Yeah, you know--
Speaker 1: Bucket.
Speaker 2: --bucket, yeah the chitterling bucket--that was your Frisbee.  We just got the idea from television.  But again, good--you know, very quaint town.  The railroad--you know, the train that would come through.  So, the railroad track would be a big attraction.  There was a nice city park that we would go to, to hang out in the summer times.  And then, you know, there were plenty of relatives in town.  So, cousins around this corner and aunts over here, and, you know, and just places to walk and go and stop and hang, and--so that was, you know, just really kind of a romanticized, small, southern city the way it felt, you know, at that time to me as a kid.  It was just someplace, you know, you really liked growing up--learning to throw rocks; and catching, you know, fireflies in the jar and, you know, and grasshoppers.  Put a June bug on a string and let it fly around.  Like, those kinds of things were what we did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was Caruthersville like strictly segregated?  Or did people live--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was quite--it was pretty--definitely a segregated city.  I can remember, you know, it was a--what you know, what they call--the little drive in restaurants were very popular then.  There used to be one that we liked to go to called Knox's [Knox's Drive In, Caruthersville, Missouri].  And Knox's was near the baseball park where everybody kind of hung out.  But it was on the white side of town; and it was okay to go there, but if you, you know you stayed past a certain time, you would know that it would get pretty rowdy.  And I can remember being chased, you know, when I was in my, you know, younger ages, you know, eight, nine [years old], hanging out with some older cousins that were a little older.  We got chased from Knox's, we had to run.  And I just remember that very vividly, you know, that that racial divide in that city was all pretty serious.  And Ward Avenue was the main street.  Ward was that dividing line where, you know you'd go on this side of Ward, it's all white; this side is mainly black.
Story_ID: 659026
Speaker 1: So you came--you're born in '64 [1964].  By the time you start school it's like 1970 I guess, right, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --thereabouts?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so fif- '69 [1969] I guess, yeah?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  So this would be in the--yeah, this would be in the, you know, the earlier '70s [1970s], you know, mid-'70s [1970s] that I can recall that energy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of southern towns are just desegregating (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I think right there--I kind of remember my mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] having a white friend.  Man, I'm trying to think of her name.  But I remem- just remember how rare it was like that.  Her friend was this white lady, Diane Sayre [Betsy Diane Sayre].  Diane Sayre was--and, they were friends.  And Diane Sayre lived on Ward [Avenue], in the rich part; and she was my mother's friend, you know.  And she would like even come over to our house sometime, and it would be just this odd thing, to see this lady like at your house.  And she was my mother's friend; and I can just remember growing up with that being a part of, you know, my dynamic, you know, for me to find that so strange.  Now it's not at all, but still at that time, you know, it was just like, is it going to be okay that she's over at our house?  You used to wonder about that as a kid.
Speaker 1: Now, did they teach together, or?
Speaker 2: No.  They were, they became friends, I don't know, through some--you know, I don't even remember how they became friends.  But I don't think she was a teacher at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And your mother was teaching in Caruthersville [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she ended up teaching elementary school there.  And, you know, that made us a big deal, too.  For some reason we were considered rich (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because she--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's middle class for black folks.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A teacher is--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, now you went through elementary school years in Caruthersville and I guess through the--up to the sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah, up to the seventh grade.  I re- well, through the sixth grade, yeah.  Because I went to--we moved to St. Louis [Missouri] and started my seventh grade year.
Story_ID: 659027
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what were some of the sights, sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, again, I can remember the--in the younger years is that, the dirt from, you know, like the gravel roads, you know it wasn't a red clay dirt, but it did have a clay energy to it.  Of course, living--going over to my [maternal] grandmother's [Rosie Driver Boyce] house.  There was a farm, farm energy.  So, you know, even when the corn would be fresh, it was a very bright smell when corn was growing--I can remember that.  Rain, I can remember the, how the rain would smell off the grass.  And mixed with that kind of open air, country energy, rain would make you sleepy.  And when it rained and the air felt good, it was just one of those natural aphrodisiacs, probably mixed with the flowers or whatever was going on.  Then, we moved--then you know, I can recall moving to St. Louis [Missouri]; and there was the Ford plant [St. Louis Assembly Plant].  And they used to have, they used to press something there.  And I just can remember this smell that, you know, you'd come to the city and the air felt really to- toxic.  And it probably wasn't, you know a lot.  But again, coming from a small town [Caruthersville, Missouri], you could see the smoke coming up from the Ford plant right in the middle of the city.  And I just will always remember that the air felt like it was a bad place to be.  You know, mom's cooking, you know.  My mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] could, she would make nice meals for us--those things kind of pop up.  One, you know, which was my favorite was cream style corn in the skillet, so you can, you get that smell.  And again, probably being on my father's mother's [Mary Johnson]--you know, that grandmother side, corn was something that I enjoyed a lot, and then fried pork chops.  This was before brothers wasn't eating pork no more.  All of a sudden, you know, all of a sudden we can't have pork.  But back then everybody had pork chops.
Story_ID: 659028
Speaker 1: Now what were you like growing up?  I get the image of you in the sunglasses on the front seat of the car.  And I mean, you know, saying something that makes your mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] laugh.  Your sister [Sharita Kyles Wilson]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is involved in speech communication now.  Does this run in the family; and were you a loquacious kind of a child?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I probably was, you know, definitely you know--again, I had a more energetic, gregarious energy; a little more adventurous, you know, willing to, you know, do things.  I can remember I would get on my bike, you know, when we moved to St. Louis [Missouri], and ride like for miles away from the house.  My mother would have no idea where I was.  But I would use my bike to just be on adventures; and I would just go to see stuff and just be really far away from home.  You know, got in trouble one time 'cause my bike got a flat, and I had to ask somebody to use their phone.  And it got dark and my mother didn't know where I was, and she had to come get me.  And, you know, it scared her, you know.  It was one of those things that, you know, I kind of remember those stories.  But it was, you know, being the only male in a kind of female oriented household, I just was out looking for adventure.  I was trying to find it, so I definitely took more chances.  My sister who was, again, a bit more serious in her personality, little more maternal in her energy--you know, that's where that balance always kind of came, where she was trying to look out for me and protect me from my own, you know, you know, inquisitive nature, if you will.
Story_ID: 659029
Speaker 1: Now what about school?  Now, what was the name of your first school?  This would have been in Caruthersville [Missouri], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Caruthersville--hm (pause) I ca- man, I don't remember the name of the elementary school.  Oh, wow.
Speaker 1: Well, did you like school?
Speaker 2: School was okay for me.  Like, I don't, I was, I liked the social aspect of school, and I probably was always that way.  I can recall never really being the kind of person that was like the student that wanted to be at school or really care about school.  In--even in junior high school, you know, it was all about the social aspect of school.  That's when I first changed my name to Cedric [Cedric Antonio Kyles; HistoryMaker Cedric The Entertainer], because I used to--my family name is Tony, from Antonio.  So, all my life I was known as Tony.  Like, people would call me Tony.  And I remember when I got to St. Louis [Missouri] and was in the seventh grade, the teacher read my whole name out.  And they ask you, "Do you want to be called something else?"  And I just kept quiet, and I became Cedric.  Because it was a few other Tonys in the room, and I just said I'm going to stay Cedric.  And that was, again, my mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] was like, "Really?"  And I just, you know, at that point decided that's who I was going to be.  So, and that was more important than school itself, is to be known as Cedric; as you know, the guy with a different name.
Story_ID: 659030
Speaker 1: Now, you came along at an age when TV had really, was, had been out there a while.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Color TV was out when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when you were growing up.  Did you watch a lot of television?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can remember watching a lot of television growing up.  Of course, my [maternal] grandmother [Rosie Driver Boyce] enjoyed television.  So I can remember shows like Jackie Gleason, his variety show ['The Jackie Gleason Show'].  Something with Tom Jones.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, Tom Jones was big in those days (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had--did he have a special, or his own thing?
Speaker 1: He had lots of specials.
Speaker 2: Okay, I just remember Tom Jones was like really, I like--because to this day, I couldn't understand why I knew so many Tom Jones songs.  Like, they would just come out and I would know them.  And pe--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) black women really liked Tom Jones.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did.  I mean--
Speaker 1: Unlike a lot of white entertainers.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Yeah, he was one of those artists.  And I think that, you know, when he spoke he was--because he's from like New Zealand [sic.] or something, so he was a little, you know, exotic.  You know, and of course he wore the little tight pants, you know.  And he had the big voice, big booming voice, you know, and I think there was an attraction there.  Having to watch the stories with your grandmother--so, 'All My Children,' you know.  You can remember details of those kind of stor- those storylines are so funny as you grow up.  And I think that even when I got to college [Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, Missouri], 'Young and the Restless' ['The Young and the Restless'] became this thing that we would do as college kids, because we would all start to watch these stories.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite storyline on 'All My Children' (unclear)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I can't, I don't, I don't recall much.  But--
Speaker 1: They had like two black characters I remember for a while (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, Jesse [Jesse Hubbard].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, Jesse was a cool story.  And I remember--and I can't remember the girl [Angie Baxter Hubbard], but I remember she was so cute.  Like, I used to be infatuated with that girl when I was younger.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think she [Debbi Morgan] married Charles Dutton [Charles S. Dutton].
Speaker 2: Yes, she did, exactly, she married Charles Dutton.  Lola Falana was a big deal, you know, on television.  That was something I can remember watching in, you know, again, as a young man, and having an infatuation with her beauty and her dancing.  And so, as television began to boom, I really, you know, I loved all those show- all of the kind of drama series, 'Mannix,' 'Barnaby Jones,' 'Rockford Files' ['The Rockford Files'], 'Cannon,' 'Ironside.'  Like all those shows were--you know, 'Hawaii Five-0.'  I remember my grandmother used to love 'Hawaii Five-0'; that was her thing, "Book 'em, Danno," she used to always say that, "Book 'em, Danno."  That was her thing right there.  So, those shows had a great impression on me.  And then as, of course, as television started to evolve, you know, 'The Jeffersons' and 'Good Times' and all those kind of things, of course, became mainstays in you know in our family because they had the urban characters on.
Story_ID: 659031
Speaker 1: Considering what--what you do now for a living as a spoken word artist, a master of this--were you paying attention to people like Richard Pryor, or any of the local disc jockeys or that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, definitely, yeah.  I mean, you know, all those--Richard Pryor had great influence.  My uncle, my uncle Lloyd [Lloyd Boyce (ph.)] was the fun party uncle.  So he would have--he had a nice house, he had motorcycles.  He was a city bus driver for St. Louis [Missouri].  And so, you know, you learn this later on, he would have all kinds of scams where he would make all this extra moneys, you know.  The bus, you know, the bus gets hit from the back, he go and sues the bus company; he gets another extra eleven thousand dollars, he'd throw a big party.  That's all we knew, that Uncle Lloyd has a good time.  And he would have Richard Pryor albums, and that was one of the things that the kids--we would all try to figure out how we can listen to these albums.  So, of course (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, he'd kind of try to keep the kids away from Richard Pryor?
Speaker 2: He tried, but he didn't care as much.  The other adults were the ones that tried.  Uncle Lloyd is like--he's the guy that introduced you to it.  Like, "Y'all want to listen to this?" (Laughter) He's that uncle.  (Laughter) So, so, but, but, so, of course Richard Pryor was one of the first comedians that I really was influenced by as a spoken word comedic artist--like someone who told stories, made you laugh; and then you start to identify that with of course people in your family.  And, you know, you can recognize that maybe you have that ability early on, just by, you know, doing the show.  You know, kids, we'd get together and do a show with the family, and then you would imitate, you know, an uncle, and you would do some, you know, some other little story characters.  And that was my thing, like I could just--like, "All right, this is Uncle Lloyd making barbeque," and then I'd be like, "for days," you know, and I would do this whole thing about how he would dance.  And everybody would laugh.  We'd be like, "That's just like him."  So, you know, that's when you started to kind of identify (cough) with this ability to be able to tell jokes, so.
Speaker 1: Were you a good mimic (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I could mimic people.  Like, I can remember people--I was never really like an impersonator, but you know, just kind of--their mannerisms. And, you know, I really could pick up on those kind of things, and how someone would say a certain word or hold their mouth.  Those were the kind of things that became really a staple of, you know, my kind of go to things, as a part of my personality.
Speaker 1: Did you have a playful family in terms of, you know, just dialogue around the family?  I mean--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, our family was definitely playful and energetic, a lot of fun loving kind of energy. Again, you know, I remember those, those memories I have of going over to my aunt's house or hanging out at my uncle's house where always in some kind of celebratory energy and fashion.  And people was loving it and having fun, you know--until much later, you know, after drugs and everything came into the--you know, in our family's life.  You know, you can see that, you know, deterioration of that.  But as a little kid, it was all about fun and good times.
Story_ID: 659032
Speaker 1: As a little kid it was pretty--everything was pretty much together.  But you said drugs came into the picture?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this after the family moved to St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, dur- after St. Louis, you know.  I mean, you know, as you know the progression of--I guess the party had to keep getting going, you know.  The crack [crack cocaine] epidemic came in, you know, totally affected my cousins, you know, my mother's older sister and her kids, you know, kind of one by one affected--my uncle Lloyd [Lloyd Boyce (ph.)], you know, was affected by that.  And of course that kind of starts to break down the family unit because, you know, there's manipulating, there's conniving.  Those are the kind of things.  There's the desperation, you know, and there's those efforts of trying to help people out of it.  And then there's also the poverty that kind of goes with--you know, that cycle is just going to continue to spin itself.  And so, you start to see less kind of a family connection, you know I guess as I got into my twenties and, you know, later on, you know, and on through (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is in the late '80s [1980s]?  Mid to late '80s [1980s] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, late '80s [1980s], right, exactly.  Things just start to really, start to break down.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 659033
Speaker 1: You arrive--like Berkeley [Missouri] is right outside of St. Louis [Missouri], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a suburb of St. Louis.  I can remember, 'cause, you know, St. Louis was, was great because we had a choice--like, my uncle Melvin [Melvin Boyce] lived in Chicago [Illinois], and we went to Chicago first when we left Caruthersville [Missouri].  My mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles]--my grandmother [Rosie Driver Boyce] had passed, my mother no longer wanted to live in Caruthersville.  Thought it was time to get out of there once her mother had gone.  And so, we went to Chicago first.  And my uncle Melvin sold books, like textbooks, and he did pretty well.  He was doing well, so he had a nice home in a cul de sac, in a kind of, you know--this is the first time you see that whole energy like that.
Speaker 1: Now where did he sell--did he service a particular college like Malcolm X [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois] or Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois]?  Or--
Speaker 2: He was--
Speaker 1: --Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], or?
Speaker 2: He was out--he was actually in Harvey, Illinois.  So, you know, I would imagine he served all of the Chicago area--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Governors State [Governors State University, University Park, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: --he would go down--
Speaker 1: --(unclear) those schools (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, seemed like he actually even went down as far as Normal [Illinois], Champaign [Illinois], and stuff like that, too.  I can remember he would have to ride a little bit sometimes for his job.  And, but I can remember like the--that house, that really seeing middle class in that way, like the cul de sac and the nice car and the house with the loft level and the library--things that you just hadn't seen, you didn't see in Caruthersville.  And, you know, we really wanted to look there, but the transition was a little too big for my mother.  We really, she wanted to move to Chicago, but she just kind of felt like the transition was--you know, from a small city to Chicago was just like really big.  And then she had a sister, my aunt Arlene [ph.], and my uncle Melvin [sic. Lloyd Boyce (ph.)] lived in St. Louis.  And it was a place we had went a lot more as, you know, because it was four, three, four drive at that time from Caruthersville.  So, we would go to St. Louis quite a bit when I was kid.  She knew her way around a little bit more, and so I think she was just a little more comfortable moving there.  So, we moved.  And while she was looking for a job to--lived in the inner city with my aunt Arlene, who had thirteen kids, we lived in an environment with a lot of kids, lot of environment and then a lot of--you know, kind of urban environment.  And Berkeley was a town that at the time it didn't even have an interstate running through it.  You would have to get off, get off the streets and ride through like a lot of streets to go and find it.  So, it was one of these things you felt like you were away from everything, and I remember not really wanting to live there.  And then when my mom finally found a house, I was really kind of ups- sad about it.  I wanted to live in the city with my cousins and be around, and the house we moved into reminded me of my uncle's house.  The neighborhood was nice, it was kind of all middle class.  It was a swimming pool down the street.  When we came into the--when we finally crossed into the neighborhood where the house was, there was kids outside, it was girls.  I was like, oh, yeah, it's cool.  I'm good.  I don't want to be with my cousins anymore.  So, and--
Speaker 1: So is Berkeley more or less a black suburb; or the neighborhood you lived in?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood I lived in was, you know, had a strong black--but it was fairly mixed at the time.  But I would say, you know, I would say it was probably still 70 percent black, you know, 60 to 70 percent black.  So, it felt more like a black neighborhood, even though it was a, you know, it was a mixed suburb.
Story_ID: 659034
Speaker 1: Now was church a big factor in growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was a big factor.  One--starting in Caruthersville [Missouri], we'd go to Mount Carmel Baptist Church.  Mount Carmel was right up the street, so we would get up on Sunday mornings and walk to church.  And you--it was a couple of--it was because--you would have to pass this Sanctified church to get to Mount Carmel.  And the Sanctified church, they got the drums going and it's going on, and people are singing and clapping, they shouting.  And you could hear them in this church, and then you'd get to the Baptist church and it was a lot more calm; and it had a Methodist energy to it in the city.  But I can remember, you know, again, being in the kids choir.  And at one time I think I had to do a little sermon, you know, where they have the kids go up and you're elected to give the sermon.  You know, saving your little money from church to go to the candy store.  The Ross family, they had a little store that was a part, extension of their house.  And it was right across the street from the church, so you would go to Ross' [ph.] and go get some, you know, the Chick-O-Sticks, or some, you know, Annihilators; any of that kind of--you know, those kind of candies.  I just remember that image; that that's what it was all about.  You know, you'd go to church so you could get candy afterwards.  And then that's--we moved to St. Louis [Missouri], church was still a big part of it.  We went to a Methodist church for a while, and then my mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] became a member of the Church of Christ.  And so, we went to Paige Church of Christ [ph.] in the city.  And then eventually found a church in Berkeley [Missouri], and that's where I spent most of my, you know, formative, you know, religious years, at the Berkeley Heights Church of Christ [St. Louis, Missouri].
Story_ID: 659035
Speaker 1: Now, do you think you--your values come more from your family or from church?
Speaker 2: I would say my values come more from my family.  My mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] was, again, she was a hard worker.  She was dedicated.  She was the kind of person who--she was goal oriented.  She had something she wanted to do, she set her tasks and got it done, you know.  She was a great--on finances, she knew how to handle her finances, saving; and taught us those kinds of things.  Like she taught me that, you know--I just remember that, you know, teaching me that your name--and this was about credit--that your name was more important than--you know, having a good name is more important than anything, because it go- leaves and enters the room before you do.  So, and stays in the room.  So, if someone talks about you and they say your name, the credit of who you are is going to linger or is going to arrive before you even come.  So, I just thought that that was real important.  She gave a lot of little, little notes like that.
Story_ID: 659036
Speaker 1: At Berkeley High School [Berkeley, Missouri], were you involved in, you know, clubs and activities and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: In Berkeley High School, let me see, I was, I did things.  Because I went out (laughter) I went out for the football team for one season, and I went to maybe two practices.  And you know, the coach kind of thought, you know, I was a mama's boy, so he set me up to be the tackling dummy.  And it proved I was a mama's boy, because they just would sit up in the--I would have to run in place, and he let the biggest players on the team just run and tackle me.  And I think I went to like two practices, and I was like, "Okay, I'm cool on this."  But I was a decent athlete, you know.  It was just that, again, you know, I would say, you know, growing up where you don't necessarily have that father figure that's encouraging you to keep going.  My mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] was, you know, again, being more of an educator, and I'm her baby boy, she didn't want me to get hurt.  She didn't really care for me playing football.  She thought it was violent like that, you know.  She liked the sport, you know, but--so, when I was ready to quit, she was fine with it, like, you know.  So and I (unclear) those were the kinds of things.  But I would play in the park with my friends, you know, in what they call sandlot football quite a bit.  So, and then we had a couple of groups, the social groups.  We had one that I started called the BRATS [ph.] at one time.  And it was: Brothers Realizing--(laughter) I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Realizing what?  This sounds good.  Brothers Realizing--?
Speaker 2: Brothers Realizing--oh, I can't remember what it was, though.  It was, you know, it was an acronym, though; we had it all broken down.  We was the BRATS, you know.  And then we switched, because more people wanted to be a part of it, and we changed ourselves to the Homeboys [ph.] in my sophomore year.  So we were the BRATS like the freshman years; and then sophomore year we became the Homeboys.  And it was like more, it was probably fifteen of us then.  We would have t-shirts and we would go to parties as the Homeboys.  And we had chants, you know, like little party chants that we can do.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: It would be like, (chanting), "Ain't no party like a Homeboy party, because a Homeboy party don't stop.  Get somebody.  Work somebody.  Do somebody.  Be somebody.  Red alert, freaks at work.  Red alert--."  (Laughter) We would have all these little things (gesture); we had dances.  Like, it was funny.  I mean of course we had our little blue polo shirts with red letters that said homeboy, and then you would have your nickname on there.  My nickname was Hollywood.  So, it was interesting that even in high school I was called Hollywood.
Speaker 1: So, now, you were involved with a radio station in high school?  Or did they have one?
Speaker 2: In high school we used to have what they called, it was like the morning--
Speaker 1: Announcements?
Speaker 2: --announcements, or whatever, and that was a part of the audiovisual, you know, program.  And so, it was a big deal to be able to go on and read the announcements and talk about what was going on.  And, you know, I was one of the people that introduced like school stories.  So, I would do like the announcements, and then I would kind of tell like what happened at the football game. You know, when we went to McCluer [McCluer High School, Florissant, Missouri] and we lost, but I'd make it funny, about like what happened in the stand.  And so that was one of the things that I would--did.  But I didn't do that until like maybe my senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 659037
Speaker 1: You--you said you weren't the greatest student, but you had to be a decent student?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a decent student, mainly because my mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] taught in the district.  And whenever I tried to be a bad guy--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a decent student, but mainly because my mother taught in the district, you know, and I didn't want to be--you know, whenever there was an issue the teachers would just threaten to call my mother.  So, I never--even though I was funny and, you know, kind of, you know, a bit of a card as a kid, I never was the class clown.  Like, I never was the guy that got in trouble or took it too far.  But I was, you know, I was king of the lunchroom, you know, jones- when you know, what they call jonesing or the dozens or whatever; I was the go to.  "Get Ced [Cedric Antonio Kyles; HistoryMaker Cedric The Entertainer].  You don't want Ced to come down here.  He'll talk about you."  You know, so all my friends would use me as their secret weapon--I was the gooch.  So, but, you know, we, I had a lot of friends that were athletes; and they were (laughter)--this is when I decided to get a little more serious about school is you know, at the end of our sophomore year going into the junior year [at Berkeley High School, Berkeley, Missouri], early in the year these guys were coming to school with shirts and ties on.  And I'm like, "What's going on?"  They were like, "Oh, we're going to, you know, recruitment meeting, and (makes sound)."  And I was like, "For what?"  And they were like, "No, we're going to go to college."  I was like, "Y'all going to college?"  Like, I didn't know we were going to college, like (laughter) you know, I'm like I'm not on the football team.  So, I was like, oh, the only way for me to go to college is I'm going to have to get my grades up.  So I started to get a little serious about school, you know, probably during my, you know, second semester of my junior year.  So, I had to drive it out to get my grades up strong enough to even be qualified to go to college.
Speaker 1: Now, did you take the SAT and all that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you had to do the SAT.  And, you know, we did that like each year.  And I wanted to go to an all-black school [HBCU].  I remember wanting to go--because my mother went to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri], but I didn't want to go Lincoln.  I wanted to go to Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and, but eventually I was, you know, a kid, and I got a little fearful about going that far away from home.  And I ended up going to Southeast Missouri State [Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, Missouri], which was still a great experience.
Story_ID: 659038
Speaker 1: Now, you were in school--you graduated in '82 [1982]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, now so you're in school during the time I guess The Jacksons are real, super popular?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Prince was coming out.
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who else was--I mean were you, in terms of entertainment (unclear)?
Speaker 2: When I was in high school [Berkeley High School, Berkeley, Missouri], it was really--Cameo was big.  Parliament-Funkadelic was still very popular.
Speaker 1: So the funk was still very strong?
Speaker 2: The funk was still really--like the concerts you would want to go to would be that--Prince was, you know, coming onto the scene.  Of course, Michael Jackson became really huge was that--that was--was that '82 [sic. 1983], the 'Motown 25' ['Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever']?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 2: It was right there.
Speaker 1: Was that 'Off the Wall' and all of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I kind of remember being in high school, and we saw him moonwalk and everybody went crazy.  And I just remember that just being the big explosion of Michael Jackson, so that may have been, you know, like '81 [1981], '82 [1982]--I'm not real sure.  But I can remember being in high school and that was a big deal.  So, Michael Jackson was huge.  You know, Madonna was popping up on the scene, all of those kind of artists.  You know, it was starting to change.  But music was big because it was a crossover energy, too.  Like, I had a friend that was a deejay, and I can remember listening to like Kraftwerk and the Tom Tom Club, and Thomas Dolby.  Like, I would have music that people would be like, "Oh, that's different."  But the sound was, the sound was big.  And because he was a deejay, I would, you know, listen to this more diversified music.  And so, INXS and all that kind of stuff was, you know, coming on.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  This is the age of the--beginning of the music videos too I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the music videos were just starting to be, you know, like a big part of the culture; and it was probably a little bit after that when it boomed.  But this was--yeah, where you would, you could see your artists and see them perform the songs.  And, you know, we had this thing called The Box where you can watch videos in the morning.  So, before we would go to school, all your friends would come over and you'd have to call in a number and ask for the song that you want; and you'd hopefully make it, right?  You'd be like, "Oh, I want to see, you know, this, new Time [The Time] video," you know.  "I want to see 777 [System 7]," or something.
Speaker 1: This is on cable, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Cable TV?
Speaker 2: Yeah, cable TV.
Speaker 1: So, you could call--yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  That was, that was going in; and Nintendo [Nintendo of America, Inc.] was coming in, and all the video games.  And people would gather--you know, I remember like my house was one of the places where a few of my friends would come in the morning before we all left for school.  And we'd kind of be gathered, and you know, you try to get a few minutes of entertainment in and then you'd go head off to school.
Story_ID: 659039
Speaker 1: Now I thought it was interesting that you, you started going by the name Cedric [Cedric Antonio Kyles; HistoryMaker Cedric The Entertainer] when you moved to Berkeley [Missouri], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And was this, when you look back at it, does it really--does it like mark a point of departure where you change something in your personality or how you presented yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I definitely think so.  When I, you know--when you think about, you know, making a choice to be an individual, I would probably say that was--you know, I can look back and say it was like that move, that choice, to not be considered like just one of three Tonys that could have, you know, existed in my class.  That I don't want to be, you know, the fourth Tony.  I don't want to be--I want to be Cedric.  I think that that is one of those things where you start to come into your own personality; and you recognize that hopefully, you know, this is going to set you apart and make you something different.  And, you know, as you go back and look on it, I think that that was the whole idea around that; you know, that I just didn't want to be another, you know, average guy in the group with a rec- with a name that could be mixed up with somebody else.
Story_ID: 659040
Speaker 1: Were there any particular mentors or teachers that stand out during this period of time, either school or at recreation centers or any place?
Speaker 2: You know, probably.  I can only think of one teacher that maybe had the greatest influence on me, and I was more--I think I was in ninth, tenth grade [at Berkeley High School, Berkeley, Missouri].  His name was Mr. Kopp.
Speaker 1: C-O-?
Speaker 2: K- it was K-O-P-P.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mr. Kopp was the social--he did social studies and current affairs, and things like that.  And he would just introduce me to things that I thought was interesting.  I remember listening to like in his class, 'The Shadow' radio show.  Like, it was something that would have been long off the air, but he had the copies of it.  He would bring in, you know, the slide machine--the projectors, the slide projectors, with like stories from all around the world, we would sit and talk about them.  I mean introduced us to, like a little short film about a beaver building the dam.  And it was a silent--it was this movie with just music, and you would see this life of this beaver.  And it was just so interesting; and then you would sit and talk about it.  So, he was a guy that would like introduce you to books and reading and literature, and getting that little extra detail about something and then having a conversation about it.  And I think that, you know, he was the guy I would go to.  Whenever I would have an idea about something, I would ask Mr. Kopp, like, "What do you think about if--you know, I want to do a talent show at the school."  I wanted to do--I remember I wanted to change the plays.  All the plays used to be, you know, just kind of real--Tennessee Williams type stuff, and I wanted to do something--introduce something cooler and hipper.  And he would, you know, go, "All right, let's go tell the," you know, "the art--the theater teacher, you know, and explain what it is you want to do."  And he would be, you know, supportive and back me up.  So, and then I have very little memories of other teachers.  I thought that was really interesting.  I was thinking about that the other day, like, you know, through even through college [Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, Missouri] very few people have had an influence on me.  There was a couple of people in college I did like, though--Jim Dufek [James Dufek], who taught in the mass communications department.  I remember he was from Nebraska--no, he was from Montana.  He would call it Big Sky Country, "Big sky," you know.  So, and, but again, a great--you know, real, the kind of personality that listens to you and wants to help you, you know, shape you as an educator.  And so you know, I was able to do--I had a radio show when I was in college.  I had like a Quiet Storm type show.  I learned how to bring in music, again, from ordering off of this different type of magazine.  I could order music from Europe, they--so, I had Sade before people even knew who she was.  I was able to introduce Loose Ends.  I can remember groups like that.  Like, people didn't even know who they were; and I was playing them on my radio show because my teacher was teaching me how to, you know, get that music first, and you know, look for these resources.  And so, you know, those--you know he was one of the you know the greater people that I can remember that influenced me in that way from the education point.
Story_ID: 659041
Speaker 1: Outside of school, you know, there was--there was a combination of people that, you know, that were in and out of my life to do different things.  I had an older cousin named Eric [ph.] in Caruthersville [Missouri] when I was younger; and, you know, he was actually my cousin, but he was so much older than me, he was considered my uncle.  So, but I remember him teaching me how to ride a bicycle, you know, working with me, you know, when I was scared, you know, about riding the bike.  Just worked with me and worked with me--how to catch a football.  You know, so it was those kind of influences.  He was really funny, he was a great storyteller.  So, you know, you kind of end up picking up like technique or just the attitude of being a guy that's comfortable telling a story was one of his things, like he was really funny.  He used to be the, you know, the funny person in our family.  Everybody like, "Go get Eric.  Eric is hilarious."  You know, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It seems like--I mean, being at home with a [maternal] grandmother [Rosie Driver Boyce] and then your mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] and your sister [Sharita Kyles Wilson]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, you say you saw yourself as a mama's boy on some level.  But--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but then like, you know, I mean, watching you in 'Barbershop,' I mean those black people been, that have been to a barbershop--black men who have been to a barbershop--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --know that you know something about a barbershop.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I mean so there are some black males, you know, really having an impact on you at some point.  I just wondered, you know, who they were.  So, your cousin Eric was one, and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  Yeah.  Yeah, my cousin Eric was one.  There was--you know, David Lane [David L. Lane] was, he was the minister at Berkeley Heights Church of Christ [St. Louis, Missouri].  And he was our minister, and he was a great influence.  He was one of these guys, very calm, very well educated, well read.  And even though he was the head of the church, he had kids that were a little bit younger than I was, but they were close enough to where we were all kind of in the same social circles.  So, you know, you end up spending a lot of time with him because he's with his kids.  He was a great influence.  I'm trying--I can't recall this name.  But I was in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], and our leader was a good guy, too.  He was one of those people who influenced me, you know--taking your time, tying the knots, going to camp, you know.  And I just remember he used to always say, "Webelo," when you would have to, when you would try to go to the higher level of the Boy Scouts.  (Adopts English accent), "You're going to be a Webelo," he would say it very educated, very English, "the Webelos."  (Laughter) I don't even think I can say Webelos without saying it (pronunciation) Webelos.
Speaker 2: Okay, he elevated that concept.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Story_ID: 659042
Speaker 1: Did you spend a lot--do you remember your barbershop experiences, I mean, as a youth growing up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, you know--
Speaker 1: --listening to the older guys, or?
Speaker 2: Ye- it was, the barbershop we'd go to was the neighborhood one.  Once I got to Berkeley [Missouri], it was the barbershop that everybody went to.  And man, this name would--his name slips me as well.  But the barbershop was the neighborhood shop so we would go as friends, like all your boys, we used to go, you going to get a haircut.  And, you know, eventually--you know, at first my mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] would take me there.  But then after a while she saw that it was the place where all my friends were, so we would gather and walk to the barbershop.  Then of course, you would have the older guys there, and then we would be this group of young kids in the barbershop waiting to get our hair cut.  And of course, that's the place where, you know, again, you hear the language, you hear the stories, you know, what's going on.  And that's why that movie ['Barbershop'], I was able to identify with all those characters, you know, and especially my character [Eddie].  Because I was young, and I wanted to play the old man in the movie.  And people were like, "Why you want to play the old man?"  I was like, "I know this old man.  Like, this is the combination of a, you know, a number of different characters that I'm going to make one."  But, you know, that influence--that, you know, self righteousness, that unafraid, you know.  And then because the barbershop was a business place, and this guy was a businessman and he had the attitude of a businessman.  So, I think that that was, you know, a great influence on me.  And of course, you know, just the barbershop has always been that, you know, in our culture.  So that was, that was a very fond place to go to that barbershop.
Story_ID: 659043
Speaker 1: Now, did you consciously see yourself as an observer, a keen observer of what was going on around you?  Because I know your comedy--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) comes from this kind of keen observation of what's going on.
Speaker 2: Definitely.  And I think, again, it probably comes from being, you know, a boy in a female household where you kind of--you sit back and you watch a lot more.  You have, you know, less to say.  You, you know, even if you're in environments with other guys, you found yourself looking to see what it is that they know.  And so, I found myself, again, kind of watching situations a lot more; and I loved to observe and then kind of reenact it, or add it into--and that became a part of my comedic brand.  And I think that's still you know, a great deal of my personality is to kind of look at the whole situation and feel out the landscape first.
Story_ID: 659044
Speaker 1: When you're getting ready to graduate from high school [Berkeley High School, Berkeley, Missouri] and go on to Southeast Missouri State [Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, Missouri], did you know what you wanted to do for a living?
Speaker 2: No.  You know, I was--when I graduated from high school I was really good at history, because Mr. Kopp was one, you know, great influence; and current affairs.  And so, I was kind of leaning towards becoming a lawyer.  I thought like, you know okay, I can put up a good argument.  I was, you know, I was great in the lunchroom as far as telling jokes and stuff, so I wasn't afraid to get up and speak.  And I was always influenced by lawyer TV shows.  Like, I loved all the law shows, like you say, like 'Ironside.'  And, you know, anytime there was a courtroom kind of drama, I loved it.  So I was like, oh, I'm going to go to school to be a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Did you and your friends like argue current events, about what's going on?  Or current events (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you know, a little bit, like yeah.
Speaker 1: --or sports (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sports, stuff like--of course at that time that was, you know, that was always a big deal.  Artists, you know, who was better: Prince or Michael Jackson?  You know, those were the kind of things that was, you know, that we debated about, and of course, you know, Magic [Magic Johnson], Bird [Larry Bird], and all those kind of, you know, influences that was going on.  St. Louis [Missouri] was a big baseball town, still is.  So baseball was, you know, was always a large part of the conversation.  But, you know, that was one of the things.  Like, as I went to college, like my best friend--and he's my business partner and manager to this day--Eric Rhone, he was the only person that I was--you know, again, I used to be really big on, you know, arguments and making a point and having this kind of a--able to make my points in such a way that people would kind of back down.  And I was the only guy that--so in my high school group, I was the smartest dude in my group, so I was the leader.  And when I started going to college, Eric was one of the only people to debate me so hard that I had to continue to prove my point, that all we could do is be best friends or enemies forever (laughter).
Speaker 1: Eric Rhone is spelled R-H-O-N-E (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) R-H-O-N-E, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now he's--how did you meet--tell us about when you first met him.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was a very funny story.  I'd been to, I was at Southeast a year before them.  He came down in '83 [1983] as a freshman, and you know, we're living in the dorms.  He came from Normandy High School in St. Louis; and he grew up in the Pine Lawn area [Pine Lawn, Missouri].  So, it's very, very, hood, very urban, known as a bad neighborhood.  And his brother was one of the bad guys in the city, and he wanted to take on this image, like he's coming to college to be this bad man.  Like, you know, and he's a little dude.  Like, he's a small guy.  But he wanted to be this, you know, this guy that's going to be known and recognized for being from Pine Lawn, and everybody's going to, you know, know what's up.  And his, one of his friends was scheduled to be my roommate in the dorm.  So they had this whole plan of how they were going to kick me out, you know.  They're going to come in the room and they were going to kick me out of my dorm, and they're going to be roommates and I got to go.  And so they said they had been walking around college, they got there of course the week before, because they were freshmen and they had to do orientation.  When I show up they were, they were, they said people were talking, you know, and telling them how cool I was, and I was the man.  And they, but he still had this idea that they were going to kick me out.  So, when they kick in the room, I hear them coming.  And they kick in the room with this attitude that they're going to kick me out.  And I turn around--I'm in college, (laughter) of course I'm a wild one, I got a big joint, and when I turn around I say (gesture), "Welcome to college, gentleman," and they're like, "Oh, no."  (Laughter) And they, and of course me and Eric became really cool.  We would, you know, we would just kind of sit and talk, and you know, to these guys, just trying to get them on board with college.  And then we just became like this kind of Frick and Frack--this, you know, this tandem.  That, we was always together because, again, he was a bright, creative, he was inquisitive, he was aggressive--his personality.  And then we just end up being just really good friends, and been, you know, friends well over thirty years now.
Story_ID: 659045
Speaker 1: You decided to major in communications at first, or was it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, I went to school [Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, Missouri] and I wanted to, you know, major in pre-law.  And my advisor, Fred Wyman, good guy as well, he was the advisor assigned to me; and he heard my voice and thought I should do communications.  And you know, I told him I'd done some, you know, some school plays, things like that.  So he was like, "Well, you know, you can mess around with some law stuff if you want to.  But maybe go to the communications department; and I think that you'll, you know, it'll be a little more suited for what it is that you do."  And so I did like some, you know, some pre-law, history classes.  And you know, you have to go back and learn so much stuff in law that it was really boring.  And then of course my personality strives more in the communications department, so then I just switched everything to the mass communications department.  And they were growing; it was a really interesting time at that school because it was a couple of upperclassmen, they had fought to get the radio station [KRCU Radio, Cape Girardeau, Missouri] right when we were there.  And they had the radio station built, and it was--you know, I can remember in my freshman year how it was, you know, really a big deal that, you know, these students were fighting to get this station and to be able to speak and talk on the radio and voice their opinions and things like that.  And so, the environment of seeing people do something, not just be like kind of taught what to do, but actually, you know, be on the radio with a voice, with an attitude--you started to see like, oh, okay, this is progressive.  And I think the mass communications department was one where that was, you know, going around in general, like they wanted to do everything.  They wanted TV, you know--cable was coming on, they wanted cable.  And those kids in that department were really serious about fighting for what it is that they wanted as a part of their educational experience.  And so as a freshman, once I got involved with that, then it just felt like a place where things were happening, you know.  There was more going on; it was more energy there.  And so, it just led me to my, my major.
Story_ID: 659046
Speaker 1: Cape Girardeau [Missouri] is a exciting town, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I mean it was one of those thi- Cape Girardeau was--I was introduced to it first because my mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] went there when she went back to get her master's [degree].  And so I can remember being, you know, like a high school age, junior high school age kid going to this college campus [Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, Missouri] and seeing it in this big pristine college campus energy with the big buildings, with the pillars and the libraries and the dorms and, you know, the green, rolling green grass, and the kids sitting out on the grass in circles reading.  And it felt like you were like at Cal Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] or something.  It seemed like a big college, you know, to a kid's eye.  And so once I decided to go to school, it made sense.  And it was in between St. Louis [Missouri] and Caruthersville [Missouri]; and I still had relatives in Caruthersville, St. Louis there.  And my mother went there, I was familiar with it.  It just made sense to go.  It was interesting, in 1982 when I went to school, that was probably their largest registration of black students.  So students came from everywhere, from Florida, and it was a lot of black kids that showed up at that school that year.  It may have been eighteen hundred of us--like it was a big number.  Like, it was like--and so--
Speaker 1: That's out of a total population of--what do you think?
Speaker 2: I think the school at that time maybe was somewhere around five thousand to six thousand--something like that I think.  So it was a, it was a large group of kids to show up, you know.  And then with all these personalities mixing in--you got Florida kids, and Tennessee kids, and Texas kids, and then a lot of us from St. Louis.  So, we of course had the power, you know.  We were the city to be recog- recognized and be reckoned with on the college campus.  But it was, it was, you know, again it was that kind of experience that me growing up in Caruthersville and then moving to St. Louis, Cape Girardeau was that combination.  It had a mall; it had, you know, restaurants.  And at the same time, it was a small town feel.  So, I was able to really operate in both, while kids who were mainly urban kids from St. Louis, they felt like they were going to some hick town, where I was like, oh, this is still big.  Like dude, you know they got pavement.  (Laughter) There's, there's concrete.  I've lived in cities where it's chickens running across the street.
Story_ID: 659047
Speaker 1: Did you do any standup in college [Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: No, in college I was really known for singing.  So I would, I sang in a couple of choirs, you know.  In all the talent shows, I was, you know, I was known as a singer.  So that was, that was the big deal for me in college.  I didn't really do standup 'til way after.
Speaker 1: I know when I first heard your stage name, [HistoryMaker] Cedric The Entertainer, I figured that you probably were a singer.  You weren't just a (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --probably a singer, too, and.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was, that was kind of--you know, and when I started, that's how the name came.  It was really kind of, you know, just by chance.  Because I would, you know, I was popular as a comedian, but I didn't have a lot of jokes.  So when people wanted to hire me, for a long time I would fill the show up by singing, and I would write poems.  And so I was like, don't call me a comedian, call me an entertainer.  And so the guy introduced me as Cedric The Entertainer; and that's how I got the name.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: This is, this is shortly after college, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, shortly after college.  When in--you know, college was a great experience for me because again, like I said, the communication department was doing well.  I had like a little news show.  I had a comedy show that was called 'The Cape Garage Door' [ph.] that we kind of did like our version of 'Saturday Night Live' with sketches and, you know, stuff that we would shoot.  And so actually when I graduated I had a job at a CBS affiliate [KFVS-TV] to do like fun news stories, you know, things that had kind of a funny kind of--you know, more personality pieces, not hardcore news.  And this was in the early days of, you know, like 'Entertainment Tonight.'  And pe- this kind of thing was starting to be like added to news stories where it was like, give me the entertainment.  Give me the, you know, person of interest kind of story as opposed to just hardcore news after news, and so.
Speaker 1: Is this in St. Louis [Missouri], or?
Speaker 2: This is (unclear)--this is in Cape Girardeau [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Cape Girardeau, okay.
Speaker 2: So, I was hired at the Cape Girardeau CBS affiliate (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they had a CBS affiliate?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a small little network.
Speaker 1: What was the--what was the call letters?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: No, because I didn't never get--I didn't get a chance to go to work, so I don't recall (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: Well, what happened?
Speaker 2: So I get hired, and it's the summer Dan Rather becomes the news anchor.  And I think he, I remember this, that his salary was something like eight million or eighteen million [dollars].  I don't know, it was a big number.  And that all of the affiliates had to chip in to pay his fee.  And so my salary which was going to be like--I remember it was going to be like twenty-three thousand starting--my station had to chip in thirty [thousand], and so my little twenty-three was gone.  So I believe I got hired like in June, and I was supposed to start work in September.  He got, he became the anchor in July; and I was fired in (laughter) I was fired in August.  So, I never went to work at all, like.  And I remember like feeling so big time when I got the job.  Like I told everybody I had this job and, you know, I had a place to stay, I had my car.  I was getting ready to be the man.  And so--
Speaker 1: This is ironic because you, I read that you saw yourself becoming a black Dan Rather.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.  And I actually did a charity event with Dan Rather, and I told him that story.  It was funny.  He was like--yeah, he was like, "Yeah?"  He thought that was interesting how life trickles down.  He said, "But it worked out better for you this way."  (Laughter) I was like, "I guess so," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 659048
Speaker 1: Now you were, you were a Kappa in college, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, in college I pledged Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] in '94 [1994].  So, that was fun.  We were like the, we had a few, you know, brothers that were on the campus, but we were the mothership--the initial line.  And so that was, that was a fun part of being Kappa in college, too.  Everybody always felt I was an Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].  Like, people would see me and my personality and thought I should have been a Que.  But my uncle Melvin [Melvin Boyce] was a Kappa; and so that was just one of those things, like as a family thing you got to pledge Kappa.
Speaker 1: Now, with so many--this great influx of black students at Southeast Missouri State [Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, Missouri], was there a black student organization formed?
Speaker 2: There was.  It was a strong black student organization.  It was led by this guy named Victor [ph.]--Victor, I'm trying to think of his last name right now.  But I remember he was a strong personality.  Like, good looking kid, curly hair.  And I just remember he was older than us, but he was like a fighter.  Like, he was--and so it made the organization pretty strong, you know, and eventually the Kappas, we became really a lot of leaders in the Black Student Union.  And one of our members, John Hibbler and Press McDowell, all these guys became presidents of it during, you know, the years later.  But it was a strong environment, you know.  We, we, kids came down there and they wanted to be educated.  And they wanted the, you know, the opportunities to be opened up to where--like at the radio station [KRCU Radio, Cape Girardeau, Missouri] we had black days, black--where we can play our music.  We could do what we wanted to do, like, you know, change the programming, you know; and this was what the Black Student Union would fight for.  Certain things in the cafeteria, certain things, you know, in the dorms, you know, these were the kind of things that--.  You know, the school, when bringing in all these students, didn't necessarily expect those cultural changes--things that they--like, yo, we don't want that; we want this; and those things that--.  And so it was good to see kids your age fighting for it and wanting things.  And you know, and I think that was--you know, though it was a state university, it was a great time to be there.  Because the activism, the growth of the university, what was going on at the time really perpetuated and encouraged kids to grow up and grow forward.  And I think that was it.
Speaker 1: Were there any black administrators or faculty there that you remember that were able to help the students?
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: 'Cause there's usually somebody, you know, on these campuses, but?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there was, but right now nobody comes to mind that I could just say, you know, this person was, you know, our go to, or really helped influence us.  But I'm, you know, I'm sure with that many students down there, it had to be, you know, some black educators and administrators there even for--in order for them to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was there anything special about graduation?  Were you recognized for anything special?
Speaker 2: Oh, at college graduation (laughter)?  College graduation, you know, it was one of those--that I don't remember, because I think I really messed up in high school graduation [from Berkeley High School, Berkeley, Missouri], where I wore my gown with no shirt because I wanted to wear my gold chain.  And I had my chain, and my mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] was so mad that I think then at my college graduation I just decided to do it right.  But, I just could remember that.  And then I think one thing I kind of remember in my college graduation is that a few of our friends, we had a move that we all did.  Like, once we got up on the podium we did like this kind of like frat step that was like left to the right (makes sound).   And we just like--and we yelled out a lot and--yelled out our year.  And it was like, you know, just this little moment of taking over.
Story_ID: 659049
Speaker 1: So after Dan Rather takes your job away [at KFVS-TV, Cape Girardeau, Missouri]--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: --so, what was, what was left?  What did you decide to do?
Speaker 2: So, I had to go--had, you know I tucked my tail in and I went back to St. Louis [Missouri].  I tried to get into radio, so I you know I tried radio for a while, and I never really got a job.  I got like an intern job at--I was trying to remember the call letters.  (Pause) It was an intern job, I didn't keep it. And so I eventually got a job selling fax machines, and it was in the new era when fax machines was the hot thing.  And I just, you know, I ended up going on that pattern for a while, working at Best Buy [Best Buy Co., Inc.] when they came in selling electronics for the holidays.  And then, eventually landed at State Farm where I became a claims adjuster.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, yeah you write about that in your book ['Grown A$$ Man,' Cedric The Entertainer] that you became an expert claims adjuster in terms of dealing with difficult people (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, with difficult black people, right, yeah.  I was bilingual, that's what I told them--I spoke regular English and angry Negro (laughter).  Because black people would come in there and they would really be--they would have people really scared about their cars, like, just arguing and cussing at the top of their voice about how they--you know, they got a ding on their door and they need a whole new door.  You know, "Somebody knocked my bumper out.  I--this car is totaled, I need a new one."  You know, and be--having everybody all up in arms and people getting scared.  And I was like, I just remember a guy coming in, "I'll blow this building up," and everybody was scared.  And I said, "Look, black people can't get dynamite.  That man ain't going to blow nothing up.  Let me go out there and talk to him."  (Laughter) So, you know.
Speaker 1: So you were able to keep it real.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just go out there.  Keep it real, get people to calm down.  Like, "Look, you're not going to get anything this way.  Let me see what I can do for you."  And so that was one of the reasons I started to be promoted quite a bit at State Farm, is that I had the skillset to be able to just kind of calm people down. But I was a really bad claims adjuster.  Like, I just, I was young.  I'd, you know, hang out all night and party and then just show up and do work.  So, I would have files on my desk.  People would be in a rental car for three months messing with me (laughter).
Story_ID: 659050
Speaker 1: You came out of college [Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, Missouri] in '87 [1987].  So, these are the years, '87 [1987] to '88 [1988]--did you start doing any standup during this period of time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  See, m- I started doing standup maybe in early '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: Now how did it come about; and did you, had you thought about doing this before, or?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I mean, you know, of course standup was really starting to grow.  Living--it was a lot of people.  Eddie Murphy was popular.  You know, you started to see other names come onto the scene, you know, in those late '80s [1980s].  You know, Chris Rock as a young man, you know.  Damon Wayans was popping out on the scene.  So, you would see like these comedians and knew, like, oh, that's actually something that could be done, but never anything that I would identify with that I could do.  And so, right around the same time I started working for State Farm, it was a guy there who was a comedian.  He was out on the road and he was okay--I thought he was okay.  He was a friend of another friend; and he would be around our neighborhood just kind of hanging out.  And I would say things, and he was like, "Oh, that's funny.  Can I use that?"  And I was like, "Oh, I don't know, go ahead."  And you know and he would do that a couple of times.  So then one time he was, he was back and he--you know, and we were sitting around talking.  He was like, "Oh, man, I made eleven hundred [dollars] last week.  And I made fourteen hundred this week and (makes sounds)."  And I'm like, "Doing jokes?"  He was like, "Yeah," he was like, "you can do this," he was like, "you out of all the people I know can do this."  And so I was like, "Yeah, I should try it."  And then so it was a comedy competition, used to be really big, the Johnnie Walker National [Johnnie Walker National Comedy Search]; and whoever won the Johnnie Walker National would go on the Johnny Carson show with t- on 'The Tonight Show' with Carson ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'].  And it was a big deal, and he did it all around the country.  And it was, you know, like a big competition, and he signed me up.  He was like, "I put your name on the list.  All right.  Now if you go, you go.  But you're going to go out as an amateur."  It's a, you know, it's a process.  Like it's amateurs; then you make it to another round and then you go--and then you'll eventually be competing with real comedians.  But they let everybody do it.  And he put me on this list and I went out, and it was like sixty something comedians and they were picking ten.  And I made it to the ten, so that was it.  That was--and that was the first time I'd ever did comedy.  So, I was--we worked together; we worked on like some of the stuff that I had.  We worked on a routine, you know.  Some of my first jokes I remember, like a preacher going to McDonald's.  I used to have this joke about, "First, give me a large shake.  Well, see, I'm kind of hungry.  So, I want a Big Mac because a Big Mac got two all-beef patties, special sauce, lettuce, cheese, pickles, onions on a sesame seed bun.  But you see, I ain't through yet because I got a coupon for some free fries.  The doors of the church are open."  You know, it was like some of my big jokes like at the time.  I used to do like these--difference between a white cheerleader and a black cheerleader.  And so, I had a lot of energy when I would go on stage, a lot of--you know, again, things that had elements of, you know, entertainment.  I would sing black songs like John Davidson.  Remember John Davidson was like this kind of--
Speaker 1: How would he sing, like?
Speaker 2: Like I would do--I remember Johnny Gill's 'My, My, My' was the big song.  And I would (singing), "Put on your red dress and slip on your high heels.  Thank you.  Some of that sweet perfume," (laughter) (singing), "you got me singing my, my, my, my, my, my."  (Laughter) It was a like a big deal at the time; it was funny.
Story_ID: 659051
Speaker 1: I was just saying that in real life, white entertainers were taking the blues and sing- you know re-singing them to sell them to a white audience.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Back in the days when it wasn't acceptable for whites to buy black records.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  And I think that was, you know, one of the--kind of the basis of where that joke came from.  It's like, you know, you can't really have--you can't even have something that's soulful like that without them taking it and making it this other song.  And so, used to be fun.  It was one of my first jokes that I would do.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but to imagine John Davidson singing that song is really--that's--
Speaker 2: Singing 'My, My, My,' yeah.  Yeah, I can imagine it though.  That's funny.
Speaker 1: That's something.  So, so, your jokes, like a lot of black comedians in the white world--well, white comedians too.  Jerry Seinfeld is known for taking something that people--out of everyday life--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and dissecting it, you know (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  Yeah, he was great like that.  I think that that was--and those, that was the kind of thing I used to like to do, like just kind of take--you know, expand upon.  I did a lot of stuff based off the church or, you know, like, you know, you would see you know, like the ghetto wedding.  And I was saying, like I had a cousin that's really ghetto.  Got married and she--the flower girl didn't have no flowers, and she had on some loop ba- bass music, and they was passing out sunflower seeds at the wedding.  You know, it was just the kind of thing where you take, you take an idea and you just kind of keep exaggerating it to its--you know, identifiable, yet funny.  You know, the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a process for coming up with material?  Say if you have something coming up and you need new material, what do you--I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --even then I mean, I guess you--did you establish how you approach it?
Speaker 2: You know, at the time, you know, you just really just kind of talk, because I didn't really know I was a comedian.  Because again, this guy [Damon Wayans] had to tell me, like, "You can do this."  So, it's one of those things where I think for me the process is to, you know, just kind of actually be doing something natural and then hear some- hear myself say something funny and go, all right, cool.  Now write that down, you keep that.  And then I started to have a process where I would just look for ideas.  You know, like I can sit and, you know, pick up a newspaper or go through a magazine, or sit with a couple of other people and just kind of talk and talk and talk until ideas start to happen.  And I still kind of do that to this day.  So, if I have a, you know, a specific event or something that's coming up, I mainly sit around and think about that event.  Like, what is it for?  Who are the people that are going to be there?  And then if it's something that's, you know, that's just going on in my life, then I can relate that to the set later and then I'll add it in.  But most of the time I'm trying to write towards, you know, an idea; or what's going on in the world, or what's current.  And then that--even if it's, even if it's about being current, it may take me to a greater idea.  So, and I allow myself that freedom to go with what do I think is funny about this particular point of view?  So.
Speaker 1: Do you often use collaborators in terms of--I mean or at least people to talk to, to make sure that you--I mean to generate funny (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it's necessary.  I think, I mean, I still write most of my jokes.  But, you know, I like to, I like to sit around with other comedians; and you know, my wife [Lorna Wells] is a great, you know, bouncing board.  She's funny, and she'll say something funny and I can take what she said and enhance upon it and make it a joke.  And I have few friends--I have a few young comedians that I like to hang around with, too.  Where it's like, I got an idea that's kind of funny, and then we start talking about it and we would spin it into a bigger joke.  And so, and then, but then it's often that I'll just sit and write my own stuff and be like, this is how I feel.
Story_ID: 659052
Speaker 1: One of the toughest parts I think of being a comedian from what I've been able to observe over the years is being heckled, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was there any fe- I mean, though you're coming along--you were coming along at a time when there's a lot of television and comedy clubs as such.  It was not--which may have, I think--well, I don't know.  But do you think the environment is safer now than it used to be when (unclear) guys came along (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think so.  I think, you know, it used to be a time where heckling was somehow considered vogue.  Like, it was the thing.  Like, you go and you heckle and you talk at a show.  And it led to the popularity of, you know, comedians like Don Rickles who, you know, that's his shtick--he does insults.  So if you say something, he can you know, he'll shoot you down.  And then the late Robin Harris, who was, you know, one of the great--one of my great influencers was great at like, just going through the audience and just--so, if you said anything, you know, if you're willing to take that chance to heckle somebody, he would kill you.  And so, and I think that, you know, now you find less heckling.  I think that people are, you know, they come out and they want to be entertained.  And I think, you know, but that's always an element when you're just a person up there talking and the audience is sitting there listening--that to hold the attention of everybody, you got to be really good, or having, you know, a really great story to tell.  Otherwise, you're going to lose the interest of somebody who feels like they're going to, they got the right to say something or interject, or whatever they want to do at that point.
Speaker 1: Now, you were s- almost successful from the beginning in terms of people liking what you were doing.  But did you ever have a time when you were heckled, or you really had a tough audience?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, definitely, definitely had some tough audiences.  And you know, I mean I always have a few, you know, comebacks.  But again, because I'm more of an entertainer, I'm not the kind of guy that's always kind of like ripping jokes and, you know, got a bunch of one liners.  So, I never was really comfortable dealing with hecklers.  Like, I didn't want that.  But I've had, you know, of course had those kind of (unclear) you know, situations.  One that I remember that was, it was tough though was--because you know, he's a great comedian and he's got a different style.  But Eddie Griffin was scheduled to do a show in Memphis [Tennessee]; and all the people, his fans, were coming to see Eddie Griffin.  And at the last minute, he had to cancel.  And so they called me to replace him.  And so I show up, and my style is totally different than Eddie Griffin.  Eddie Griffin is, you know, is a lot more about a dysfunctional family and pimps and hos and all this stuff.  And he's, you know, he's a great comedian, but you know, my show is fun and its energy.  And I'm singing and talking about church and dogs, and this crowd just wasn't really feeling that.  And you know, they were in Memphis, they were hard.  And you know, we got to going back and forth until, you know, I was in a full on argument with a guy, because he's talking about he's going to smack my glasses off my face.  And I was like, "I wish you would."  And the next thing, you know, the next thing you know I'm not telling jokes at all.  You know, that was the one time I can remember when heckling went completely wrong; and I just, you know, I ended up having to, you know, give up the show, and you know, it was just, it just never got back on track.  Like, I never could get back to jokes, because it had got so contentious, you know.  So, it could be really bad at times.  But that was the one time that I do recall heckling going extremely wrong (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's got to be--that's got to be something that you have to concentrate on controlling I guess.  Because you've got, you have to make a connection with the audience.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And once that connection is made, if something like that goes on, you're still connected.  (Laughter) So you're--so, there's really conflict.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And if you're trying to have--you know, again, from a performer's point of view, if you're trying to bring energy and love and light, once you go dark, it's, you can't really gather it back.  And once your audience sees you go dark, you can't get it back.  You know, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Michael Richards (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I don't think he has been as popular, or in a sense I think it just, it ruined his whole career.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is so true that you know, again, people's perception and what they expect when they see it, you know, it's one of those things that takes--it takes a lot to have that--to con- keep that audience's trust, and then you can lose it really fast though.
Story_ID: 659053
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were getting ready to tell us about the Johnnie Walker National [Johnnie Walker National Comedy Search] at some point.  Now is this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --before you got the contract with the Funny Bone?
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: This was, the Johnnie Walker National was one of the, it was one of the--again, the first time I even attempted to do comedy; and once I did, and did well--they had a, you know, they had a, you know, a contest where you'd get in and they pick the ten.  And then I went in and did, I started to develop the set for that, and I performed in another little competition where I won five hundred dollars.  And that was, that was actually before the Johnnie Walker.  So, the first time I ever did it, I won five hundred dollars.  And so I was hooked on comedy at that point; and eventually had to work my way up.  I didn't--you know, I didn't, I didn't go far in the competition.  Once you got to the professional levels, you know, you recognized guys are really good.  And so, I was out, you know.  But I was, you know, I was hooked on comedy at that point, and started to do shows all around St. Louis [Missouri].  I had a couple of different nights.  I had my, you know, I had the Cedric comedy night at Hunter's Lounge [St. Louis, Missouri]; then I had one that became famous in St. Louis called 'Ced's Backyard,' I used to do at Mannie's nightclub [ph.].  It was c- and it was, it was a club, you know, where I would bring in comedians from Chicago [Illinois] and Atlanta [Georgia], and I was the host each week.  And we'd do it on a Wednesday night at the underground club where all the thugs hung out, and the street dealers.  And they would come in, spend lots of money and show their cars off, and girls.  And I was the--that was the club.  You come see me do comedy.  And so, really popular.  And I was able to really hone my craft, because you just have to be fast and you had to be witty, and you have to be, you know, fresh each week.  And so, we just had a really good time during that period of, you know, of my growth.  And then eventually started working at the Funny Bones where they gave me the contract to go around and do their clubs.  And I was still working at State Farm up until that time.  But then the Funny Bone, they gave--they had twenty-two clubs around the country, and you can go twice.  So, that was basically forty-four dates.  And once I got that, then I was able to quit my job.  And so that's when I decided to give up State Farm and I went to go do the Funny Bone.  And I started out with a little pilgrimage to Los Angeles [California].  So my first date was, I would say it was like in October in Davenport, Iowa.  So late August, early September, I drive to St. Lou- from St. Louis to L.A. and I'm going to do like a month in L.A.; and then I'm going to do this run and I'm going to head back to Davenport and start my career, this is going to be my move.  Well, I go--one of my best friends from college [Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, Missouri] was living in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] at the time.  I was just going to stop by to say hi to him for a couple of days, ended up being two weeks.  (Laughter) So, I get to L.A. and I only have basically two weeks for me to be there.  I come and they have the Comedy Act Theater [Los Angeles, California].  It's crazy.  Martin Lawrence, Robin Harris is on stage, Joe Torry, Ricky Harris, Damon Wayans--I'm so intimidated by seeing all these strong black comedians that I never go on stage.  So, I'm just--I don't even--I never go on stage with these guys.  I just sit in the back and look at them, like, no, I'm not going up there.  So I drive to Davenport, Iowa and I start my career.  But I'm motivated, you know, by what I've seen in California.  So, I'm like writing a lot more.  I'm just really--and I'm like extremely strong for an opening act.  So the club is shocked on how good I am to be an opening act.  Like, I'm at the bottom of the totem pole as far as the pay scale and everything, but I'm killing the stage.  So I do Davenport, then I go do Des Moines [Iowa], and then I'm on a whole runaround.  And by the time I get to Cincinnati [Ohio], my name is ringing.  Everybody knows me and I'm killing it; they move me to a middle act.
Story_ID: 659054
Speaker 1: So, I'm doing great.  The Funny Bones are loving me.  They're, they're telling me all the clubs want me back, and this is what's going to happen.  And so, it's like a Christmas break, like a long break.  Like three weeks I'm off; and then the top, I'm going to drive down to Dallas [Texas] to go do the Funny Bone in Dallas.  When I get there the club has been bought out--it's an independent club, it's no longer a part of the corporate franchise.  And the guy says, "No, I don't see you on my books as the opening act."  I was like, "I was booked from a long time ago."  He said, "Oh, they should have told you at corporate I bought this club like three weeks ago, and I book my own opening acts.  Sorry."  So, now I'm all the way down in Dallas.  I'm expecting to make three hundred dollars for the week.  I got a hundred dollars on me; and I'm, I had a little girlfriend down there, you know, and when I landed I took her to Applebee's or something.  (Laughter) So, I'm down to, you know, sixty dollars.  Like, man, I don't know how I'm going to get home.  And Steve Harvey is in Dallas, and he's doing his own black comedy night.  And he's on the radio and I hear him on the radio getting up in the morning, telling jokes, telling people to come check out his show.  And so I go by there one night, and it just so happens the headliner was bombing--he was just not doing well.  And you know, the same comedian that got me started knew Steve, told me, you know, he knew of me because of this guy.  And I came in, I introduced myself, he was like, "Oh, yeah, Percy Crews [Percy Crews II] told me about you.  And if this guy keeps bombing, you think you can go up and do five minutes?"  I said, "Yeah."  And so, the guy didn't do well.  I go up, do five minutes; kill.  And come back, you know, the next night and I told him what my situation was.  He said, "Well, just keep coming back.  If this guy doesn't do well, I'll keep putting you up.  I'll talk to the owners and see what I can do for you."  And so, never did I ever really hope another comedian would do bad, but (laughter) this particular instance I would just sit over there and put the voodoo hex on this guy.  Like, but eventually, even once he started to do well, I- my set was so good and so fresh that Steve put me--put me up anyway.  And then they gave me two hundred dollars at the end to get home; and then he booked me to come back like two months later to be a headliner there, and paid me a thousand dollars.  And that catapulted me to the next level.  And so, you know, I don't even think I finished the Funny Bone run after that.  I may have went and did like maybe ten other clubs, but I didn't do all twenty-two.  I was already off and going to another situation.  So, it was crazy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now during this--
Story_ID: 659055
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) During this transition period, when you're like striving as a young comedian, what did your mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] think about this?
Speaker 2: You know, my mother, you know, again she's, comes from, you know, the educational background, go to college, get a good job.  And so when I was leaving State Farm, during that period I started to be really good, and I was having my own nights around St. Louis [Missouri], different places.  So I invited my mother out to see me one day, to let her know that I really love what I--what it is I do.  And she came and she saw how I drew--you know, I had a crowd there, I was making money, and that I was really funny.  And she enjoyed it, and so she said, "Okay, if you can make it make sense, then go for it."  And that's why I didn't quit my job until I booked those twenty-two clubs [Funny Bone].  And once I explained to her that I had a base, kind of a base salary because I have these twenty-two clubs and, that equaled to forty-four dates, she was like, "All right, go for it."  And so that was called planning your work and working your plan--that's what we used to say.
Story_ID: 659056
Speaker 1: So this, 1989 when you meet Steve Harvey--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and start a new phase of your career.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Harv was great, because Harv was, Harv was, you know, he was a big headliner in the Funny Bone circuit, so he would work the white clubs.  And then he was on this new renaissance of starting these black clubs.  And like I said, I had saw the Comedy Act Theater in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and then they also had one in Atlanta [Georgia].  And then everywhere else in the world, it was just kind of like what I was doing in St. Louis [Missouri]--it would be a black night, like you would just do a nightclub, and you would a Wednesday, but you wouldn't have a professional comedy club.  And Steve had taken a club that used to be something else and turned it into a professional comedy club on the weekends.  So, from Thursday through Sunday it was a comedy club; and then the other days of the week it was something else.  So he was doing that, and he introduced that idea in Dallas [Texas] and it was working.  And so, you know, you start to see this renaissance.  And then shows like 'Def Comedy Jam' came along; BET's [Black Entertainment Television] 'ComicView' came along.  And so now the awareness and the ability to become popular happened really quick.  It was the great renaissance of black comedy at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, I was able to come in with--you know, I always say my graduating class was, you know, the Bernie Macs, D.L. Hughleys, and you know, Chris Tucker; and you know, all of us started to come into comedy at the same time.  Even Dave Chappelle, who had been around--but you know, the awareness of him started to happen during this period.  And this large group of black comedians, and we were all able to go and be popular, tour and make money.  And it just became--the comedy club circuit was no longer where you wanted to be, making three hundred a week.  I can go out and make three thousand on a Saturday, you know, on a Friday.  And, you know, we were selling out, you know, Fox Theatres and stuff like that.  So, that was, that was the new move.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this was a new age of comedy in terms of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, late '90s [1990s] and early--
Speaker 1: --so many--that whole generation that you just spoke of.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And I mean, it's interesting.  You see, those were the really strong comedians because these guys, all of us are still around, like, as big comedy names still.
Story_ID: 659057
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Miller Lite Comedy Search.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was another big one for me.  The Miller Lite, the Miller Lite Genuine--yeah, the Miller Lite Comedy Search was a Chicago [Illinois] based, Chicago based show.  You had to be from Chicago.  It was all about Chicago comedians.  And I was probably there the year before and watched I believe, Bernie Mac win, and I saw Bernie Mac--and Damon Wayans was the host.  And I remember like, man, this was a big deal.  They were at this big venue, and Bernie Mac was amazing.  And there was all these other comedians competing.  And so I found out what the rules were; and so I basically--I had an uncle [Melvin Boyce] who lived in Chicago.  I took his address, and then I got into the competition the next year.  And so, I would have to drive up so I would know when shows were being--when there would be like preliminary contests.  And like, "Well, you need to be here this day."  I would drive up, be in Chicago like a day before and go.  And then people started to go, "Are you from Chicago?"  "I'm from St. Louis [Missouri], but I just moved here."  So I just kind of--and it was a, it was a lot of--you know, it was a lot of, you know, a lot of the comics had problem with it, because it was their competition and I was sneaking in 'cause I was from out of town.  And everybody knew I was from out of town, but I was that good.  Like, the organizers wanted me in the competition.  They was like, "No, this guy's got to be in it."  Like, because I was good like at, you know, at that time.  And so I eventually won; and I won three thousand dollars.  And I just remember getting that dummy check thinking I am rich.  I got three thousand dollars at one time.  "Mama [Rosetta Boyce Kyles], you can quit your job."  (Laughter) I felt really wealthy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is 1990, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, man.
Speaker 1: Now, Chicago is like that.  You got to be from Chi- if you say you're from Chicago, well, they really, like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, it was a serious thing.  And so I mean it took a lot to--you know, everybody to just kind of respect what it was I was doing.  Understand that comedy was big and it was growing.  And again, a lot of great friends from there--people that I competed against: Adele Givens and Tony Sculfield and George Willborn.  I got people that we still have great respect for each other to this day.
Story_ID: 659058
Speaker 1: Now, you played the Ap- the Apollo [Apollo Theater] in New York [New York] in Harlem, in 1992, right?  Is this your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --first television appearance, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, scared to death.  I mean you come from St. Louis [Missouri], you go and do the Apollo.  And it was one, you know, of course we all watched the show, 'Showtime at the Apollo.'  And you knew if you messed up, that audience was going to boo you bad; and it was the kind of thing you just couldn't live down.  And you know, I was already popular, you know, amongst my peers and, you know, and working a little bit.  So, you're almost taking a chance.  Even though you've never been on television before, you know that the only time you go on--if you walk into this environment and you don't do well, it's going to be bad.  And it was, it was New York, it was in Harlem; it was intimidating.  It was--and I was scared, man.  And I just remember, you know, like just thinking like, I'm just going to go out here and rock it, and do my best.  And I remember doing my set and I got a standing ovation, and I've never been back (laughter).  I'm 1 and 0 at the Apollo.  The only time I went back was for a charity event and performed with--you know, it was a big charity event.  But I never went back on the show and never went back to just kind of be like, "Yo."  That just, that audience scared me so much.  I was like okay.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite piece at that time?
Speaker 2: Probably at that time, I used to do Luther Vandross doing the alphabet step probably was my, one of my big thing.  It was like--my voice is a little tired right now.  But it was, I used to be, talk about how Luther first got his weight problem because he could sing when he was a kid.  So even when he was a kid, he, you know, he'd be in school and they'd be like, "Luther, do your alphabets."  And he'd be (singing), "A," (clears throat) (singing), "A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P," I give up (laughter).  And he would finish and the girls were like, "Oh, Luther, you want something out of my lunchbox?"  And he would say yes, and that's how he got his little weight problem, you know.  (Laughter) So, that was one of my big jokes, you know.  And it was something I used to do--in college [Southeast Missouri State University, Cape Girardeau, Missouri] and I was in singing groups.  It was something I used to do when I warmed up, and I used to just be playing around with the guys.  We'd getting ready to sing something, and I would be doing these Luther runs.  And I started doing that as a joke, and they was like, "That's hilarious."  And that's how it became one of my first jokes.
Story_ID: 659059
Speaker 1: There are other TV appearances that follow.  And in 1994, you were chosen to be the host of Black Entertainment Television's 'ComicView.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did that come about?
Speaker 2: That was, you know, that was a good situation as far as I was concerned.  Because from, you know, from 'Def Comedy Jam,' which was '92 [1992] or somewhere--I was, I had a gap, and I was popular and I was writing a lot of jokes.  I was doing my Cedric's backyard show ['Ced's Backyard'] in St. Louis [Missouri].  I was writing a lot of material and I wanted to go on television again.  And because I'd been on HBO [Home Box Office] already, all my contemporaries were telling me not to go on BET--that that was a step down.  It was like, "It's a step back and wait until you can go on HBO again.  But don't, don't do it on there."  And I said, "No, I just got all these jokes.  I got to say them."  And so I decided to go and get on 'ComicView.'  And it just so happens that D.L. Hughley who was the host was stepping down.  And so, they were going to do basically a competition on whoever won was now going to be the new host.  And I had no idea of that when I started the idea--I just wanted to tell jokes.  And so, it just worked out.  Because I was able to win the contest; and then I became the host of the show.  And it put me on every night, you know.  And as far as cable and African American, I was on every night in black households, and it made me a household name.  And so it was probably one of the best marketing moves I could have made at that point in time in my career, but I had no idea that was what I was doing.
Speaker 1: So everybody knew you by then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But, you know, once I became the host of the show, I was on every night.  You know, I was able to be, you know, a person that was introducing comedians and be funny.  And I was, you know, I looked like the guy who was bringing you the hottest comedians in the world.  And so, it worked to my advantage.
Speaker 1: It's good to be seen as the one that can recognize and herd the rest of them into (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, exactly.
Story_ID: 659060
Speaker 1: Is this the--yeah, it was the Richard Pryor Comic of the Year Award, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) BET [Black Entertainment Television] that led to being the host [of 'ComicView'] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.  That led to being the host, which was a great honor.  It was my first time being able to meet Richard Pryor.  I mean he was, you know, deteriorating at the time.  But--he was sickly but he was still coherent; you could still talk to him.  And that was, you know, of course, you know, a great, great honor to be able to meet your idol like that.  And so that was just a big deal.
Speaker 1: Yeah, people think of, I guess, major entertainers as always being from New York [New York] or Chicago [Illinois] or Los Angeles [California].  But--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --here's Richard Pryor from Peoria, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was something I was able to recognize.  Because again, on my run, you know, to do the Miller Genuine Draft [Miller Lite Comedy Search], I would drive to Chicago, I would pass Peoria all the time; and of course that's what would I think of--is that Richard Pryor is from here.  When I would pass it, and you would think you'd get off and go and try to, you know, go into the city and see some of the stuff he talked about on the albums.  You trying to look for these places, and you know.  So, you know, that was really cool; and to recognize how close it was to where I was from.  You know, was, you know that was always one of those things, too, to let you know that you don't have to be from New York or L.A to make it.
Speaker 1: Well so many people talk about Richard Pryor's comedy and him being special as a comedian.  How do you feel about Richard Pryor's comedic- comedy career; and how did it influence you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think, you know, again Richard Pryor was one of the first voices you--you know, that I was impressed by as a comedian.  And you know, because I can remember hearing some Bill Cosby stuff and Redd Foxx albums, but it was a little over my head.  Richard Pryor was somebody I could identify with.  He felt like the uncle telling a story or something of that nature when you listen to those albums.  So, you couldn't wait.  And then as you saw him, you know, grow like his special, or his little short lived TV show ['The Richard Pryor Show']--funny, you know.  Him on 'Saturday Night Live'--funny.  You know, then the movies, 'Which Way Is Up?'  You know, just things that, you know, made an impression on you.  You know, he was definitely one of the great comedians.  And you know, his freedom is probably, as I grew older, is one of the things I think I recognize and respect the most--is his freedom to be able to tell his story, and the things that he was willing to talk about; and how he would go there on stage.  And I think that that really makes for great comedians.  I always say that about Chris Rock, Dave Chappelle, and Louis C.K.  These guys are like fearless, like they just--they can shape their world and their experiences, and talk about them without necessarily any kind of pretext or prefix.  And I think that, you know, I always say that at, you know, at some point in time, you know, when you do a brand that's considered wholesome or positive, you can put yourself in a trap to where you can't necessarily say everything that comes to your mind as a joke.
Story_ID: 659061
Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995]--'95 [1995] or '96 [1996], you founded the Cedric The Entertainer Charitable Foundation [Cedric The Entertainer Charitable Foundation, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And this is sort of--it seems--I was thinking, oh, this is early in his career.  So, were you always thinking about if you became successful on some level that you were going to do something for others, or what?
Speaker 2: You know, it probably came, you know, after a few TV appearances.  I would think that, you know, again, growing up with my mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] who was one who was--she definitely helped people out, and you know, and have, you know, family members stay at the house.  The charitable nature was a part of my upbringing, if you will--to be able to give back, or to look at a person who's down and say, "Oh, how can I help you out in any kind of way?"  And I think that as I started to get popular and make some money, my sister [Sharita Kyles Wilson] was the one that helped me to understand that it would be important for me to be able to give back and help some kids out.  Because I would do it probably on an individual basis anyway.  You know, somebody would come up and be like, "Yo, my son needs help going to school."  And we're like, "All right, cool, you know, I'll take care of that."  And so eventually it was like, all right, let's turn it into real charity work.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I thought that was, you know, early for somebody to start doing that, because you weren't making like super money then.
Speaker 2: No.  Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you, you did that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 659062
Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995] you, you acted as the host of 'Def Comedy Jam' for a season, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about that experience?
Speaker 2: You know, 'Def Comedy Jam' was definitely one of the shows that catapulted the African American comedian into, a big way into the overall, you know, popular American psyche.  Like, we were everywhere because the show was so popular that we became pop culture.  And so to be a host of it at any given time, even though the show it, you know, had been through, you know, a couple of generations by that time, it still was important.  You know, it was important to be the host, where people would say, "All right, cool."  Then I'd been the host for 'Def Comedy Jam,' so it was a prestigious kind of job at the time.  And so, it was an honor to be able to be asked to be the host for that period.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, there's a difference between 'ComicView' and 'Def Comedy Jam' in terms of the blue material--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know in 'Def Comedy' jamming.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Def Comedy Jam' sometimes gets a little rough.
Speaker 2: Supe- yeah, 'Def Comedy Jam' could be really rough, but it was never really a requirement, which was the--you know, the thing is, it was just because it was HBO [Home Box Office], I think people, you know, let that freedom--that they could curse, could be blue, or dark--that they just chose to be.  And so, that was something I didn't do.  I still kind of was able to, you know, build my brand from the BET [Black Entertainment Television] point of view, which was a little more family oriented network.  That you know, I could let go a curse word or two if I wanted to on 'Def Comedy Jam,' which was great.  It was able to give me some street cred (laughter) if you will, but I didn't have to go dark, and I didn't have to prove it--because it wasn't my brand anyway, because my mother [Rosetta Boyce Kyles] was a great influence on what I did on stage.  Because, you know, when she'd come to the shows I wanted to have a, you know, a smarter show that reflected being her child, you know.
Story_ID: 659063
Speaker 1: Now, '96 [1996] you were cast in the role of Steve Harvey's best friend, Cedric Jackson Robinson [sic.].
Speaker 2: Jackie [Cedric Jackie Robinson]--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Or Jackie Robinson, sorry, on 'The Steve Harvey Show,' so--?
Speaker 2: Another unique, you know, experience.  I was out doing a tour with D.L. [D.L. Hughley] and myself.  We were the--both were former hosts of 'ComicView,' we had moved on.  And so we were touring around the country as the two hosts of 'ComicView.'  And we came to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and it was customary at each show that if you're in your hometown we would flip flop--that you would become, you would be the headliner that night.  So, we were in L.A. and D.L. was going to be the headliner.  And I found out, like, all of these executives were coming to see him.  You know, he was telling me, "ABC is going to be in the house, and Brillstein Grey [Brillstein Grey Entertainment; Brillstein Entertainment Partners] is going to be here.  CBS is going to be here."  And even though he was the headliner, I decided to turn my show up.  So, I wrote like all this new stuff so that I can be seen, because they were going to be in the audience.  And I got a deal, I got a deal with Brillstein Grey.  Steve had a deal with Brillstein Grey.  We were still friends, you know, throughout.  And when he had an opportunity to do 'The Steve Harvey Show,' Brillstein Grey, who was producing the show said, "Well, do you want to do--go on Steve's show, or you can go on your own show?"  And Steve had asked for me, and I already had the deal--and I was like, "Well, do I have to get second position money?"  He was like, "No, you still get your same money, but you're just going to make a choice to go on Steve's show."  I was like, (unclear)--I was like, that's cool.  Because I saw Steve do 'Me and the Boys,' and I saw how hard it was to be like the lead guy, you know.  So, I thought it was smarter for me to learn to be in the shotgun seat and learn television, and let Steve be the guy.  Plus he was my friend and it just worked out.  And it was awesome.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You often got the funniest lines (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the funny one.  (Laughter) Well, that's the best job.  When you're not the one--and I've learned this too in television.  When you're not the one that also has to carry the story, then you usually have the best opportunity to be funny.  You think about 'Seinfeld,' it was Michael Richards and every- you know, they were the funny ones.  Seinfeld [Jerry Seinfeld] was the guy that tells you the story, you know.  Only 'The Cosby Show,' where Bill Cosby was one that was the lead and the funniest one on the show that I could think--most of the shows, it's always the other character that gets to be the funny one.  And even though you're the star, you end up being the person that's telling the story.  So you don't have as many funny lines, because you got to keep the story on track.
Story_ID: 659064
Speaker 1: So, I was going to ask you about the Kings of Comedy tour.  But off camera we were talking about like, when did Robin Harris pass?  He was a comedian who was part of the same group.  In fact, he was a little bit ahead of your group, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And Robin Harris was a little bit ahead, little ahead of my group, and he was really--he was starting to just catch his wave.  And he was the, probably the comedian that most influenced me.  I mean of course Richard Pryor and Eddie Murphy were people that I really liked and watched, but Robin Harris was the first comedian I saw that looked like a guy that you might know.  Like, his delivery, his--you know, he wasn't really made for TV, if you will.  He was just like an uncle, like a cousin; and his delivery was like that.  And when I saw him I recognized, like, oh you can do comedy that way.  And that is, that was the thing that really made me recognize that I could do it.  So, he was probably one of the greatest influences I had.  And I can remember, I'm going to say it had to be, it had to be maybe '94 [1994], '95 [sic. 1990] like, because I was still working at State Farm, I still had my job.  And I remember, you know, them announcing he passed on the radio.  And it was just so tough I had to pull over, because you know he had meant that much to me.  Because I had started, you know, on my way doing this comedy thing.  And so, yeah, that was--that was a big one right there for me.
Story_ID: 659065
Speaker 1: Kings of Comedy tour.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The Kings of Comedy grossed over $37 million, 1997.  And you're in the center of this, one of the Kings of Comedy.  Tell us about it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was--again this was an interesting time with comedy because, you know, the renaissance was on.  Everybody was hot, making money.  'Def Comedy Jam' was out doing tours.  Anybody could do a comedy jam.  You can just, you know, you can just be Frank and James and do a comedy jam, and put a few comedians on there, they would sell out.  So Walter Latham, who was a promoter who had, you know, he'd taken D.L. and myself out on tour; and also, you know, promoted Bernie Mac separately, and Steve Harvey separately.  He came up with this idea to do an arena tour.  And so he started it--he tried it like with just Steve and Bernie somewhere in Dallas [Texas] I think; and then came with the whole idea and added--.  So the first year, the first year was just me, Steve and Bernie with Guy Torry as like the opening act.  And so we were the kings; and then Guy was our opening act.  And then the next--you know, after that we added D.L. Hughley and just made it this foursome.  We toured, you know, three, four years and then did the movie ['The Original Kings of Comedy'].  It was just, just a big time for comedy--it was huge.  Because we were just selling out arenas.  We were The Beatles--it was rock star comedy, man.  Like, the private jets, and everybody got their own limos.  It was just ridiculous.  It was a fun, fun, time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is going on at the same time you're doing 'The Steve Harvey Show,' too?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  So, Steve and I, we are just raking in the dough; we're having a great time.  We would shoot 'The Steve Harvey Show' you know, rehearse Monday through--Monday through, you know, Thursday.  We ended up shooting, we shot the show on like--we ended up changing our schedule so that we could go out on the weekends.  We, I think we started shooting our show on Wednesday nights.  So, we would rehearse on Thursday and we would be off Friday.  We would come back Monday, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom; and then shoot the show.  And we--so, we had it down to a system like that.  So, this was a busy time and a good time.  I mean, comedy was, comedy was booming and we were in the middle of it.
Story_ID: 659066
Speaker 1: Now back to the show.  Now you're, you play a teacher in the show.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the gym coach [Cedric Jackie Robinson].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And did you have a--I mean I know the show had writers.  But how much influence did you have over the material that was presented on the show?
Speaker 2: Well, we had great writers on the show.  But again, because we were standups, I mean it was a lot of trust to both Steve [Steve Harvey] and myself.  If we didn't like a joke or we had something better that we wanted to say, well, they gave us the reins to be able to do that.  And so, but we had a bunch of really great writers on the show.  So it was all about performance and delivery, but I would definitely add a lot of stuff in that, you know, that made the show.  That was just--that ended up becoming my brand, like, through most of the projects I do.  It was like, just ad lib.  Like, "Do this.  And now Ced [HistoryMaker Cedric The Entertainer], do your thing."
Speaker 1: Yeah you had two significant co-stars, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I mean Wendy Raquel Robinson and Terri J. Vaughn, who played Lovita Alize [Lovita Alize Jenkins Robinson] on the show.  And she was great; and of course, you know, me and Steve.  And the cast was just great all around.  People loved Merlin Santana.  And, there was Romeo [Romeo Santana] and Bullethead [Stanley "Bullethead" Kuznocki].  People loved all the characters.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Do you have a favorite moment from the show?
Speaker 2: Seem like--one of my favorite moments from 'The Steve Harvey Show,' I had a couple of them.  One was, you know, I introduced the character Grandma Puddin', where I used to be like--this was before Tyler Perry, you know, who did the Madea.  But the mean grandmother kind of lady and, she was funny; she hated Steve.  That was a fun character to play.  But one of my, probably one of my favorite memories on there was--it was a couple.  It was the group, the High Tops [Steve Hightower and the High Tops], when we sang 'When the Funk Hits the Fan.'  We would have the little outfits on, and Ron Isley [Ronald Isley] was a part of it, and that was fun.  So we were this old group, and we would get up and perform.  And those would be fun shows where we'd be up dancing and performing.  And then one that I remember was doing a dance where I was trying to choreograph the girls.  They had, some young girls were there, and I was showing them moves, and I did the difference between Janet Jackson and Britney [Britney Spears].  I was like, told them, "This is Janet," (gesture).  And it was the same move, but one was left and one was right.  I just remember that I improv-ed it, and it just blew up--like the crowd--and I did it without any of the producers knowing I was going to do it.  And that's, and it just killed.  And that's one of my favorite moments on the show that I can remember.  It was like, I just did it.  I just did it, like, I was like, I'm just going to do it right now.  And it just worked, and so--and everybody went crazy.
Story_ID: 659067
Speaker 1: You had a live audience, right--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) where you actually taped the show ['The Steve Harvey Show']?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that was great.  I mean, again fun; and I still kind of do that, even with 'The Soul Man,' is that you have that live audience, because you get that immediate response.  You get that laughter, you get that energy; and you kind of know what's working right away.
Speaker 1: 'Soul Man' is your new show, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, we'll get to it eventually.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you play a minister [Reverend Boyce "The Voice" Ballentine] on that show, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I play a minister on 'Soul Man'--a former R and B singer who became a minister, you know, loosely based off a couple of people we know.
Speaker 1: So, double entendre, soul?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: And there are more and more--I can think of Al Green.  I can think of--
Speaker 2: Exactly, Al Green is one.  And there was the rapper, Mase at one time, and Ham- MC Hammer went pretty religious.  Anybody that did something and was popular for something else, I wanted to be able to kind of play off, what's that transition like for those people.
Story_ID: 659068
Speaker 1: So, 'The Steve Harvey Show' ran in, until when?
Speaker 2: Ran right around, what, 2001 [sic. 2002] maybe?  Two thousand--yeah, did 2000 and the 2001 season.  We did six seasons, six and a half.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So by this time, you're living out here, you know for--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) you've been out here.
Speaker 2: I moved out here in '94 [1994].  So when, so once I became the host of 'ComicView,' you know, I came out and I started to live here.  And I would go back and forth to St. Louis [Missouri], but I always kept a place here.  And then, you know, once I got 'The Steve Harvey Show,' then, yeah, it was time to kind of like really, you know, get roots out here.
Speaker 1: Well both you and Steve Harvey have been able to become game show hosts--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to--I mean to do a lot of different things, you know, that have all, you know, emanated originally from standup comedy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think, you know, that's great.  I love the idea that--you know, standup is probably one of the more versatile skillsets, because it does allow you to be just an orator in front.  So, to be able to be, you know, a game show host, it's all about listening, having fun, but hearing the people and then turning that quick little, you know, observation or something that they said and make it entertainment; and at the same time guiding the show along and keeping the rules intact.  And so, and then of course led me to doing movies and commercials.  I had a great run with Bud Light doing the commercials where we even won the Super Bowl one year with one of my Bud Light commercials.  And so that's, you know, that's been fun; the opportunity to write a book ['Grown A$$ Man,' Cedric The Entertainer].  So, again, standup just definitely opened up so many doors that--and Steve has always been the kind of guy that explains that, you know, and show it to you that you can do so many things, you know, even when it was about being a business owner.  But through standup, you know, is, you know, it's something very important that you want to be able to diversify and know that you can do it.
Speaker 1: So, were you able to just make the transition from standup to acting without any lessons or anything, without any acting--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't do a lot of acting lessons, and mainly because a lot of my standup, again, was the idea that I would, you know, emulate people.  I would reenact scenes, you know, as a large part of my standup.  And for me to do that, I just kind of trusted that ability when I started to act--that I was just kind of reenacting or redoing something as I believed it happened already.  And so, and I think that that was, you know, an advantage for me as, you know, to go to, on screen and have people really enjoy it.
