Story_ID: 253246
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Paul Brock.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Willis Edwards, W-I-L-L-I-S, E-D-W-A-R-D-S.
Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Franklin Earl.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind your name or anything?
Speaker 2: Well I--Willis Franklin--my aunt [Carrie Hudson] wanted to name me Willis instead of Will, and it was Will Frank Hudson.  And I, she--my mother [Aunita Hudson Edwards] decided she wanted to name me Franklin Earl to have a portion of my father's [Frank Edwards] name and my brother's [Frank Edwards, Jr.] name, so I have all of them in one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is January 1, 1946, my place of birth would be Palm Springs.
Speaker 1: Okay, Palm Springs, California, right?
Speaker 2: No, the place I was raised, I'm sorry, where I was born, was born in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Houston--and I was raised in Palm Springs, it's like I guess after I was born I was swooped off to Palm Springs.  So we almost always say that I was born in Palm Springs, but I have to tell you I was born in the Negro General Hospital [Houston Negro Hospital; Riverside General Hospital] in Houston, Texas, on the first day of January, fifteen minutes after twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay, now just briefly, just for the record, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is I am a producer, community activist, that's me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now before we get started, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 28, 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Los Angeles, California, in the chairman's room of the Hilton hotel [Hilton Los Angeles Airport, Los Angeles, California] at the airport [Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles, California].
Story_ID: 253247
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five warm-up questions we ask, they're lightweight, short (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 1: --questions that require just a short answer, the first one is, do you have a favorite food, sir?
Speaker 2: Mustard greens.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is my birthday.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hawaii.
Speaker 1: All right.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do what you can from where you are.
Story_ID: 253248
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you some questions about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side and your father's [Frank Edwards] side, and we'll start with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Aunita Tridoris, A-U-N-I-T-A, Tridoris, T-R-I-D-O-R-I-S, Hudson Edwards.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's the first name again?
Speaker 2: Aunita, A-U-N-I-T-A.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 20th, she was ninety years old when she passed, so 1915 I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Carthage, Texas, east Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: My mother's side of the family, her father, was Levi Hudson, he was the patriarch of the family.  He lived in Carthage, Texas, was active as a deacon of the church. Never shopped in a grocery store in his life, always grew his own food.  And, was be able to slaughter his own meat.  He lived on a fabulous farm there in Carthage, Texas.  In fact, I am going to be going there for the first time in a long time to decide on which piece of the property that I will keep me and my sister [Brenda Edwards Pine] for--to rebuild on.  My grandfather had a pond in the back that--of his house that was so wonderful.  And he had beautiful, beautiful--where he grew everything he grew greens, he grew tomatoes, he grew watermelons 'cause I never had heard of the yellow meat watermelon before but I saw it there (laughter), you know.  He was probably--used to drive a car at thirty-five miles an hour, and he'd always get stopped for going to slow.  He always would take his time about what he would do.  He was a deacon in the Central Baptist Church in Carthage, Texas.  And he was a very wise man, a wise man, in that he was able to take care of his family even in his death.
Speaker 1: Okay, now are there any stories from your family that go all the way back to slavery or beyond?
Speaker 2: I don't, I did not know--my mother had tuberculosis after I was born, and my mother was in the hospital most of my younger life.  And because in those days tuberculosis they had to keep quarantined and, or zoned in order to.  And on that side of the family I did not know a lot about--I learned a lot from my aunt, Carrie [Hudson].  She was, like grandfather, like the matriarch in the family, and she took care of us and she told us stories.  And like she was able to finally tell me about who my father was, because I never knew that I had any other father but the father that I had.  And I finally learned about who he was and where he lived and why I was born (laughter).  How I was born, and what happened in the midst, but still my mother and father had gotten married.  And he wanted me to be his son, and but I finally found out who my real father was at the age of twenty-seven.  'Cause I needed to get a passport and I couldn't get a passport because it was not my name Willis Edwards, it was like on my birth certificate, it was Will Frank Hudson.  And I carry my grandfather's last name, and my mother did not want anyone to know that she had had, you know, that she and my father had broken up.  And in between that there was a child conceived and I was the child.
Story_ID: 253249
Speaker 1: Okay now, what was your father's full name?
Speaker 2: Frank Edwards.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was from Tyler, Texas.
Speaker 1: Is this the man that raised you or the one that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's the man that raised me and the man that was the entrepreneur of the family.  He had a little--he had, in Carthage, Texas he had a little store there.  And then when we came to live in Palm Springs [California], he had a little bar there to be able to try to make ends meet in Palm Springs.  So, I'm very proud of our relationship, but I was glad to know who I really was and what I was about, and it did not bother him that I did know, so that was right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was your biological father's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Will Smith.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, from Marshall, Texas.  I remember when my mother [Aunita Hudson Edwards] introduced me to him, we were coming back to California.  And she took--she had to go get clothes clean at this cleaners in Marshall, Texas.  And I, for the life of me I was trying to figure out why we were gonna go from Longview [Texas] to Marshall to get (laughter) to get these clothes cleaned.  And I remember this guy rubbing my head said, "Son, how are you."  And, you know, when in those days we would just say, son, you just think--but I could see it very clearly.  And where I was standing next to my mother, and it was like it was--and she wanted me to meet him.  And she finally told me at age of eighty-four.  She was eighty-four when she told me who he was when I met him, and so forth, so.  And my mother and I were very close, we became very, very close.  She tried very hard to make sure that I understood why she did what she did.  And that she loved me just as much, and my father did love me very much.  And I'm so--it was just unfortunate that I was not able to meet my father again myself because he had passed when I was twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you met him how old were you when you met him?
Speaker 2: About seven years old.
Story_ID: 253250
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Aunita Hudson Edwards] talk about growing up in Texas?
Speaker 2: My mother talked about growing up in Texas, and talked about her mother [Elnora Davis Hudson] was a teacher.  So my aunt [Carrie Hudson] was a teacher, and my mother was a teacher.  And, but she mostly lived with her grandparents, she--her grandparents spoiled her, and she was the--and she was always around--my mother knew and became the historian of the family.  And she would know to this day who her cousins were.  She's introduced me to cousins here in Los Angeles [California] that I would've never known that they were my cousin.  And she's, she made an effort to make sure before she passed, it's like she was on this urgency to make sure that I knew everything.  My mother traveled extensively with me until the time that she died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The last time that we were together was in New York at an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] national board meeting.  And she had wanted to go to New York because her first cousin who was her age lived there, and she had not seen him in 15, 16 years.  And her happiest day was--is the day that she saw him and spent time with him, I'd never seen her so happy.  She forgot about all her pain and everything.  And she, you know, she says, well, you know--we were talking about her going.  And I said "You might not want to go because, you know, you're in pain," and  she says, "Well I can pain just as well as in New York as I can pain here."  So we went on to New York, and she ended up having a wonderful time with her cousin who I now have gotten to know.  And each time I'm there in New York we visit.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother want to be a teacher too, like her--
Speaker 2: Her mother?
Speaker 1: Her mother and sister?
Speaker 2: Well it was like, in those days it was like it was in the family, it was in the family, education was a big thing.  And so in those days with African Americans that was the big job to have, is a teaching job.  And you were able to be looked at in a different manner within the community itself and all that.
Speaker 1: Okay did she wanna be a teacher too, I'm trying to pursue if she was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I think that mother wanted--she didn't say she did but, I guess it was something that was ingrained in the family.
Speaker 1: Okay so she didn't go on to--did she go to college or--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah she went to college, and she was a teacher, she taught and she taught in Palm Springs [California].
Speaker 1: Okay, I wasn't sure if she was a teacher from what you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah my mother was a teacher.
Speaker 1: Her mother was.
Speaker 2: And my aunt was, and she was.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I'm asking you something that you thought I already knew.
Speaker 2: And most of my life was spent with my father [Frank Edwards] and my aunt, my great-aunt, and because of my mother having tuberculosis.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a--what's the story behind them moving from--now you were born in Houston [Texas] right?
Speaker 2: I was born in Houston, and we moved, I guess within, I guess a matter of a year.
Speaker 1: To Palm Springs.
Speaker 2: Palm Springs, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now why did your parents move to Palm Springs?
Speaker 2: Because we needed to be in dry heat because of my mother having tuberculosis.  And it was decided on that this is where we would land, and a lot of people had moved to California from Texas, it was a lot of east Texas people who moved there.
Story_ID: 253251
Speaker 1: So, you say your father [Frank Edwards] had a bar for a while?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he had a bar in Palm Springs [California], it was a little hole in the wall but it was a bar, where he would have his chickens and hamburgers, and it did quite well, by the way, just being there and trying to make it.  And I learned so much from him we--there were about three thousand African Americans who lived in Palm Springs.  We all lived on the Indian [Native American] reservation in this section of the city.  And then when they wanted to build downtown up--they wanted to move all the African Americans out of the city in the north end of town.  And just the other day up where I think homes at that time cost twenty-seven thousand dollars.  They've just built a new housing development in front of my mother's [Aunita Hudson Edwards] house, each one of those houses cost three hundred thousand dollars.  But there is a group that is in that environment that needs a lot of love, and we need to reach out to them.  In fact, Palm Springs just had its first African American mayor [Ron Oden], of the city of Palm Springs.
Story_ID: 253252
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?  Like a first memory from childhood?
Speaker 2: I have a confused childhood memory, and the confusion was is that I'm like, my mother [Aunita Hudson Edwards] was not with me.  And I was very confused about that, and I was trying to figure out why all the time why my mother wasn't there, until I had learned about where she was.  And, and I would live between my aunt [Carrie Hudson] and my father's [Frank Edwards] place, but I'd never--my mother and I did not become closer until I guess I was twelve or thirteen years old.
Story_ID: 253253
Speaker 1: Can you describe I guess the surroundings where you grew up, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I was very fortunate when we were in Texas, my grandfather [Levi Hudson], I loved being with him because he had this wonderful farm.  And how we would have fresh everything, and how the food would taste, the smell.  The air, the pond in the back of his place of where we go fishing.  And he would catch his fish, he would make his own bacon, all of those things, and his wife [Elnora Davis Hudson] would make biscuits from scratch.  And with the syrup that he had made, and it was always that feeling of that love that was there.  And the quality of the food, his eggs he got his from his chickens.  His greens, he got from the field, his corn, he got from this field, his tomatoes, he got from his field.  All of that was a different taste, different feel, all of that.  And he would plow it himself, and it was just exciting to always be with him, and to be able to have--I learned how to can things, you know, with my grandfather.  And there was the side of learning about the slow life as it compared to the fast lane.  And I learned a lot from him, he was a great man.  He was one of these people who didn't say much but did a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about Palm Springs [California] and growing up there, was it, were you--
Speaker 2: Palm Springs for me it was quite different.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you, you were a baby when you moved to Palm Springs?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right, and but Palm Springs for me was different, the difference in Palm Springs was is that I learned about racism there.  I learned about--I learned how to have wonderful friends of all races.  And many of those friends we're still friends today.  And we broke color barriers that we didn't even realize that we were doing, because we all hung out together.  And we did not care about race, we just cared about friendship, and we're still friends today.
Story_ID: 253254
Speaker 1: So I was asking you about what life was like in Palm Springs [California], in those days what--tell me this, I mean you said that you discovered racism in Palm Springs?  Well, there's probably racism in Texas too, but what was race relations like when you were coming along in Texas and in Palm Springs, what's the difference between the two?
Speaker 2: Well I mean, and like one time this one teacher told me, she says, "You're never be able to learn anything."
Speaker 1: Now this was here or in--
Speaker 2: In Palm Springs.  And 'cause she thought I was not smart, she thought I was just an average kid.  And, it had hurt me very much because I thought I reached out.  I thought I wanted to learn, I had tried very hard to learn.
Speaker 1: Now was this a white teacher?  This an integrated school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Mrs. Crawford [ph.], Mrs. Crawford, I'll never forget her.
Speaker 1: Was this an integrated school?
Speaker 2: It was an integrated school of Palm Springs, it was all the schools was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: What was her name, Mrs. Crawford?
Speaker 1: No, your grade school?
Speaker 2: Oh what grade was it, I was in the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: You were in the ninth grade.  But what was the name of the grade school you attended first?
Speaker 2: Nellie N. Coffman Junior High School [Cathedral City, California].
Speaker 1: Neil?
Speaker 2: Nellie N. Coffman Junior High.
Speaker 1: Nellie N. Coffman?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to Palm Springs High School [Palm Springs, California].  So but anyway she said that you would never be able to learn and so forth and so on.  Well, it gave me a challenge, and I thought it was quite unkind of her to say. But it gave me a challenge to be able to become a leader in the sense of the word of becoming a vice president of student body.  Becoming, you know, going to college and becoming student body president.  Not letting those things bother me but focusing in on what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Now do you think that she said what she said because of racism or did she think you really couldn't do things?
Speaker 2: Oh I thought it was in part because of racism 'cause she wouldn't--she didn't try to understand me.  She wanted to, you know, it was like, I just felt very badly.  And to this day I still think of it, but I see what I have accomplished because I--it was a challenge for me.
Speaker 1: Okay now how many--what was the percentage of black students when you were in school, I mean roughly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, if it's only out of what, maybe seventy-five thousand people, Palm Springs there were three thousand black people.  It was not too many of us there.  But what I was protected from many times is because of the environment of the people I was with.  But I knew all the time that people looked at me in a different way for as trying to get a job there.  Trying to, to doing the basics of--I had friends who were very well off when I--my best friend was Alan Freed's son, his name was Lance Freed.
Speaker 1: Alan Freed, the radio Alan Freed, okay, famous for all those commercials (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, right.  And he was the king of rock 'n roll, they used to call him.  And his son Lance and I, who's now president of Rondor Music [International] here in Los Angeles [California].  We were in school together, and there was another kid named Paul Burke, Jr. [ph.].  So, and my environment of life I was protected by them, because we were a team, we were a family.  It was like that, we were family, he would sleep over my house I'd sleep over their house, you know, that type of thing.  And in this I learned so much of how sometimes you become very naive of the world.  Because you're so protected with what would you do, till I actually I started learning about more racism and more of this than when I first came to college about housing.  About--I had never had to worry about an apartment in my life I--we always had homes to say in.  We never, you know, if we stayed, like when I first came to school here.  We used to have--be driven to school, because that's what that was, I mean that--but then when I had to go out into my world and knock on doors and try to figure out how to get an apartment.  And how to be rejected because you thought that you would be accepted, and wondering why were you rejected, and it was only because of racism and they did not want you to live in that apartment building.
Story_ID: 253255
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back to school, now, we haven't gotten finished--before we get that far.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, now how would you describe yourself in grade school [Nellie N. Coffman Junior High School, Cathedral City, California], what kind of a little kid were you, and what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Well I--in grade school I enjoyed being a part of leadership.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I'd always wanted to be in student government.  I've always wanted to be--bring together people.  I like bringing people together, and I like challenges, and I like to make people communicate and work together well.  I started to bring my yearbook from school, I saw it out there but.  I saw it out there, in fact, I was seeing--thinking about bringing and letting you see that, but.
Speaker 1: Oh, high school yearbook?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay I was asking about grade school now.
Speaker 2: Well I mean it was high school [Palm Springs High School, Palm Springs, California]--like my grade school was fine, I mean I enjoyed myself.  I enjoyed my life; I wanted to learn.  I had a will to learn, and so I did well, but I wanted to do better I wanted to do--
Speaker 1: Okay now, what was your favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: My favorite subject was, in the vein of political science, I like politics, I like social studies.
Speaker 1: Okay social studies?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'd always wanted--at one point I wanted to go to law school, then I decided not that.
Speaker 1: This is when you were still in grade school?
Speaker 2: No, yeah it was in grade school I wanted to be a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you inspired--did you know any lawyers then?
Speaker 2: I just started by fighting for people's justice and fighting, it's something that was part of me, I used to see on TV and stuff at night.  I wanted to do what a lawyer did and when they go to court and you stand up for people and but that went by the wayside (laughter).
Story_ID: 253256
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: The church was totally a part of my growing up, you either were in church or you went to an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] meeting.  My mother [Aunita Hudson Edwards] started the Palm Springs [California] NAACP.
Speaker 1: Now that's significant, 'cause I don't think that most little kids are involved in NAACP when they're growing up.  That was, that was (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my mother after she--we got back together after her--she got out of the hospital.  My mother was--she wanted so much a lot of time to make sure that we bonded together.  And the way I never got in trouble was because of how my mother, she took me to prayer meetings. She took me to this, so I grew up in the church beyond all of this.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so was--so did you have like roles to play in the church, did you--where you in the youth ministry?
Speaker 2: I was in the youth--I was on (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you in the choir?
Speaker 2: I was in--on the usher board, and I was in the choir.  I was at everything I was, you know, if you wanted something I would raise my hand (laughter).  Because I always wanted to be in this leadership role, whether it's was in the church or whether it was in school.
Speaker 1: Now how old were you when you went to your first NAACP meeting?
Speaker 2: I was eleven years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you expected to really play a role in the NAACP?
Speaker 2: Well there was a there was a woman in Pasadena [California] who used to travel in the small cities and try to organize the NAACP.  A Ms. Ruby [ph.], and she--I heard her speak to young people, and I wanted to be involved from then on.  And my mother was taking me and I--when I heard her speak I decided I wanted to see if I could be involved in this, 'cause it was exciting fighting for people's rights and stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said when you heard your mother speak or Ms. Ruby?
Speaker 2: Ms. Ruby.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you remember her last name?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to do that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'll come back to it in a minute.  She lived in Pasadena, she was the matriarch of the NAACP in Pasadena, California--
Story_ID: 253257
Speaker 1: I was asking you off camera about the Indian [Native American] reservation, can you tell us about what that was, and what that's about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well in the--we were in the area where the African--where they had African Americans in this area called Section 14.  Which was--we were in the prime piece of property, they didn't realize when they put us there the first go around that we were on this prime piece of property.  And so on that prime piece of property, it's in this section of the city, guess who, here's Louis Armstrong one day going in somebody's house to stay.  Here's, you know, Ella Fitzgerald here's this whole people, because they could not stay, African Americans could not stay in the hotel in Palm Springs [California].  Or they so--they would stay in private homes, and for me to be around those people I thought I was in seventh heaven.  To be around them, and to learn so much from them, and understand who that they were, and understand about the class A entertainer.  And their principles of what they come from and hear them tell stories.  So it's like where they had been and where they come from.
Speaker 1: You know, Palm Springs is one of the major resorts in the United States, and there's a lot of golfing, Bing Crosby and Bob Hope always talking about going to Palm Springs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Right.  Right, a lot of golfing.  Right, right.  And that's one of the places that Arthur Ashe got his start in tennis.  The--so you had a lot of major breakthroughs with such people like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was--so it was common to see a lot of entertainers in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was common to see that, it was--and on a day-to-day, and you could--you had the different levels of, of standards of people.  It's like, we know whose home that they stay with because they were a little bit wealthier than we were.  And but, we made sure that we had our own seat we never had to pay for anything.  We just had cut us a hole in the wall, and get us a six-pack of beer and we'd be up there on top (laughter).  And we would get there early enough so they would never catch us (laughter).  So that was an exciting thing to do.
Speaker 1: Okay so you'd actually get outside of the place you'd have like a whole (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I mean it's like you up on top of this whole--they called it the Chi Chi Lounge [Palm Springs, California].  And we had cut this hole they never even knew hardly, and we had our own seats up there, we kinda sunk down.  And it was like we had our own little folding chairs, and it was up there and so--
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was quite a few people would be up there then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was three of us.
Speaker 1: Just three, oh three?
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) right.  Just three of us to--we didn't have the money to go, and they wouldn't let us come, you know, because the race issue with me.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you were doing that?
Speaker 2: Oh well, fourteen.
Speaker 1: Fourteen.  All right.  So three enterprising fourteen-year-olds.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you have any personal experiences with any of these big stars?  Did you ever get a chance to really talk to one of them, and--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I got to talk to Louis Armstrong, you got to talk to Ella Fitzgerald, you get to talk to Johnny Mathis we get to talk to--
Speaker 1: What were they like?
Speaker 2: Well I mean the exciting thing about it that they are very humble people.  They were not bigger than life, like bigger than life stars are today.  They were humble people, and they had their integrity, their integrity was, was them.  And they had--you could--I learned a lot, I noticed how Louis Armstrong would handle things.  And, he would handle it in so many different ways he would he would in order to say no.  He would not always never ever hardly say no, he just says, "I don't think we should do it that way."  You know, and it's the little things that I remember.  And I would ask Ella Fitzgerald, and she would say well, me, I say, "Well how do you feel about the world," and all this.  And she say, "Well the world loves my voice, so it's like I'm accepted in a better vein than others.  And many people who want to work with me, want to work and are honored to work with me, as I am with them."  And she always was a very kind and just a humble person.  That people, she would have the following that both black and white from all over.  And then I spoke to Johnny Mathis about his life and how he got where he was.  And to understand that he, you know he used to be a track star.  And, how he started singing, and so, he had went all over.  His voice had been carried all over the world.  And that, and he said he hoped that he had helped somebody, and he thought that he had.  And so just taking the time to take five minutes, ten minutes.  So we would we would try very hard to get to know their life so we could go and tell everybody that we met Ella Fitzgerald or Louis Armstrong or Mahalia Jackson.  We brought Mahalia Jackson to Palm Springs one time, and I had never seen so many people of all races come together as when Mahalia Jackson came.
Story_ID: 253258
Speaker 1: Who are your heroes?  Did you have any local heroes, any people that taught you?  Or any people in the community [Palm Springs, California] that inspired you, or--
Speaker 2: Well I--my hero was this woman named Essaline Rougely 'cause when--
Speaker 1: How do you spell that, we gotta get that, Essaline--
Speaker 2: R-O-U-G-E-L-Y.
Speaker 1: R-O-U-G?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, E-L-Y, Rougely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: E-S-S-A-L-I-N-E?
Speaker 2: A-L-I-N-E, Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Essaline Rougely, and she would be this woman, when my mother [Aunita Hudson Edwards] was ill she was this woman that oversaw my sister [Brenda Edwards Pine] and I.  Just--she took that on, on her own, and it was like a second mother.  You know, how you talk about a second mother, well that would be almost like that.  And she would always encourage me to go on and do things.  And if I wanted to be, if I wanted to do something in school, she would encourage me.  I'd talked to her about it, she was somebody I could talk to and say anything to about where I was about my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now it was just you and your sister, your mother, your father [Frank Edwards].
Speaker 2: Oh no, I have two half-brothers.
Speaker 1: Two half-brothers?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, so that makes that's--
Speaker 2: Four, four of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and you're the oldest I guess?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: My oldest brother is not with us anymore, I'm the baby boy.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And my sister is the baby.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 253259
Speaker 1: You say when you were in high school [Palm Springs High School, Palm Springs, California], you wanted to get in--you got involved in student government, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you, so you won, did you win?
Speaker 2: Yeah I won, and then I went on to college.
Speaker 1: I don't want you there yet.  We're gonna get you to college yet, but in high school, well what else did you do in high school, did you--
Speaker 2: Well I--the student government was for me it was like being able to be a part of a government body that made things happen within the school.  And be a part of a leadership unit.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, well you got to be pretty popular to be elected student government president.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in those days I didn't feel like I didn't know how important it was, but as you look back on it, it was very, very important because of you had, you had people who were wealthy to people who were very poor.  And that's who--and you had all races and you could have a Mercedes [Benz] or you could have a just rundown truck that would be driving up to school.  And so in Palm Springs, there was a group of us who stuck together, and we were the leadership of the school.  And we all worked together and made things happen in fact we're gonna have a thirty-fifth anniversary reunion soon, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay now did--were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: I was a good student, I was not a A+ student.  I was a good student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's what you'd call a good student, I was a good student because I passed all my courses, so I was a good student as far as I was concerned.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in high school?
Speaker 2: No, no not in particular.
Speaker 1: Were there any--so were there any teachers that really tried to that tried to help you out especially at--
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember there were a couple but I--Mrs. [Essaline] Rougely, she used to work in the cafeteria of the high school, and she was my mentor.  You know, she wanted me to do well, she wanted, she found out I got involved in student government.  And her, my encouragement was her--to go on, and how I did as well as I did is because of her.
Speaker 1: Now in terms of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at that time, were you involved in the NAACP youth activities in your high school?
Speaker 2: I was involved in the NAACP youth chapter, they had a youth chapter.  And I wasn't the president or anything, I was just involved, and I learned about fighting for people's rights through the NAACP.
Story_ID: 253260
Speaker 1: I know part of what you did later on in life was you paid sort of close attention to the black image in television, in the movies and that sort of thing.  Did you, were you thinking about that sort of thing when you were coming along, did you?
Speaker 2: I was thinking about bringing people together. And I didn't know about so much about images until 1963 [sic.] when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was shot.
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], I'm talking about '63 [1963], '68 [1968].  Sixty-eight [1968], and I was rather devastated in my life, you know, then that he had been shot.  And I learned so much by hearing him on the radio and all of that too, how you got to stand up for what you believe in and all of that.  And I wanted to make a difference in the world, and that's how I got involved in leadership positions.  And in fact, I went on, and I was in college [California State College at Los Angeles; California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and I took off from college to work on the Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy] campaign.
Speaker 1: Okay now, I don't want to get too far (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right (laughter).
Speaker 1: I keep asking about if you were--did you watch the movies when you were in high school [Palm Springs High School, Palm Springs, California], and television a lot?
Speaker 2: Oh no, we didn't have a TV in our house.
Speaker 1: You didn't, okay.
Speaker 2: My mother [Aunita Hudson Edwards], she wanted us to learn.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't go to the movies that much either or did you?
Speaker 2: Every--oh yeah we--every once in a while we'd go to the movies, but and that would be like a treat.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you didn't really think a lot about it you weren't thinking, thinking a lot about that--
Speaker 2: Well I thought a lot about being in the entertainment industry somewhere.  At one time I wanted to be an actor too, you know, I wanted to do that as well.  But then I learned how to be in the background and put projects together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me ask you now, okay, how did you, you went to college, but how did you--did you know you were gonna go to college when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I mean that was, in my life in my household that was not even an issue that you had to go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did your brother and sister [Brenda Edwards Pine] go too, or--
Speaker 2: My brother went, my brother Eddie [Edwards] went, my brother Frank [Edwards, Jr.] went, but he decided to work in management of a Thrifty drugstore.  So at eighteen he went to a training program, my sister did not.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was expected that you all would go--
Story_ID: 253261
Speaker 1: Now you ended up going to, was it UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: California State University, University of Los Angeles [California State College at Los Angeles; California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right so, how did you decide on that particular school?
Speaker 2: Well see, I think it was the one that accepted me (laughter).  No, it's like (unclear)--no it was like, it was not far from Palm Springs [California].  And it was a school that had--the average age was twenty-seven years old, and they had the quarter system.  And--that I could be able to take a lot of courses, and they had the quarter system.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is okay, this is Cal State Los Angeles (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, so you graduated from high school [Palm Springs High School, Palm Springs, California] in what 19--
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], okay, and so you started school that same year?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So what was your major in?
Speaker 2: Political science.
Speaker 1: Okay and now did you--
Speaker 2: Then I went to Vietnam [Vietnam War].
Speaker 1: Well wait a minute I don't want to get out of school yet (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I'm not going, I took out of school to work in Bobby Kennedy's [Senator Robert F. Kennedy] campaign.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was like six feet away from Bobby Kennedy when he was shot.  They'll show you in the article, and I got drafted after that 'cause I was gonna go back to school, and I got drafted because I was advancing for Bobby Kennedy.  And then I got drafted, and I went to Vietnam and came back.
Story_ID: 253262
Speaker 1: Now, Roosevelt Grier [Rosey Grier] I know was on the [Senator Robert F.] Kennedy campaign, and there were some other people, black people involved (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, Roosevelt Grier and Rafer Johnson.
Speaker 1: Rafer Johnson right, right, so you were with that group?
Speaker 2: I was with that group, I didn't know them very well, but they would see me around.  And I would--when Robert Kennedy would come to California I was trained at the Kennedy school of advancing to advance with the possible next president of the United States of America.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is just a couple months after [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed, 'cause he was killed in April 4, of '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Bobby Kennedy was killed in June of '68 [1968], I believe.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about what happened that date, if you were close by, tell us about what happened that day?
Speaker 2: Well it was, you know, we were looking forward for him to winning California, and the excitement was in the air it was like this whole--and nobody thought about anybody being shot, everybody was thinking about well, we might be getting the next president of the United States, and that was Robert F. Kennedy.  And when he was shot it was like it's like, it wasn't like a boom, boom, boom, it was like choo, choo--just like that, and you didn't realize that he was shot until he just went down.  Rosey was not that far from him and (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Where were you at--in relation to him?
Speaker 2: Right behind--six feet behind Rosey, Rosey Grier.  And it was like, for months and Sundays I was just numb, because a dream that had gone away.  And it was probably one of the most devastating moments in my life.  So when I got drafted I just went on into the [U.S. military] service I didn't try to fight it I didn't try to (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know Bobby Kennedy was anti-war.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: A lot of his supporters were anti-war, did you feel the contradiction to go into the [U.S.] Army at this point?
Speaker 2: Well no I, you know, in my frame of mind I would serve my country if I had been called.  And I--and if I had been in my right mind at that--the other side of it I would have probably tried to figure out a way not to do that.  But is probably the--it was just something I went ahead and did out of--I don't know the energy level of it.  Or the--I didn't ever think I would have to go to war, you know.  I thought that I would just go into the Army and do what I needed to do, but I ended up in Vietnam [Vietnam War].
Speaker 1: Now there's a missing piece here somewhere, 'cause you, I don't want, you know, you can just tell us in whatever way you can, how you ended up like leaving school [California State College at Los Angeles; California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] to be with the Kennedy campaign and why you didn't go back to school?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, but hear me, it's not that I didn't go back to school.  It's like I took off from school to work in his campaign.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in between all of that I was drafted.  And so because I--if I had been in school I would've been protected.  I would've been protected, and I would have never--as long as you were in school they would not draft you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I took the chance because I wanted him to be president of the United States--
Story_ID: 253263
Speaker 1: When you were drafted [during the Vietnam War], where did they send you, did you--
Speaker 2: They sent me to Chu Lai [Vietnam].
Speaker 1: Now Chu Lai is in--
Speaker 2: In the infantry of the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Chu Lai, is that in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: That's in Vietnam, right.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: And I did everything in the world--I tried so hard not to go to Vietnam.  I, you know, if you go to jump school that's like six more weeks of--and you think that if you get that if you get--if I had gotten just like--I was there a year and three months.  If I had gotten four months cut off, if I could've brought more time, I would've never gone to Vietnam.  But it didn't work out that way, but I did go and I came home, you know.
Speaker 1: Well what was that experience like, being in Vietnam in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, you know.
Speaker 1: That's the height of the Vietnam War.
Speaker 2: Right, it was the height of the Vietnam War.  It was the height of, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Chu Lai.
Speaker 2: Chu Lai.
Speaker 1: I don't know what exactly what happened there, but I've heard that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's like, I still have memories of people blown, like when you're in the field and somebody blows up in front of you, and you know that you could've been that person.  This is probably the first time I've ever really talked about it, talked about it in the vein of how one had to deal with it psychologically.  And, and I would just for me was when I got--the first time that I got hurt, I ended up being a court reporter.  And then we would do the Article 15s and all that, for I knew how to type.
Speaker 1: Now how did you get hurt, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well it was just like I got a piece of shrapnel right in the back and near my spine.  And they took me out, and they kept me in the hospital for a long time.  And then they reassigned me in the rear, so I was able to then become a court reporter.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you finished the balance as a court reporter?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Balance of your service?
Speaker 2: Right.  And then I came home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then when I came home from Vietnam, my best friend is the district attorney here, Steve Cooley.  And he had two hundred people at the airport for me, which I'll never forget, and I thank him tremendously for that.
Speaker 1: Oh that's Palm Springs [California]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, here?
Speaker 2: Cal State LA [California State College at Los Angeles; California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're in Cal State LA at the moment.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 253264
Speaker 1: And Steve [Cooley] was student body president [at California State College at Los Angeles; California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and I came home, and they ran me for student body president.  'Cause Steve was going out of office, and I ended up winning.  And so I ended up running a million dollar corporation, which is student government.  And being able to start a national student lobby in Washington D.C., and where we were able to lobby [U.S.] Congress on federal AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] education.  And Fred [R.] Harris, that used to be Senator Fred Harris that used to be a senator--
Speaker 2: From Oklahoma, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he carried the legislation for us on the eighteen year olds to vote.  And that was because of us through the national student lobby that we were able to get the eighteen-year-old vote passed by Congress.
Speaker 2: And when was that, what year was that?
Speaker 1: I will pull that up for you, I don't like to give bad dates and so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This was in, this is in, well it was in 1968 or '69 [1969] that that happened 'cause I was back from Vietnam [Vietnam War] then.
Speaker 2: Okay, no it couldn't have been then 'cause [Senator Robert F.] Kennedy was killed in '68 [1968] so.
Speaker 1: Oh it was sixty--wait a minute, '68 [1968], '69 [1969], '70 [1970], when I came back home '70 [1970], '71 [1971] yeah.
Speaker 2: It's the National Student--
Speaker 1: Lobby [National Student Lobby (NSL); United States Student Association].
Speaker 2: Lobby, okay.
Speaker 1: And then when I came back Vietnam there was a kid named Poindexter Williams.  Poindexter Williams was a young man who was killed in Vietnam and his mother wanted to bury him in his grave in Fort Pierce, Florida.  And I don't know whether you remember, and they refused to bury him there because he was black.  Well, I then took on the charge, and organized the veterans from across the country.  And we got him buried where his mother wanted him to be buried.
Speaker 2: Okay, well this is--so you get involved on, are these--you think your experiences in the Kennedy campaign gave you connections to do these national campaigns, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well yeah, yeah, because it taught you how to organize, and taught you how to reach out and organize with people.  And, and it taught you how to do logistical coordination it taught you how to fight for issues and so forth, and so on.
Story_ID: 253265
Speaker 1: Do you have any personal reflections of Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy]?
Speaker 2: He was a fun guy to work for, I mean he was fun because he would not take everything so seriously.  That's the fun part, because he would be able to joke about some things.   At the end of the day that we would all be taken very seriously that he would turn around and say, oh well that's politics, you know.  And I learned about politics through him and a guy named Tom Bradley.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's the most significant thing you learned from those guys?
Speaker 2: Don't take everything so serious (laughter).  I think, and at first when I went to Vietnam [Vietnam War] I was--this is when Tom Bradley first ran for mayor, and I won a precinct at the time when I was on leave, I won a precinct for Tom Bradley.  And he lost, and then when I came back he won this election, and it was a very exciting time for the city [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay, did you work on the Bradley campaign?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I was one of his youngest commissioners that he had appointed.  He was an exciting leader, and he was he probabl--well, I took all the things I had learned from the Bobby Kennedy people.  Did you want to stop?
Speaker 1: No, just keep on going (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, the Bobby Kennedy people--what I learned was that, and Tom Bradley gave it the true meaning of hope and understanding.  And that everybody across this country wanted him to be the mayor of this city.  And through his leadership we were able to do great things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And through Tom Bradley I was--when was [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] nominated for president of the United States?
Speaker 1: It was in '76 [1976].
Speaker 2: In '76 [1976], through Tom Bradley I was able to give the pledge of allegiance at the Democratic [National] Convention [New York, New York] in 1976.  Governor [Jerry] Apodaca introduced me that evening, and I was able to--and Robert [S.] Strauss was the chair of the convention.  And I was able to advance for Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis when she came to the convention. And so I brought her back to the chairman's office, and I went to get Tom Bradley and to bring him in the room.  And in this room was [Mayor] Richard [J.] Daley, Tom Bradley and Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis and Robert Strauss.  And when Tom Bradley walked in the room, and she's sitting there like this she said, "And you're tall too."  And it was like, and you'd never seen three giants of men and who had come together become so humble.  You know, what this woman was able to--the power that she had. It's like, people would just kiss the ring of her hand.  I mean, it was like I couldn't believe, these guys was like little kids they hardly said anything; she would do all the talking.
Story_ID: 253266
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about the Bob Strauss [Robert S. Strauss], Tom Bradley story from '74 [1974] in Kansas City [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Well I mean in that--in those years there were--Robert Strauss was a man from Texas.  Tom Bradley was from Texas, and in that day and time there was a surge of from when the African American politics were beginning to build its own base of power.  And become more demanding of that our petition base would be a part of this process.  And Tom Bradley was known as a very low key concern guy that would not stand up to somebody like Bob Strauss.  And when he did stand up to Robert Strauss, everybody was shocked.
Speaker 1: What happened, what triggered his--
Speaker 2: Well it's about African Americans participating in the [Democratic National] Convention, and making sure that we had our fair share of delegates at the convention.  Robert Strauss was for me this guy who wanted to then build the Democratic Party to the level that he could, but needed some help in guiding him of how to deal with the African American community.  And from that Tom Bradley, in that year that [James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] was nominated for president of the United States became the vice chair of the convention.  And it was through Tom Bradley that I was asked to become--to give the Pledge of Allegiance.  And what happened with that was, it's like everybody then wanted to give the Pledge of Allegiance.  It was up until then it was no big deal until I gave it.  And then all of a sudden Strauss's assistant, and then this woman named Azie [Taylor] Morton, who became the--who later became the treasurer of the United States.  That year we had worked very hard in California for this guy called Carter that none of us really knew, but knew with this guy named [HistoryMaker] David [S.] Cunningham [Jr.], David Cunningham was city councilman, and Carter lost California.  And the interesting thing about it was is that David Cunningham would not return our phone calls, 'cause he had promised we'd go this convention, we'd do this and that the other.  And so three of us took a one-way ticket to New York [New York] 'cause we were so upset, and I ended up meeting a girlfriend of mine from high school [Palm Springs High School, Palm Springs, California], and she was head of credentials.  So I ended up with a job, I had a one-way ticket to New York (laughter).  I ended up with the job plus I had a place to stay and I brought money back home, and all three of us got to work on the convention.  And through all of that process I was chosen to give the Pledge of Allegiance.  And that was the time I introduced Tom Bradley to Jackie Kennedy Onassis [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis].
Speaker 1: Okay, now you said that other people wanted to give the Pledge of Allegiance after you were allowed to give it or asked to give it.  How did you do it, did you--is there a particular style that you gave it in that had anything to do with it.
Speaker 2: No, it was like I ended up, how many millions of people wasn't it on TV (laughter).  It's like people in Los Angeles [California] was dropping coffee in their laps and said, "Did you see [HistoryMaker] Willis [Edwards] on television?"  And I became the star of the convention from California because Tom Bradley asked for me to give the Pledge of Allegiance.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So it really increased your stock around here (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, stock across the country of course, and but in working in that, that convention I still work every four years in credentials.
Speaker 1: You mean to this day?
Speaker 2: To this day.
Speaker 1: All right, so you're still involved with it?
Speaker 2: And there, there's a group of us who have been--and being in credentials at the convention, you don't understand, it is one of the most significant moments of history.  Because you become everybody's friend, 'cause people are trying to get into the convention.  They need a delegate's badge, they need a badge to go into the VIP section, I'm that guy.  There are about twenty-five of us who work on distributing all of those things for the convention.  And, we've helped people from all over the country, kids who wanted to come to the convention, to be a part of it, 'cause I was helped by someone.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your official title that you're, you're like part of the credentials committee (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Staff.
Speaker 1: Staff?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Staff for the credentials committee, okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 253267
Speaker 1: During this time period, were you involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, when I came back, I came back into Los Angeles [California] and while I was student vice president [at California State College at Los Angeles; California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] in '73 [1973] I became the president of the Beverly Hills Hollywood [NAACP] branch, I got that down pat.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  What the significance of the Beverly Hills Hollywood branch?
Speaker 2: It was to fight discrimination in the industry. The Beverly Hills Hollywood branch was organized thirty-four years ago I think to fight discrimination in this industry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what are--can you--what cases would we know about that NAACP like fought, you know, discrimination in the motion picture industry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it--
Speaker 1: Which has traditionally been like a racist industry--
Speaker 2: Well let me say this much, it was us who took on the Academy Awards.  It was the Beverly Hills Hollywood branch that took on the Academy Awards every year.  One year we had no black actresses at all the next year we had one black actress.  But it took up until this year that there were six nominees, black actors and actresses that were nominated for an Academy Award.
Speaker 1: So the NAACP contended that in the past (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah we--
Speaker 1: Black actors and actresses were snubbed because of their race?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And then because like even though other people didn't understand what we were trying to say, like even with 'The Color Purple,' because we thought that the acting was superb.  But we thought that it was always that most of the time everything about black men at that time was very demeaning.  And, but we thought that the acting, the people who act--the acting portion of it was superb, and they should've gotten an Academy Award.  'Beulah Land' was a major issue for us.
Speaker 1: Now this is another movie?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then--
Speaker 1: This is a made-for-TV movie I think?
Speaker 2: Right, and what it was is that we fought on different levels about behind the scenes and before the camera.  Because we were the first ones to start talking about breaking the union barrier--oh my God--breaking the union bearer.  When we broke the union barrier, it's like because, if you talking about discrimination in the unions within this industry.  It was hard for blacks to get in the hairdressers' union.  It was hard for blacks to get in the transportation union because most of it--it's nepotism.  Nepotism beyond belief, it's like it's all families who grown up in these different groups and they're the ones who get these positions.  And the average person that deal on this issue about transportation.  Let's just take transportation, I think they get twenty-five to thirty dollars an hour, that's a lot of money, but if you can't get in the union, you cannot be a part of it.  And then if you go out on a set, if you don't have some protection around you--they will threaten you and try to destroy you.  Because you're getting into their money and how they make their money.  And they're the ones that wanted--they didn't want any African Americans in these different unions.  And so it was the NAACP who fought the way for that to happen.  Okay, and now we have more people in the hairdressers' union, transportation, all segments of unions for the first time.
Speaker 1: Now did the so-called blaxploitation period of black films in Hollywood increase the number of black people that were involved?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah it gave people opportunity to work on a film, so they can get into the union.  Gave people opportunities to act, plus gave people a chance to produce.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is like, you're talking about a period I guess of from 1968 maybe to, when, how would you?
Speaker 2: Well then maybe I can only go from where I, '73 [1973] is where I came into the role on it--
Story_ID: 253268
Speaker 1: --Let's talk about the development--in '73 [1973] when you got involved with this, I guess, the black--the resurgence of black movies and stuff was at its height probably, with 'Super Fly' (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, 'Super Fly.'
Speaker 1: And 'Shaft.'
Speaker 2: All of that.
Speaker 1: All that was coming out--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in '73 [1973].
Speaker 2: Right.  But people--but at the same time we were talking about behind the camera, the writers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Being given the opportunity to write, until this present day our first screenplay that was written was written by this guy named James [L.] White, who wrote 'Ray.'  And if we had not highlighted him, nobody would've ever known that he was writer of the movie.  And you have--so our concern was equally behind the camera as it was in front of the camera.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we talking like everything from the crew to the camera men the technicians, the grips, and everybody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, everybody--
Speaker 1: The caterers?
Speaker 2: Right, because behind the scenes is where the money is made, big time.
Speaker 1: This is a--would you say this is a huge industry in terms of the number of jobs and--
Speaker 2: That's the reason why you have to deal with the unions on the race issue.  And you had to deal with--and then we had to learn that also on the economic side that we need to put up our own money to make our own movies.  If we didn't do that, guess what would happen?
Speaker 1: Well you wouldn't really have--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: As many positions.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right. But now you have [HistoryMaker] Michael [A.] Schultz, and you have different producers, directors that have been out here for a long time.  Now [HistoryMaker] Reuben Cannon, who's doing a tremendous job by pulling together our own investors to make our movies.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you, you got started in '73 [1973] focusing on the Hollywood film--
Speaker 2: Right.  And they had always said to me that we would never get the [NAACP] Image Awards on national television--
Story_ID: 253269
Speaker 1: How did you--where did the idea of an [NAACP] Image Awards come from?
Speaker 2: There was a group of people who had come together and wanted to award people who had given African Americans jobs in this industry, and that's how it came about.  Five people, Lil Cumber was the first black agent.
Speaker 1: Who's that?
Speaker 2: Lil Cumber, she's now deceased.
Speaker 1: Lil Cumber.
Speaker 2: Lil Cumber, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that--
Speaker 2: C-U-M-B-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lil Cumber, a guy named Eddie Smith, who's now in a nursing home.  But Eddie Smith was head of the Black Stuntman's Association.
Speaker 1: The black what association?
Speaker 2: Black stuntman--
Speaker 1: Stuntman's, okay.
Speaker 2: And then you had this woman, Toni Ross [ph.].  Toni Ross was a extra person that used to be in it being the extra.  And she named the award called Image Award, she was the creator of the Image Awards.  And I want their story always to be told, because if it was not for them standing up we would not have anything today.  So when I became president of--I had this vision about it being on television.  And what I did was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the first--when was the first Image Awards done--what year was the first Image Awards given?
Speaker 2: I can only go for the TV piece, and I'll get that for you, I just wanna--
Speaker 1: So you were, were you around when the Image Award--you were there when it started right?
Speaker 2: No.  I was there--I'm the guy, I'm the piece that got the Image Awards on television.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So it was already established?
Speaker 2: Right, it was already established, but I was given the opportunity to--there was this guy named [HistoryMaker] Wayman Smith at Anheuser-Busch [Companies, Inc., St. Louis, Missouri].  I'll never forget it that he believed enough of me in this project--this is during the time that [HistoryMaker] Margaret Bush Wilson was trying to fire Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks], remember that.
Speaker 1: Ben Hooks was the--
Speaker 2: The executive director.
Speaker 1: Of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: Of the NAACP, and even Margaret Bush Wilson tried to stop him from giving me the money to tape this show and to syndicate it because she was having that and the infighting with Ben Hooks.  So what we did do was--he put up the money, and we were able to tape our first show. And that first show was with Lena Horne.  We were the luckiest people in the world because she was at the Pantages Theatre [Los Angeles, California] and we were at the Hollywood Palladium [Los Angeles, California].  And to get her to come that evening is what gave us the big boost with Brandon Tartikoff at NBC.  Once he saw our tape and our syndication of it--he--Bill Cosby interceded on our behalf to see that if NBC would put it on the air.  And it was through Bill Cosby and [HistoryMaker] Phyllis Tucker Vinson [Jackson], you remember Phyllis Tucker Vinson, it was through them that we were--and Johnny Carson, that we were able to put the Image Awards on the air.  There was a young lady by the name of Maynell Thomas, that worked with Johnny Carson.  And we needed a production company that was bonded that NBC would recognize, and it was Johnny Carson who came forward and said, "Well I have a show every night called the Carson show ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson']."
Speaker 1: Now this is through Maynell--
Speaker 2: Maynell Thomas she was the executive (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now is this the same one that's in Chicago [Illinois] now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: You know her?
Speaker 1: Yeah we know Maynell.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well Maynell is--was my friend, I went to her, she says come to me with something that I could do.  And I went to her, and I asked Maynell to help me get this Image Awards on national television.  And it was through her standing up and asking Mr. Carson to help us, is how we were able to get the Image Awards on national television.  NBC gave us $400,000, and we had to come up with a line of credit of $150,000.  And it was Jeff Katzenberg [Jeffrey Katzenberg] at that time at [The Walt] Disney [Company] that could pick up the phone and call Brandon Tartikoff and say I will guarantee it.  And if it wasn't for him and if it wasn't for Maynell being able to have Mr. Carson be our production--it was called Carson Productions [Carson Entertainment Group], we would've never gotten the show on the air.
Speaker 1: Now what year was it televised?
Speaker 2: It was televised '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right, '75 [1975].  But I'll check that and make sure you--but it was Maynell Thomas and I who became co-executive producers of the Image Awards.
Story_ID: 253270
Speaker 1: Now the [NAACP] Image Awards, what--who won the first Image Awards and what were they for, can you remember some of the people that won?
Speaker 2: No, I hate to say that (laughter) but I don't--I have to go back, and I could tell you, but I have to--I don't like to give out misinformation when I don't know I tell you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well can you remember some of the people that've been--have received an Image Awards in the past that you think are highlights of representative of the--
Speaker 2: Oh well, Lena Horne, Sammy Davis, Jr., Bill Cosby, Nat King Cole, I mean we had the class.  Ella Fitzgerald, we had the class A of stars.  We didn't realize what we had at the time but when you could get all those types of people almost on the same stage at the same time it was incredible.  The Diahann Carrolls [HistoryMaker Diahann Carroll], the Sidney Poitiers, the Brock Peters, you know, the whole phenomenon of people that were class A stars, better than many stars today.
Speaker 1: Now would you say--
Speaker 2: We have the Denzel Washingtons we have the Halle Berrys, you have, you know.
Speaker 1: Now when you look at it, I mean for those of us who, well prior to the Image Awards was there was there a venue by which the African American community could, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No there was not.
Speaker 1: --award these--
Speaker 2: Not at all, it was these five brilliant people who got tired and wanted to honor the people who gave them jobs in this industry.  And that's what it was about, and it was about our images.  And, and it evolved from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and what we were able to do too, we were able for the first time to give African Americans a opportunity to do two things.  One is, is train people how to be seat fillers, train people behind the scenes or behind the cameras, and because the people that was--did the variety show never, never had done a variety show before.  And they were given the opportunity to do that and learn.  And many of them--Rita Cash, who was one of our writers, she now writes for the Academy Awards.  And you have a young lady who do the seat fillers and all that, she now does every major show there is.
Speaker 1: Seat filler now what is, what is seat fillers?
Speaker 2: Well it's like, you know, (laughter) seat filling.  It's like, you know, you have major stars who sit in these seats, and if they are not there, you have people--there's a system that you have where you keep people to keep the seats filled.  So you might see people sitting next to people but you never--you would never know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, in other words, you try to keep some stars together in a group?
Speaker 2: Well no, you try to keep all your seats filled and make sure.
Speaker 1: And make sure--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All the seats are filled.
Speaker 2: And make sure that--but I'm just using that as an example.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seat filling is a major money making job.
Speaker 1: This one is important 'cause if it looks like nobody's in the seat (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right then you don't have a show.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And this is something that could slip through a crack if somebody really didn't know about it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right but the exciting time about it was is that we were able to--nobody understood us whatsoever.  Nobody understood, and so we just take on Hollywood we would take on Hollywood, and we started a boycott of Hollywood.  There were no black actresses working we--and we talked about our images, and our images issue has been on this burner for all these years.  And, and was the first time that Hollywood gave us back something this year with major roles that we thought was very positive roles.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what would you consider like a negative role.  I mean I think that there was some contention over the film 'Beulah Land,' a TV movie you were talking about being a negative?
Speaker 2: Right, very negative.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I mean, I think that if you look at 'The Color Purple,' how demeaning black African American males were in that movie that was a negative role for us.
Speaker 1: It was only one person, a male, I mean, well, there was more than one, the main one that [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover played, he wasn't very positive.
Speaker 2: Right, right and but we had to speak from that standpoint, many people didn't wanna hear it, they thought, well you can't talk about it that way, but yes you can talk about it when it's negative, it's negative.  But I did not say that the acting wasn't great, but it was negative force, there was not a balance there for us.
Story_ID: 253271
Speaker 1: This leads me to a question, and this is something this kind of troubled--puzzled me, but I know Michael Jackson won the [NAACP] Image Award one year.  But it was right after he changed his features and his color, and I've wondered I say how could he win the image awards after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I think that Michael Jackson is a creative genius, and that's why we honored him, because he was a creative genius.  Not because he changed his color, and all that he had a right to whatever he wants to do, but we were talking about his creativeness.  And his creativeness.
Speaker 1: You realize the irony of that though, it was the very year he'd changed his color?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It was completely--
Speaker 2: Well I mean it's like, we had to make a decision like one year, R. Kelly, R. Kelly if we had talked about what he was doing out here in this world as compared to what he had done as a artist--
Speaker 1: That's two dramatic differently--well he was accused of doing things, he's still only facing charges.
Speaker 2: Well I mean and, and until you're proven guilty, you have to be willing to stand for something, and we should because of his artistic work (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: His music then was--'I Believe I Can Fly' was, that was a theme song for a lot of people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His music was the hottest thing.  It was songs that everybody was relating to, and we thought that it was very important for us to stand up for his rights as well, until the court system let it run its course.  Like I was saying for the issue about Michael Jackson now, let it run its course, if he's guilty he's guilty if he's not he's not and that's the way it is.
Story_ID: 253272
Speaker 1: Now the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in terms of agitating around image, would you say that, I mean is, does the NAACP have a model of what a positive image should be?  Or do they think it should be--or does the organization think it ought to be a balance between positive and negative or what is the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I think that what we have to do, I think that we're going to be doing this next year, is bringing together some of the brightest minds in this country.  Talking about our image is in crisis, our images of ourselves.  Our images of what we allowed to go before the camera.  Our images of how we allow people to demean Rosa Parks.  Our images, when we stand for something and how do we stand for it.  And we gonna invite some of the brightest minds to come together and talking about our images in crisis.
Speaker 1: This is gonna be televised?
Speaker 2: Well it'll probably be on C-SPAN.  But we want to make sure that we have a hearing, we're gonna have a hearing about it--our images in crisis.  And we going to invite in different educators and psychiatrists and not just actors and actresses but people who deal with this whole issue on a daily basis.
Speaker 1: Okay, so who do you project to invite, you know?
Speaker 2: Poussaint.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. Alvin Poussaint.
Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, people of that--in that level that talks--can talk very well about our images.  And there was a guy named [HistoryMaker] Roscoe C. Brown, who is fabulous and he is a brilliant man.  And you invite people like him to come forward and just talk about us and the image.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you--I'm sure you're probably familiar with Bill Cosby's remarks last year about, about people in the black community who are not really helping themselves out by their own activities and stuff.
Speaker 2: Their inactivity, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would agree with him, right I mean I think that we have to bite the bullet sometimes and say that's true.  And what are we going to do to help make it better, and that's what he's trying to do and I really--we really truly support him.  If I were to be able to choose the president of the NAACP, I would choose Bill Cosby.
Speaker 1: Okay, and yeah, so are you still the president of the chapter [the Beverly Hills Hollywood NAACP] here?
Speaker 2: I'm the vice president.
Speaker 1: Okay, how long were you president?
Speaker 2: Twelve years.
Speaker 1: Twelve years, all right.  And what do you consider--I guess you'll consider the [NAACP] Image Awards being televised an--
Speaker 2: Well I think what history will say about me is that we were the fighting force in this industry to make it what it is today.  And many people have gotten jobs because of the NAACP and made beaucoup money because of the NAACP.  And I hope that one day they will give something back and help the NAACP.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were president from what, '73 [1973] to '85 [1985]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: Yeah, and what my focus was, it was not so much about being a producer or whatever in this industry, it was about that people said that we could not get it done.  And I said, "Well yeah I think that we can get it done," and our first show was taped for syndication.  And our lucky star was Lena Horne.  And then after that Miller [ph.] came in and put up the money then after that Brandon Tartikoff called--heard what Bill Cosby had to say because he was the he was the big dog at NBC.  And if it wasn't for Bill Cosby, I must say the show would not be on the air, as well as Johnny Carson that the whole team that was put together made it work.
Story_ID: 253273
Speaker 1: Who are some of the people, what, you've given awards to a lot of them.  But are there any individuals you think that have done the most to get black people jobs in the industry?
Speaker 2: Well I think that Bill Cosby did, Bill Cosby did, and because we were raising hell about writers behind the scenes, and producers and all of that stuff.  If they build the opportunity to make sure that David Smyrl, do you know David Langston Smyrl?  David Smyrl was able to write, Mr. [Matt] Robinson was able to write on his show because, and they were all writing buddies.  I mean, but he was able to bring them in and make them a part of the writing as well.  I think Bill Cosby's done--history will show that Bill Cosby has done more than any other actor in this about having--being of influence.  The guy who tells the story, James [L.] White, who wrote 'Ray,' it was because of Sidney Poitier that he got into the [Screen] Writers Guild [Writers Guild of America].  I mean that's a powerful moment, and here this guy has wrote 'Ray.'  You have people like Brock Peters, who started a major program for training people behind the scenes to make sure that people finally get into this industry, a tremendous contribution.  And then you have people like who understand the power that they have, like Maynell Thomas, who understood this crazy guy that came to see her to try to make sure that we had a show on the air, for the first time gave African Americans jobs that never happened in this industry.  The writings and the writers and people learned how to write at our expense.  And we gave a lot of people jobs.  So the basis of it is, is that we were able to be a training ground.
Story_ID: 253274
Speaker 1: On the [NAACP] Image Awards itself as such I put together a crew of people that had never been involved in the industry before.  There's a young lady named Sandra Evers-Manly, she was my first vice president, and now she is the president of the Northrop Grumman Foundation.  And she started her own non-profit, and she has her own film festival, these are how your training ground are training people how to go on and do their dream.  And she has a thing called the first weekend.  The first weekend is where you take your family, and you go to an African American movie or a movie that has an African American in it, to make sure that our viewing power is there, and that to show that we do support our movies.  And she was trained by me, and she became the president [of Beverly Hills Hollywood NAACP] after I left.  A person named Roland McFarland who's at 20th Century Fox, is because of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] he has this job.  And all of this team of people that I put together allowed me to be in the leadership role in putting together like the Image Awards.  The person that coordinated the Image Awards and all of that.  We did it, we did it until we got it right (laughter).  And that's the exciting thing about it.
Story_ID: 253275
Speaker 1: Is there one black film project you think is--that exemplifies what the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] would like to see and--
Speaker 2: Oh I think 'The Rosa Parks Story.'  'The Rosa Parks Story' to me is dynamic, and to tell you about [HistoryMaker] Julie Dash.  Julie Dash is--was our director and she's an absolutely brilliant woman.
Speaker 1: Now she started off with independent films?
Speaker 2: Right.  She started off with an independent film, you all should interview her one day.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Julie Dash is such a brilliant woman, of how she pulled this piece together we didn't have much money, and she humanized Rosa Parks for the first time, because everybody talks about Rosa Parks was sat down on the bus.
Speaker 1: That doesn't sound like much, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Cedric The Entertainer got in trouble in the film 'Barbershop' for saying that if all she did was sit on the bus then what's the big deal.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Or words to that effect, a little bit more crude than that.
Speaker 2: Right, right and, but I don't think he'll ever say that again, you know.  But what I come this far by way of thinking that Rosa Parks was a person that stood for something in my mind, but also she was a human being.  And that she loved her husband [Raymond Parks] very much.  So for the first time in a movie that you had a black woman and a black man making love or having love interest, or he would be able to rub her feet or romanticism but also be a part of civil rights and stand for something.  And Mrs. Parks is to me, my she-ro, and she doesn't ask for much, she's just a humble person.
Speaker 1: Okay now in the movie, I haven't seen the movie I read about it just on some level.  But do, do--does the movie depict Rosa Parks as training and stuff prior to being on the bus?
Speaker 2: It depicts all of that, I mean it's about her from when she grew up as a young girl.  Her best friend Johnnie Carr, about them being--meeting up again with the NAACP and start working together.  And her training, of how she was trained by her grandmother.  And to make sure that she went to the best schools and got the best education that she possibly get.
Speaker 1: Yeah, though I'm thinking about even more specific kind of training about how NAACP and, you know, how she trained and she went to Highlander Folk School [Highlander Research and Education Center, New Market, Tennessee] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Highlander, right she did all that's a part of it, right.
Speaker 1: Learned organizing training.
Speaker 2: Right how to organize and how--
Speaker 1: The reason why raise this is a lot of people don't realize--they think that she was just somebody with some tired feet but she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well no, she never said she had tired feet, right.
Speaker 1: Well that's the misnomer--the myth that's behind it--
Speaker 2: Right no, and she never she never broke the law either.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but they don't think about her as someone who had intelligence enough to plan what she was gone do and carry out a--
Speaker 2: But she had got tired of people being mistreated.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's what that was about, she was tired of people being mistreated and not in particular about having tired feet whatsoever.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but my point is these are smart people organizing against evil--
Speaker 2: Well and sometimes it's a--one person makes the difference, and that electrifies this country.  I mean if you ever were able to be with her and you walked into the same room with her, and you see people just began to rise and rise and rise.
Story_ID: 253276
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to know her when you were producing the film?
Speaker 2: When I had gotten the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] virus, Ms. [Rosa] Parks came to see me and asked me would I come to work for her, help her, and--
Speaker 1: Now when, when was this now, you're telling us a lot of things at once?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, it was almost ten years ago now.
Speaker 1: Yeah well, what, yeah.
Speaker 2: And she came to see me and asked me would I help her.
Speaker 1: Now this was after--was this after she was attacked in her home?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was after she was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was living in Detroit [Michigan], she was--
Speaker 2: But she would live out here during the summer.
Speaker 1: But the boycott took place in Montgomery [Alabama]--
Speaker 2: In Montgomery.
Speaker 1: But she eventually moved to Detroit.
Speaker 2: Detroit and then she would come out for--and stay at Leo Branton's home.  Do you know [HistoryMaker] Leo Branton [Jr.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a lawyer.
Speaker 2: A lawyer that represented [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, and stayed in her home.  And I got to know her through them and when she found out I had gotten ill she came to visit with me and asked me would I help her as well.  And, you know, at that time I was so humbled that she came to ask me to do anything for her.  And I forgot about I was sick (laughter), it was like hey, and that's how our journey began.  Our journey began, and it was the most exciting moments of my life, of traveling with her all over the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started actually assisting her personally (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Well, what I did, I was put together a campaign, because I always thought that she should receive a Nobel Peace Prize, I always thought that.  And so the Congressional Gold Medal, it's like if you remember when, when [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton was in his prime, and he was he was in trouble, big time trouble with Monica Lewinsky.  I proposed to the Clinton staff that they invite Rosa Parks to hear his State of the Union message.  And that I think she would be a beginning of a healing process for America, and that evening when he introduced Mrs. Parks, it was like seven minutes' standing ovation.  And there was a guy named [HistoryMaker] Jesse Jackson, Jr. looking up at her with a tear coming out of his eye there and saying like, you're responsible for me.  I mean, it was a moment that one would never forget.  But in that moment of those seven minutes you had an agreement between the Republicans and the Democrats when he called Rosa Parks' name.  And she was the talk of the country for about a week after that.  With--and articles were being written for her like she had--we had reinvented her. And then from that we went and met the Pope [Pope John Paul II] in St. Louis [Missouri], he asked her to come and meet with him.  And then from that--
Speaker 1: Were you there?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I--it was my idea.
Speaker 1: Well, what did they talk about?
Speaker 2: Oh they--she gave him a note about, how can we work together to bring peace to the world?  And that was her--she'd always wanted to talk to him about peace and justice.  And to thank him for taking the stance that he did, you know, against racism and the apartheid and so forth.  And they exchanged notes with each other, and then from there she got the Congressional Gold Medal.  And to be able to put together a historical moment of all the civil rights units in this country, had some major corporations and such flew in that day.  And this had never happened, Jessye Norman sang 'Lift Ev'ry Voice And Sing' in the rotunda of where we had the Congressional Gold Medal ceremony which had never been sang there before.  And there was a woman named [HistoryMaker] Artis Lane that she wanted to have her design her Congressional Gold Medal.  Who's that?
Speaker 1: She's a black artist.
Speaker 2: She's a black artist, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's true.
Speaker 2: And for the first time--
Speaker 1: Here in Los Angeles [California]--
Speaker 2: Right, for the first time in the history of the myth around the--there was a woman named C. Delores Tucker who I went to, and said we have got to be able to have an African American artist do the design of the, and the president of the United States, Clinton changed, and asked for professional legislation so that Artis Lane could be able to design Mrs. Parks' Congressional Gold Medal.  So there's a historical moment there brother through all of this, and that day it brought together so many people from all over.  And the exciting thing was--is that it brought them together like she had--from that moment of the night that she was at the president's speech to the day that it was her day on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 253277
Speaker 1: And you still work with Ms. [Rosa] Parks?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what are some of your projects, your current projects (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The projects that we do is training kids to be the best with what they can be.  It's a leadership training program that she, The [Rosa and Raymond Parks] Institute [for Self Development] runs every summer from young people from all over the country and Japan and Canada.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is run in--out in Detroit [Michigan] or here?
Speaker 2: This is in Detroit, but they, they take an Underground Railroad tour.  They're educated about the Underground Railroad and about the--they have a whole history of our civil rights that they take a tour of that.  And through that they're a lot of leadership training components that is a part of that.  They're chosen from all over country, they're people who fight to get into these slots to two hundred kids each year.
Story_ID: 253278
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well my hope is that one day that we will stand up and not run from this whole issue about the prison system.  And how many of our children are there, and how do we avoid them going there.  There are so many people who were prosecuted unfairly.  The violence that's in the drive-by shootings and the violence that is in our community, it's time for us as African American men to stand up and take our community back.
Story_ID: 253279
Speaker 1: When you look back on all the things that you've done, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Probably would be wealthy but no (laughter), no I don't think so.  I think that everything that I've done in my life I've been very fortunate and blessed to be able to do.
Story_ID: 253280
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look back at your life at this stage do you--what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: That I did what I could do from where I am.
Story_ID: 253281
Speaker 1: Now did your parents [Aunita Hudson Edwards and Frank Edwards] get a chance to see you become successful?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother did, yeah she did, she did, she was very proud of me.  And she traveled all over, and she got to go to two Congressional Gold Medals.  One for [HistoryMaker] Dr. Dorothy Height and the other for Ms. [Rosa] Parks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She got to meet [Nelson] Mandela when I advanced for Mandela.
Speaker 1: You didn't tell us about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She got to (laughter)
Speaker 1: You advanced for Mandela, too?
Speaker 2: Yeah I wrote a manual how to advance for Nelson Mandela when he came here to the United States.  And it was exciting for him to come here, and they had forgotten to invite Mrs. Parks to meet Mandela at the airport.  And all of these big time dignitaries was all up there, and he stepped out on the top of the plane there and was waving.  And he looked out, and he saw this woman called Rosa Parks.  And he kept on down the steps like he was in a hurry, "Rosa Parks, Rosa Parks," all the mayors that wanted to shake his hand, he went Rosa Parks, Rosa Parks, I'll never forget that.  And he went straight to--he didn't touch anybody else but he went straight to her, and it was a moment I will never ever forget.
Speaker 1: Now was that here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: It was in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Detroit, okay, okay was that '95 [1995], '95 [1995]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now did you work with [HistoryMaker] Harold Rogers and some of the other people that were involved in that?
Speaker 2: I did the California piece, the advance from there to California.  And [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters was one of the people who spearheaded it from California.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you, you have any other reflections about Nelson Mandela, did you get a chance to be around him?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And talk to him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I advanced for him when he was here.  Advanced him up and down the State of California and then in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Are there any other--any stories about him that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's a humble human being and a very kind man.  And if you were to mention my name today he would say, "Oh [HistoryMaker] Willis [Edwards]," he would remember me.  So I--when people remember your name, you know that you've done your good job.  But he was--it was such an honor to be in his presence as it was to be in Mrs. Parks' presence.  And it's like, he doesn't ask for very much, but if you're given an opportunity, you would do a lot for them.
Story_ID: 253282
Speaker 1: Now you've been involved in several productions, are you planning any productions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we trying very hard now to get the Curt Flood story done.  And I'm working with Mrs. Flood, [HistoryMaker] Judy Pace-Flood, and we wanna make sure that if we can get it done, it will be done within the next two years, two or three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, Curt Flood, you know, transformed baseball.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I mean Curt Flood was a brilliant man, and if it wasn't for him there would not be free agency.
Speaker 1: Now there any other--I know that it's probably thousands of stories are made, you know, we could probably do, but are there any stories in the back of your mind that you just you would, you would want to see produced the most at this point of?
Speaker 2: Well I want Johnnie Carr, who is still--she's ninety-four years old, and this woman she still lives in Montgomery, Alabama.  To tell her story her side of the story I, that's one, and I would want Dr. Height.  [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height, her story to be really told, probably one of the most powerful women in this country.  And probably one of the brightest in this country.  She is the only African American that owns a building on Pennsylvania Avenue [Washington, D.C.], you have to pass her by to go to the [Capitol] Hill [Washington, D.C.].  And it's the National Council of Negro Women but the story of Dr. Dorothy Height needs to be told.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything that we haven't asked you or have left out, that you think that you might have even left out that you want to talk about before we start wrapping up?
Speaker 2: Naw, I think I (laughter) I think I just want to say that I'm very humbled that you've chosen me to do this piece.  I don't usually do interviews per se, to do them, because I'm mostly a background person who likes to get things done.  But I thought it was important to try to share something with somebody about me, about where we are with this.  I want to thank you very much for that.
Story_ID: 253283
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother [Aunita Hudson Edwards] always taught me--says if you believe in something, if you have to stand, stand alone.  And that I did what I could do from where I was.   Because if everybody would do what they can do from where they are we'll have a better world.
