Story_ID: 596667
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: I am Charlestine Romelle Fairley [HistoryMaker Charlestine Fairley].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Say that one more--say that one more time, we're going to use the mic. Okay, good ahead. Again please.
Speaker 2: Say it again please.
Speaker 1: I am Charlestine Romelle Fairley, that's C-H-A-R-L-E-S-T-I-N-E, R-O-M-E-L-L-E, F-A-I-R-L-E-Y.
Speaker 2: And your date of birth?
Speaker 1: July 24th, 1938.
Speaker 2: And your place of birth?
Speaker 1: Greenville, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Would you tell us your occupation?
Speaker 1: I am currently an higher education administrator.
Speaker 2: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 1: You are, or we are, at Sojourner-Douglass College, the Annapolis, southern Maryland campus [Sojourner-Douglass College, Edgewater, Maryland].
Speaker 2: And today's date?
Speaker 1: April 25, 2007.
Story_ID: 596668
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, all right?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is green. At one time, it was blue but in recent years, I've changed from blue to green.
Speaker 1: And what about food? What do you like to eat? What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is seafood, seafood. And, next favorite would be vegetables. I could live off of seafood and vegetables.
Speaker 1: Okay. Think of the seasons and tell me what time of year is your favorite.
Speaker 2: I like springtime. It's at the end of winter and you get light and beautiful foliage on the trees and flowers are just beginning to bloom, and I get a feeling of freedom during the spring.
Speaker 1: Okay. When you go on vacation, do you have a favorite destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite American city is Chicago, Illinois, and my favorite vacation area is beach Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], Myrtle Beach [South Carolina], my hometown, Gulfport, Mississippi; Fort Lauderdale, Florida, all these areas, any area where there is sand and beach and the sound of the surf. This is where I relax the most and enjoy most.
Speaker 1: Now tell me, do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: I do, and I can think of one just now, and that is a quote from Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], "Everybody can be great because everybody can serve."
Story_ID: 596669
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family. Let's talk about your mother. Would you tell me her name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Ida Victoria Harris Dawson Blake [Ida Harris Blake]. That's I-D-A; V-I-C-T-O-R-I-A; Harris, H-A-R-R-I-S; Dawson, D-A-W-S-O-N; B-L-A-K-E.
Speaker 1: Where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know the date of her birth?
Speaker 2: August 27, 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember them vaguely. I spent a lot of my growing up time with my father's parents [Rosie Farmer Dawson and Kemp Dawson, Sr.], but I do remember my mother's parents.
Speaker 1: Do you--can you tell me their names?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother's name was Emma Darris Harris.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was Len Harris.
Speaker 1: You said vaguely you remember them, so you didn't spend very much time with them.
Speaker 2: Not much time with them.
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about your mother. Did she share any stories about her growing up in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Not much. My mother was not very vocal about her growing up in Mississippi. I do know that she had a sister and a brother, and she was reared by her grandmother, Ida Brooks [ph.], who was a midwife and, as I understand it from my mother, was very strict, stern, and my mother seemed to have thought that a lot of pressure was put on her to do the right thing. She was the older, while the other two siblings played and could get away with quite a bit, but my mother felt that she carried the burden of responsibility of doing the right thing and making sure that her siblings did the right thing and that she grew up with a lot of responsibility. I have heard her say that from the time that she could write, she accompanied my great-grandmother to deliver babies and she had to fill out the forms and keep the records for her. So, vaguely I remember she doesn't--she didn't talk much about play time or happy times, but this is the story I remember most, is she always felt that there was a lot expected of her.
Speaker 1: How much education did she have?
Speaker 2: My mother was a high school graduate.
Speaker 1: Do you know where she went to school?
Speaker 2: She went to school in Greenville. I don't know the, the name of the high school there, but I suspect it was the high school for the colored children of, in Gr- right in the town of Greenville, Mississippi.
Story_ID: 596670
Speaker 1: Tell me what type of person she was.
Speaker 2: My mother [Ida Harris Blake] was a very warm and caring person. Because she was that way and she is giving, very understanding, and frequently she was underestimated. She had a fiery side if you crossed her the wrong way, or if she did not think kindly of what you had done she could let you know in a very positive way, but she was somewhat quiet and was very loving and very caring and very concerned about everybody.
Speaker 1: If you had to talk about a trait that you received from her, what would it be?
Speaker 2: I think I received a lot of things from my mother. (Laughter) At this time in my life, I think I've become my mother, and I think that we have--we're very similar in the sense that we're quiet spoken, we are very giving, and we listen, but I also have a fiery side that, and many times it's surprising to people because you don't get that from me right away when you meet me. But I, I share a lot of my mother's characteristics, I think.
Story_ID: 596671
Speaker 1: Now, you talked about your [maternal] great-grandmother, Ida Brooks [ph.]. Was there any talk at all about any of your family being in slavery?
Speaker 2: Yes, not so much from my mother's [Ida Harris Blake] side, because my mother's mother was a Darris [Emma Darris Harris], and I knew that the Darris' were freed Negroes and that those, her uncles and aunts and all were professional tradespeople. I think that they had migrated from Louisiana to Mississippi, and to the best of my knowledge they were never enslaved. I never heard much about Mama Ida, which was Ida Brooks, which was my mother's grandmother that reared her. I suspect that there was slavery in her background, but the most colorful story that I've heard from my family regarding slavery was from my father's [Kemp Dawson, Jr.] side, my father's mother [Rosie Farmer Dawson].
Story_ID: 596672
Speaker 1: Let's introduce your father.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, I see (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me, tell me your father's name.
Speaker 2: My father was actually Willie Kemp Dawson, Jr. [Kemp Dawson, Jr.], but he was always called Kemp.
Speaker 1: Willie Kemp Dawson, Jr., okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dawson, Jr.
Speaker 1: And he was born where?
Speaker 2: He was born in, I believe, Sunflower County, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In, I think, around March 15, 1919.
Speaker 1: And who were his parents?
Speaker 2: His mother was Rosie Farmer Dawson, and his father was Willie Kemp Dawson, Jr--Sr. [Kemp Dawson, Sr.], I mean. Senior.
Speaker 1: Senior. Okay, okay. All right, so now, tell me the story.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'll tell you the story about Mama Rosie. This is my father's mother. I'm told, and I've heard this story over and over again, that Mama Rose's father was a black Indian [Native American] that was enslaved and freedom came, as they would say, freedom came when he was ten years old, and he was so happy to be free that all his life, no matter what he did, whatever the routine task he had to do in life, he always stopped and prayed because he was so happy to be free. He prayed and thanked God for his freedom, so he was, as the story goes, he was ten years old when freedom came.
Story_ID: 596673
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your father [Kemp Dawson, Jr.]. What did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father was a mechanic. By the time he passed away, he owned his own service station and shop, but during his lifetime, he did many--he held many jobs here. I would just say that he was a laborer, but the mechanic, he had that skill, and he used it in conjunction with any type job that he had. His jobs were always connected to cars and maintaining cars, parking cars, but his whole career centered around cars.
Speaker 1: And how much education did he have?
Speaker 2: I don't believe my hus- my father, my father was not a high school graduate. I would think that probably, I get the impression somewhere between fifth and sixth grade, because he left home. He left the farm as soon as he could get away, up to a time he had been on the farm with his family and as soon as he was old enough and able, as my grandmother [Rosie Farmer Dawson] would say, he left home and he left the form--farm, and went to Greenville, Mississippi, and that's where he met my mom [Ida Harris Blake]. But, I would think that my father had somewhere between fifth and sixth grade education.
Story_ID: 596674
Speaker 1: Now, you visited your grandparents on your father's [Kemp Dawson, Jr.] side, is that right?
Speaker 2: My grandmother on my father's side reared me. She, she took care of me, I guess, how can I, when my father went to Greenville [Mississippi] leaving the farm, he met my mom [Ida Harris Blake] and he had different types of jobs and once they got married, then he decided to take her back to Sunflower County [Mississippi], with him back with his family. So, they, he, my mother and my father lived with my grandmother and the rest of his siblings. He was back at that time with his family. So, as the story goes and I've tried--the entire family moved from a farm in Mississippi in Sunflower County, to Indianola, Mississippi. That was a town portion, and at that time, I think it was during the Great Migration of black folk going to Chicago [Illinois], some going to the West, my mother's parents [Emma Darris Harris and Len Harris] and family moved from Mississippi to Chicago. My father and mother moved from Mississippi to Washington; Seattle, Washington. I think they went because of the shipyards. He went there looking for, for work with the shipyards and when they decided to do that, my grandmother insisted that they go but leave me with her until they found their way and until they got settled, and as it seems they did not find their way well enough for her, nor did they settle, so I was there with her throughout my growing up years. In the course of time, my mother left Washington and joined her family in Chicago, left my father in Washington, and he spent most of his life between California and Washington, and I spent most of my life with my grandmother. My grandmother raised me and I did just opposite of most of the city children would come to Mississippi during the summers when they were out of school to be with grandparents. I did just the opposite. I spent most of the time with my grandmother and during the summers once I became of age to travel alone, I would go to Chicago where my mother was.
Speaker 1: The land that your grandparents owned where you lived, did they own the property?
Speaker 2: Not the Dawsons. The Dawsons didn't on my father's side did not own the property. I believe they were sharecropping in Sunflower County. My mother's family, the house where I was born in Greenville was owned by her family; as a matter of fact, that property was owned by my mother and her sister. It had been given to them by their grandfather and my great-grandmother [Ida Brooks (ph.)] lived there all her life, but that property was owned-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --by them.
Speaker 1: So you actually were reared by Rosie Dawson [Rosie Farmer Dawson].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 596675
Speaker 1: When you think of a sound or a smell or a sights that you see, what do you see when you remember that time of growing up there?
Speaker 2: Of course, I remember--don't remember much about Indianola [Mississippi], but I do remember a lot about the coast. By the time my family moved to the coast, we were--I always remember the sand, the hot sand, because in the summertime, we'd run around in our bare feet and the sand was so hot I always remembered the beach, the sound, the sound of the tide coming in, going out. I remember in the evenings when we would play outside and they, there was smoke. They would build a little fire. It would smoke to keep away the mosquitos because, of course, there was no air conditioning and it was tradition once you came in and took your bath and got ready for bed, you stayed out of the house for a while to give it a chance to cool off. So, I do remember the smell of the smoke that kept the mosquitos away, the sand was always a part, and, and the sound of the beach is always comforting.
Story_ID: 596676
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory? I do remember bits and pieces from different periods of nothing that's really connected. I do remember my [paternal] grandmother [Rosie Farmer Dawson] taking me to visit her sister, who lived in the country at the time because we were living in Indianola [Mississippi] and she took me to visit her sister, and they fixed breakfast and cooked, and I was always curious about the hens and the cows and didn't like it too much 'cause it wasn't--didn't have any grass, but I do remember at breakfast time we had milk and I could tell the difference between the milk from the farm and the milk from the city, so I would say, "Well, I won't drink the cow's milk." They couldn't get me to--they tried to explain to me, well, all the milk comes from cows. All milk--and I said, "Oh, no. I will not drink the cow's milk," so, somebody got the bright idea to get a milk bottle and put the milk in and so when they served it for breakfast, they poured it and they say, "Now this is the milk from the bottle," but when I drank it, it tasted just like the milk so I knew, I said, "This is cow's milk. This is not the milk out of the jar," I guess I was saying, so I remember that as a child, being with my grandmother and I can't--oh, I do remember the first time I saw the beach in Gulfport [Mississippi]. We were walking down the street and my aunts say to me, "I'm going to take you so that as far as you can see, there's nothing but water and when you stand--," I was standing on sea water and I said, "Well, where's it going?" She'd say, "As far as you can see, you see nothing but water." And of course, I remember another time with my grandfather [Kemp Dawson, Sr.], my father's father. We were playing--I was playing hopscotch and trying to draw the little outline of it and so he came and he helped me with it and he put a circle. He said, "This is the world." And I looked at it, and he said, "And here, this little dot, we're only--we're only a small part of the world. There's a whole lot of world out there and when you grow up, I want you to see that world." I, I can just remember that, I don't know in conjunction to what, but I can remember him drawing the world and pointing out that we were just in a small portion of the world there in, in Mississippi.
Story_ID: 596677
Speaker 1: I asked you earlier to describe your mother [Ida Harris Blake]. Describe your [paternal] grandmother [Rosie Farmer Dawson], since she's the one who reared you. Describe her to me. Tell me what type of person she was and what your relationship, your personal relationship was with her.
Speaker 2: My personal relationship was a very close and loving relationship. She was very wise. She didn't have much education, but she loved people and she understood people. She was, I say that she was wise in the sense of when I was growing up and, of course, during our generation parents, and especially grandparents, were very strict on girls. My grandmother was never, ever really strict on me, but she would sit me down and she would talk to me and she would have me to know what her expectations of me were and, as I reflect on it, that was very wise because I never wanted to disappoint her. Never wanted to disappoint her, but she always expected me to do the right thing. She would never don't go out there and do--she would tell me, "Well, I know that you're going to do this and this." It was always what she wanted me to do and she would always say to me, "Now always remember that your name is precious and you don't ever want people to start talking about you. You have to always carry yourself in the right kind of way." And, this is the kind of counsel she gave me, so consequently I just always, it would just break my heart if I ever did anything and she found out that I had done something that she didn't expect me to do. She was in the community, a strong church person. She helped people. She prayed a lot. But, she just expect--I just grew up knowing that she expected the best out of me and she expected great things from me and I just really wanted to live up to that and we were very close; so much so, I was the first, her first grandchild, and I think that there was, perhaps as time passed and the others came, that was a little envy there because I was always referred to as her very special grandchild, and we could talk; I mean, I could spend time with her talking about anything. She was just a wonderful person and I often say I wish I could find the contentment and the spirituality that she had. She was just kind. I can't say--I mean, she was, she could be critical, but not in a punitive way. She could tell you things in a way that she was, she was never punitive. She's always loving.
Story_ID: 596678
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, we were talking ab- about your, your [paternal] grandmother [Rosie Farmer Dawson]. Let's establish when you moved to Gulfport [Mississippi]. How old were you?
Speaker 2: I was, I think, about four years old when we--when the family--it seems that our family moved, you know. When I think about not one person in the family moved, or maybe they moved ahead of time, but the family moved.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, did your grandmother work outside the home?
Speaker 2: She rarely worked outside the home, but when she did she had, I do remember her working as a, what they call a pastry cook. She baked pies and cakes for one of the restaurants on the beach.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your grandfather [Kemp Dawson, Sr.]. You mentioned him briefly. What was your relationship like with your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a typical grandfather relationship. We, he didn't talk much, and you kind of waited for him to talk. You didn't engage or enter into conversation without him unless, you know, he was ready to talk. He was a laborer and he worked as an assistant to electrician--
Speaker 1: (Cough) Excuse me.
Speaker 2: --work and did contract working people like that, but he did not, he was not, the only skill that he had was that of electricity. He could wire a house and do those things, and he did for many folk, but he didn't have a license where he could do it on his own.
Story_ID: 596679
Speaker 1: Now, describe where you lived in Gulfport, Mississippi. Describe the community in which you lived. Who lived around you?
Speaker 2: I guess we could say as people say today, it was a mixed use community. It was a segregated community with professional people, nonprofessionals, living all in the same community. The church was the focal point of our community. There was an elementary school [Gaston Point Elementary School, Gulfport, Mississippi] in that community where we walked to school each day from first through fourth grade, right across from that there was the church; the Little Rock Baptist Church [Gulfport, Mississippi]. As I stated, it was the focal point of the community. Everything evolved around that. On my street, I grew up on Camp Avenue, and on the first end of the street, there was Dr. Love [ph.], who was the town's colored or Negro or African American physician. There was, as I come down the street and look there were teachers who lived there, there were people who worked on the pier. That was where many of the men worked out on the pier. There were a lot of jobs where you load and unload cargo coming into that area. Of course, there was the minister, there was, I can see right now Mr. and Mrs. Brown [ph.], who had an ox and a wagon on the street even in that day and time. Everybody else had lights and running water and--but the Browns didn't. They even ground their own coffee. They had lamps. They were a little different, but accepted as a part of the community. Occasionally, Mrs. Brown would make homemade ice cream and put it on her wagon with her ox and go down the street and stop, ring the bell. People would go out and buy a dish of ice cream from her. We were all within walking distance of each other. The children were, my friends, we were in and out of each other's house. There was, on my street on Camp, there was a big oak tree with a large tire tied up with a rope and we'd go down there and swing and play during the day. In the community, people had various occupations and professions; you know, all there together there was not much of strata in terms of the way people lived. At that, early on at that time, our streets were not paved, just full of sand. Some cars, if people coming in to visit could easily get stuck in the sand if they didn't know how to navigate the terrain.
Story_ID: 596680
Speaker 1: But as I say, the, the church [Little Rock Baptist Church, Gulfport, Mississippi] was a focal point. We went, I think the only time we didn't go to church must have been on Monday and Friday. Sunday we had church, Sunday school, church, BTU [Baptist Training Union], and night service that they don't have any more now. It's interesting. On Tuesday we had choir practice. We practiced and, where the youngsters, you know, young people went, we went to choir practice early. The older went later. On Wednesday night, the older people went to prayer meeting. The youngsters didn't and that gave us a time to run around and chit chat. We knew everybody was going to be in prayer meeting on Wednesday and then on Thursday night there was a teachers' meeting. If you taught Sunday school, we had a very strict superintendent of Sunday school. If you taught Sunday school, you had to attend teachers' meeting and go over your lesson so that you would be prepared for Sunday and then, of course, I say Friday we didn't have church, and then Saturday we might go to the movies or to a ballgame, depending on the season softball game, baseball game. And come Sunday, we were back, back in church.
Story_ID: 596681
Speaker 1: As I said, our school was from first to fourth grade and once you pass fourth grade, then there was a bus that came to take us to central Gulfport [Mississippi]. All colored children went to from fourth grade through high school [33rd Avenue High School] in central Gulfport.
Speaker 2: What was the name of your elementary school first?
Speaker 1: The Gaston Point Elementary School [Gulfport, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Do you remember any of the teachers from Gaston Point?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes. I remember there was a favorite teacher of mine, Mrs. Tate [ph.], always, there weren't, I liked my teachers, but, and of course the school at the time was a one teacher school, so, Mrs. Tate was, was my teacher there and I liked her. I think she thought I talked too much; as I indicated before, as a child I was quite a talker and the most trouble I would get in is I had to go and stand in a corner or she had to separate me from somebody from talking.
Speaker 2: What type of student were you?
Speaker 1: I was a pretty good student. I was, I studied. I was not a student that could just get away with, you know, without studying but I, again, I wanted to please my grandma [Fairley's paternal grandmother, Rosie Farmer Dawson] and so I did what I needed to do to get good grades in school; however, I would say that at one point once we moved from our local school in Gaston Point and we had to catch the bus to go out in central Gulfport, I didn't like school so much and I would sometimes be slow getting to the corner, hoping to miss the bus and sometime missing the bus, so my family has this saying when I was working on my Ph.D., they'd say, "My goodness, we used to couldn't get her to go to school, and now we can't get her to stop. What happened?" When I was a child, I don't know if it was the bus ride or being out of my community, but I just didn't, didn't want to go but they insisted. I had an aunt, my Aunt Minnie [Fairley's paternal aunt, Minnie Dawson], who would march me right down there and find a way to get me to school.
Story_ID: 596682
Speaker 1: Was the school named Central Gulfport High School, or was there another name for it?
Speaker 2: The school's name was 33rd Avenue High School [Gulfport, Mississippi], because that's where it was located.
Speaker 1: And tell me about the teachers there.
Speaker 2: Well, we had, when I started there a Mr. Greene [J.B. Greene] was the principal and, as I recall, he was very strict. For some reason, every time he came 'round, we would scatter. We didn't stand around much and didn't talk much to him, but the teachers were highly educated, very caring, more like parents than teachers are today, and many of our teachers had their master's degrees. They had gone to, because of segregation at the time, the State of Mississippi would pay for them to go out of state to study, and a lot of our teachers had master's degrees from Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], 'cause that's where they would go in the summer but I just remember the school being like a community. We were required to dress--there was no dress code, but the monitor would check to see if your shoes were shined, if your socks were cleaned, if you had combed your hair they would make these little marks that give you a star if everything was okay, or if they'd give you a check mark or something less than a gold star if, if you were not well groomed, and if your shoes weren't polished, and we had the regular type of spelling and arithmetic and reading. We didn't have much equipment until later on in terms of the sciences and the music, but the basic reading and writing and arithmetic.
Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any extracurricular activities that you participated in?
Speaker 2: I had, I was a cheerleader. I was not very athletic. Most of my friends were some--I mean, I didn't, but I always, for instance with the basketball team, I wasn't good enough (cough) to do that, but I would keep the scores and I was the statistician, as they would say, and I did say I was a cheerleader. I was a leader in the Tri-Hi-Y club. I had a local leadership position as well as state regional leadership position. So, other than cheerleading and club work, this, this is what I did. I, I wasn't very athletic.
Story_ID: 596683
Speaker 1: What were holidays like at your home?
Speaker 2: What were?
Speaker 1: What were holidays like?
Speaker 2: Oh, very enjoyable. They were very enjoyable, especially during Christmastime. My [paternal] grandmother [Rosie Farmer Dawson] would start baking and sometimes my aunt and some of her friends would come and they'd start baking the cakes and the pies and making candy, pralines, just gathering all of this together for Christmas. We, during the holidays we'd go from house to house to sample cakes and the goodies that different people had. Different folk were known for certain dishes. I did not mention I had godparents who lived in the community and my godmother was an outstanding fruitcake baker, so everybody during the holidays looked forward to going to her house for her fruitcake. Of course, we had programs at the church [Little Rock Baptist Church, Gulfport, Mississippi]. We always had a Christmas pageant, Christmas concert where leading up to that time, we were practicing for that. During that period, everybody looked forward to having a new outfit and getting your hair fixed, those, you know, with the straightening comb and the curlers. One of my aunts was a beautician, so I could always count on having my Shirley Temple curls just right for the holidays but, and occasionally we had family to come during the holidays to visit.
Speaker 1: You talked about that most of the homes had running water, so all of the homes except for the Brown [ph.] family had indoor plumbing?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No. Not all of them. Some did. You know, it depended. Some had indoor plumbing. Some would bill from time to time. I don't think that the homes were of such that they were built with indoor plumbing, but most everybody tried to build that whenever they were able (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were able to.
Story_ID: 596684
Speaker 1: Did you make friends that you still have today during that time?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Who are they?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do. I can think, I, I well one is Vera Adams, and I'm trying to think of what her, Vera Adams Lane. We were in the same class. We grew up together. My next door neighbor, Sonia Williams-Bryant, and sad to say that three of my best friends passed away a couple of years ago. It seemed a couple of years ago that we just lost a lot of people out of our class and, of course, I have a classmate and friend, Lalita Henshaw [ph.], who lives over in Virginia, and we get together all the time. Whenever there is something special here at the school [Sojourner-Douglass College, Edgewater, Maryland], she is always here with me. Whenever something is happening with her family, I'm with her. As a matter of fact, her family is sponsoring a cruise, Mediterranean cruise this summer in August. So, I'm going with them and they tend to have a cruise every other year. I went with them on their first cruise and missed a couple, but this cruise I'm going with them because I, I've never been to the Mediterranean, and we're, you know, we're still very close.
Story_ID: 596685
Speaker 1: Tell me what influenced you as a young person.
Speaker 2: The church [Little Rock Baptist Church, Gulfport, Mississippi]. My church and the, the, the work that I did growing up in the church. I really learned how to be a leader. I was just telling a friend of mine recently that my time consciousness comes from my superintendent of Sunday school, because he was, he insisted on, his name is Mr. Lee Adams [Lee Adams, Sr.]. This was Vera's [Vera Adams Lane] father. He insisted that we start on time and that we end on time no matter what, and he, he taught that; so even now, when things are very relaxed in our day and time I still am a person who is very conscious of time. I learned to speak before an audience in my church. I learned to, early on, I became a Sunday school teacher and I was encouraged by my family and by the people in the church, because they thought I was an outstanding teacher. They thought I should be a teacher and at that time in my life, I was determined that I would do anything but teach. Little did I know that eventually I would end up in education, but the church was, was very influential.
Story_ID: 596686
Speaker 1: I had a teacher who was not really a teacher of mine, but she was the librarian at the high school [33rd Avenue High School, Gulfport, Mississippi]. I think she was Dr. Thelma Buchanan [ph.]. I don't know what her name is now, but she was very influential in the sense that she could pull me aside and talk about things that she thought that I needed to know. She taught me a, what is the poem, 'For My People' by Margaret Walker, when I was, I guess, in about eleventh grade. She pulled me aside and said, "Here, I want you to learn this." And I learned it (laughter), every verse of it and then she had me to compete in the fraternity Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] talent competition and I won, and, but, it would never, it never occurred to me to do that, because I didn't have a voice to sing and most of the competitions were singing and music and all, and she'd say to me, "I want you to do this, and I want you to compete this year." So I did. I competed and won on the coast and ended up going, coming on a trip to Georgia, but she was the kind of person that would say to me, "I'd like you to try this. Don't you think it would be a good idea to do this?" And she was my mentor in the sense as I grew, you know, during, during my high school years and very, very influential. She was a very polished kind of woman and, of course, you know as a young person you want to emulate that and she influenced me a lot.
Story_ID: 596687
Speaker 1: You weren't sure that you wanted to become an educator at that time. How did you decide what school you would go to? Was it just a given that you were gonna go to college?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't so much a given but everybody talked about it. We, when you go to college, no, prior to my going to college, I was the first person in my family to go and I remember I had an aunt, Susie Levi [ph.], my grandfather's sister, who lived in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and, of course, Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] was there, and she would say to me, "When you go to college, I want you to come to Southern." And, it was just, you know, in conversation, then I mentioned early on there was a Mr. Greene [J.B. Greene], that was principal of 33rd Avenue High School [Gulfport, Mississippi], but then Mr. W.F. Calbert and his wife came to the coast. He became the principal and they literally, I think, the college going rate must have doubled because they took us on trips to visit Tougaloo, Jackson [Jackson State College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], Alcorn [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi], he took some students to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], but that was just the conversation that you would go to college; now how, and how you're going to support yourself going to college, I worked hard to get a scholarship and I did get a scholarship to Tougaloo College, that's in Tougaloo, Mississippi. When I arrived at Tougaloo, I was a little disappointed because of its size. It was not quite what I thought college was going to be like. In addition to that, Tougaloo was perhaps the most expensive school at that time in Mississippi where we could attend. I can remember going up to Jackson [Mississippi] on the bus, and we'd always have to come through Hattiesburg, Mississippi, where the University of Southern Mississippi is and was at that time. And I just wonder, you know, I said, "Why can't we go to that college?" That would have been ideal, but of course it was during the days of segregation, and we'd always pass the University of Southern Mississippi on our way to Tougaloo, but as I said before Tougaloo is very expensive, and I knew the sacrifice that my family was making to assure me this opportunity. So, I thought about what my aunt had said to me over the years and so I sent off for the catalog and found how inexpensive Southern was, so I wrote her a letter and asked her if I could come and she said yes, so I transferred from Tougaloo after my freshman year. Although I had a scholarship, it was very, very expensive, and my family was making the kind of sacrifice that I wasn't comfortable with for me to be there. Plus, I didn't like it that much anyway and so, so I transferred to Southern University--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Baton Rouge.
Story_ID: 596688
Speaker 1: What year are we in? You graduated from high school [33rd Avenue High School, Gulfport, Mississippi] in 1963?
Speaker 2: Oh, no. I graduated from high school in 1956 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry, '56 [1956], okay I'm sorry. You graduated from college in '63 [1963]. No, that wouldn't be right. Would that be right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, so, you graduated from high school in 1956 and transferred to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and tell me about the experience once you got to Southern.
Speaker 2: Oh, I just loved it. It was, the campus was what I had imagined college to be like. There was a lot of freedom in the sense of being able to be yourself and make your own decisions in terms of your classes and courses. People in general, they tend to expect you to be a little more mature, which I have felt as a youngster I had always been kind of mature and settled. I liked the classes. I liked the size. Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] at the time was very small, but I really, really enjoyed the campus and the friends that I made and the classes. Why, most people would think that the classes at Tougaloo were, or should have been, more challenging. I found the Southern classes to be just right for me.
Story_ID: 596689
Speaker 1: Growing up in a segregated society had to be a little difficult. Did you--would you speak to that?
Speaker 2: At the time, it didn't seem all that difficult because there were boundaries and parameters in there in order to protect us, us meaning children, that our parents had us to know what we could and could not do, and they set, although the state had these restrictions, our parents also set boundaries so as to protect us from these restrictions. We knew, for instance, if after going to the movies that we would go separately, that Negroes or colored people went upstairs. You bought your ticket, you went upstairs. White people bought their tickets, they went downstairs. Now, I will say, and that was just one, that was just one movie house where, where black people went. There was the Paramount Theatre [Gulfport, Mississippi] on another street that seemed to have all of the best movies that just didn't allow black people to, to, to buy a ticket to go in. So, it was kind of you knew that you weren't supposed to do that, first of all, you weren't supposed to do what your parents told you not to do. There were, we were aware of slights, when you went to the shops to shop, there were some shops where we could go and try on clothes, and then there were some of the most exclusive shops that you couldn't. You just stood out and you could see what they had. I'm not even sure that they sold merchandise to black people. I can remember, it was, if you were going to the movie, you made sure that you went to the bathroom, going downtown to shop, you did all of those things because you knew that there was nowhere that you could go except maybe to the train station, to the rest room in the colored side, and of course that was not--the station was not always clean, so you tried to not have to go but if you had to go, that was the place during the time, and I left home around, I guess, after high school graduation [from 33rd Avenue High School, Gulfport, Mississippi]. During that time, we were just accepting. Leading up to '56 [1956], we were just accepting things the way they were and we were not questioning our parents' instruction about how we should behave and what we should or should not do, and living in the segregated community, we didn't have that much contact with white people. I will say that it's almost like in the back of where we live that it was not a street, but almost like an alley. There were some little houses there where some white people lived, but, of course, they were poor white folk. But although they were poor, we still did not mix. We would sometimes look over the fence and we'd see them there, but it never occurred to me to walk over there or to even to try to play with those children. It was just a kind of understanding that you had and your parents and community people went out of the way to protect you, to instruct you in terms of what you could and could not do.
Story_ID: 596690
Speaker 1: Well, after the leaving the comfort of your community and going off to college, did you see any difference in, you know, where you were going to school now at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] as far as the people's attitudes?
Speaker 2: It's pretty much the same thing. You, Southern had its own community, the college community. We could go to certain places, certain places we couldn't, but the campus itself was practically self-sufficient and self-contained. Now, I had a friend who worked at the Howard Johnson's in Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], right outside of the campus, and I've always loved ice cream and I can remember the sign, the fifty-seven flavors, and I just wished that I could have one of those fifty-seven flavors. I just wanted to see what it was like, but I could see and occasionally I would say to Don [ph.], I said, "I'd like--bring me a cone of ice cream with one of those fifty-seven flavors." He said, "No, I can't do that." You know, you couldn't--take a cone out and bring it to me, but that was one of the discomforts that I remember feeling that I really wanted, just as I wanted to go to the Paramount Theatre [Gulfport, Mississippi] at home. That was one of the things--I wanted to go to the Howard Johnson's but we couldn't. So, I won't say that it was all, you know, but it wasn't something that you dwelled on and talked about. You just understood that, that it wasn't allowed and you just didn't do it.
Story_ID: 596691
Speaker 1: So you stay at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] for two years. Tell me what happens next.
Speaker 2: Okay. I was at Southern having a great time for two years, really enjoyed the campus, made many friends that I still have today and, as I said before, I spent most of my summers growing up, and even college, in Chicago [Illinois] and, of course, once you become college the Chicago social scene is altogether different. You have students working in Chicago from all of the schools in the South and the North and this was a great place for college students to congregate, party, and have a good time. So, it was the same with me. The summer, my first summer after being at Southern, I met this young man from Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], who was introduced to me by one of my friends that I met in Chicago, and she was married to a Meharry student, so I had--one of my uncles during the summer would always give, give me a party because my birthday is July 24th, and so I called this friend and said to her, "Well, we're having this party," and I had just gone into the sorority, and I said, "I've got all these sorors here, but we don't have many guys. How 'bout having some of the fellows from Meharry come to the party?" So she said okay and so she called around and sure enough, this young man came to the party and we met, and this, Bill Hickson, William Hickson [Fairley's first husband, William F. Hickson, Jr.] from South Carolina, he was a second year dental student, and we met and started a conversation. He belonged to the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity; that was a plus. I was a new Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], and he, after the party he called me and we started to date. We had a whirlwind time. I mean, at that time, Chicago had, we both enjoyed jazz and just about every weekend, all the jazz notables were in town and he would come and take me on dates and we'd go to hear different artists, which was different. I had never experienced anything like this in Mississippi, and even dating, going to the movies, and we just saw each other. We spent all our time together that summer, practically all our time going and doing things that we enjoyed. Then, he went back to Nashville [Tennessee] and I went back to Southern, and spent most of my time figuring out how I could get to Nashville, and he spent a lot of time figuring out how he could get to Southern, so we visited each other and maintained the relationship during the school year. Then, the next year we went back and we were there together, and at the end of that second summer I didn't want to go back to Southern and he wanted me to come to Nashville with him, and, against my family's advice, including my [paternal] grandmother's [Rosie Farmer Dawson] that I never wanted to disappoint (laughter), I--we got married that September 'cause, as you know school started at that time, not quite as early, so rather than going back to Southern, we got married and I went back to Nashville with him, promising my grandmother that I was going to finish college.
Story_ID: 596692
Speaker 1: So, registered at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], having no real interest, really. I was set on getting married and having a family, and being Mrs. William F. Hickson, Jr., so that's what I did, and I was there with him until he finished Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and meanwhile we had three children a year apart, and Nina [Nina Hickson], my daughter, the older, Franklin [William F. Hickson III], and Neal [George O'Neal Hickson]. So, realizing how important it was for me to keep my commitment to my [paternal] grandmother [Rosie Farmer Dawson] about finishing college, Bill took an internship in Dover, Delaware, so that I could finish my degree at Delaware State [Delaware State College; Delaware State University, Dover, Delaware]. So, that's what I did after he finished Meharry. We came and I got my degree, and I tell people all the time, especially the women that I work with now when they give me excuses about why they can't come back to school, I say, well--I had three children before I received my first degree, so that's no excuse. So, it has helped me in my motivating other people to go on.
Speaker 2: And this was in 1963, and your degree was in--
Speaker 1: Sociology, pre-social work. I was still determined at that time, that I would do anything but teach and, of course, that I had observed growing up that many of the young women would go off to college and then come back home and, as I said, become an old maid school teacher and I was determined that I wasn't gonna be an old maid school teacher (laughter) but, so, I had selected--I was always a sociology major--social work as my profession at the time, and I thought that that would suit me.
Story_ID: 596693
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, my first job was in, as a caseworker in Burlington County, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: So, did your family move to New Jersey, or did you still live in Delaware (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, Bill [Fairley's first husband, William F. Hickson, Jr.] finished his internship in Delaware and he was a commission--he was in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] as an undergraduate, so he had to give back those years to the [U.S.] Army, so after he finished his internship, then he went into the Army and was stationed at Fort Dix, New Jersey, and so that, at this point, he had finished Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and was a dentist, and I had finished college [Delaware State College; Delaware State University, Dover, Delaware] and I was a social worker.
Speaker 2: Now, your first job was with the welfare department in Burlington?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Tell me what that experience was like.
Speaker 1: I thoroughly enjoyed that, because at that time that was at the very beginning of Medicare, or Medicaid. There was a lot of controversy about it. I remember the physicians did not like it that much, but the program was just starting in New Jersey, and not many social workers wanted that position and I volunteered for it because I rather enjoyed--you know, having grown up with my [paternal] grandmother [Rosie Farmer Dawson], I enjoyed being around older people, so I was what they call the medical caseworker for Medicare, or Medicaid, must have been. So, I would visit those, my clients were mostly in nursing homes, and I found that they looked forward to my coming. They remembered the day that I was supposed to come and if I did, for some reason, if the schedule changed they would let me know but I really did enjoy it. I enjoyed it because it seemingly meant so much to them to have someone come visit and to talk with them, and they would tell me all about their lives and their families and this, so I, I really, I thoroughly enjoyed that job.
Story_ID: 596694
Speaker 1: Well, the climate of the country now, is the Civil Rights Movement is really heating up. This is 1964, and you take your next job. You, you stay as a caseworker for Burlington County, Vermont [sic. Burlington County, New Jersey] for just a year, or how long did you stay there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I stay for, I guess, pretty close, I would say two years, I'm thinking, because, until Bill [Fairley's first husband, William F. Hickson, Jr.] finished his tour of duty with the [U.S.] Army and after he finished, then we decided to go back to South Carolina to his home, Orangeburg. Now, again, when we knew that we were going to move, first of all Bill was not that enthusiastic about my working, so he said, "Well, you know when we go back, you're not going to be able to do casework in South Carolina, because they don't have any black caseworkers, so you can just put that out of your mind." So, I went back, knowing at the time there were no black caseworkers, and so I was, you know, pretty much set to stay at home and this was to his liking. Of course, my children [Nina Hickson, William F. Hickson III and George O'Neal Hickson] were younger and we moved to this new community and all, so again, I had no interest in education or teaching, I thought. So, we moved back to South Carolina and what happened as my children developed and--as their school day let them--meant that I had more time on my hands, so then there were, I wanted to do something more than just be home--as people say, more than just a housewife, but I wanted to do something outside of the home. Someone found out at Claflin College [sic. Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] that I had the degree in sociology, although it was an undergraduate degree, and asked if I would be interested in substituting for a person who wanted to go back to complete work for a doctorate and, after much negotiation with, with Bill and my children, I decided that I would and on the condition that I would work only a half a day, so all my classes were from eight to twelve [o'clock] and I was home when my children came home. Then, I fell in love with education, with higher education. I really, really enjoyed that--enjoyed the students, enjoyed the faculty and staff, and so I began to try to figure out now how am I going to get my master's degree so that they'll ask me to come back to teach, 'cause you had to have at least a master's degree to teach on a college level, and so, again, after negotiating with my husband and my children I decided to go back to South Carolina State College [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] where I got a degree, a master's, in counseling education and after that I was asked each term to come back to Claflin to teach and then later on, I was asked to come to serve as a counselor for one of the federal TRiO programs. I did that and, as I say, my time on the job and my career development paralleled my children's development and need for me. As they became more independent, I became more involved in my work and in my career.
Story_ID: 596695
Speaker 1: You mentioned the TRiO programs. Tell me what that, what those programs are, or were--
Speaker 2: That's--they still exist and they are more than TRiO now. They're--the first one was Talent Search, Upward Bound, Special Services [Special Services for Disadvantaged Students; Student Support Services], the EOC is the Economic Opportunity Programs [sic. Educational Opportunity Centers], and I believe there is another one that is in the graduate--that's a graduate program now. But they are programs designed to assist first generation college students go to college, provide them with the support and the finances to go on to college, and they've been in existence now for more than thirty years, almost forty years. It's a continuous--I enjoyed that work because not only were we helping students, we were changing the face of higher education and changing the expectations of low income, disadvantaged students.
Speaker 1: Now, when you get your counseling degree, you become a counselor also at Claflin [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I became counselor for the Student Support Services, which was also a TRiO program. I'd taught with the Upward Bound program, which is one of the TRiO programs, and then when, when the Special Services or Student Support Services program was established at Claflin, I became the counselor for that program.
Story_ID: 596696
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me what happens next in your life.
Speaker 2: After Claflin [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, I enjoyed my work at Claflin. I had, over time, a lot of responsibility because it was a small school, which I think was an advantage because it gave a person who was willing to work an opportunity to work in various areas of higher education. I had a very understanding, supportive, helpful supervisor [Alethia S. Worthy], who was known to have been a tough supervisor, but I found it, it very helpful to me because she understood all the time that my family was a priority, and I also knew that she appreciated the kind of work that I did, but she also motivated me in as much as she encouraged me, to go on beyond the master's degree. I suspected I could do it, but I wasn't sure. So, she, she encouraged me to do that and so I applied for the Ph.D. program at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina] and, at the time, there were exceptions being made. There were certain ways African Americans could get in the program and I decided that I wanted to get in that program based on my credentials and qualifications. One of the ways was that you could start--you could take some classes as a special student, and if you did well in those classes, then, perhaps you would be invited to come into the Ph.D. program, but I felt that I had the credentials and qualifications, and I wanted to be accepted based on that, and sure enough I didn't have, I didn't have a problem-or, as I anticipated once again, anticipating that I might but I didn't--I didn't have a problem because I later found out I had colleagues at the university there that who had worked with me in TRiO, and they had given me some, they had given me high recommendations so when my application came and I had to do my interview they accepted me in the program.
Speaker 1: And, what year was that? Is this after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we are--about sixty--'69 [1969], I would say. I think '68 [1968] or '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay. Well then, tell me what year you received your master's.
Speaker 2: I don't recall the master's--I did in a year, would it be about sixty--Neal [Fairley's son, George O'Neal Fairley] was four, I base it on my children, let me see--about '67 [1967], '68 [1968] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eight [1968], okay.
Speaker 2: Somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: And you got your master's the following year?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 596697
Speaker 1: Let's go back to 1969, when you receive your, your master's degree in counselling from South Carolina State [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] and after that you become a special services counselor at Claflin College [sic. Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. Did you want to talk about what the position was like as a counselor for you?
Speaker 2: Well, yes. It was a very fulfilling and satisfying position. It was at this time, I guess, that I could say that I was really working full time. My children [Nina Hickson, William F. Hickson III and George O'Neal Hickson] were very much independent in the sense that they did not need me as much as they had, so I was able to give more time to that position and, again, I was working with youngsters who did not score high enough to be accepted in the regular program at Claflin, but they had some potential and we felt that given the opportunity, that they could succeed in college, so it was really a challenging job. We provided the tutoring, the counseling, and support to the students and Student Support Services [Special Services for Disadvantaged Students; Student Support Services], and, of course, young students have all kinds of issues and problems that they think at times are the end of the world, and many times, they just need to have someone to hear them out and kind of help them chart their course, and this is, this is what I did and I found that many of these students came from background similar to mine and I felt that we were making a contribution in that job.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you stayed there for just about four years, is that right?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in that position for about four years and I then, I didn't move from Claflin. My next position was also at Claflin, and I think I might have been coordinator of the TRiO programs, moved from counseling to administration. Need I say that that was not an easy transition, because as an administrator, your priorities are very different from those other counselor--as a counselor you're concerned by the individual, but as an administrator, you have to be more concerned about the operation and implementation of the program and meeting deadlines and doing well on your evaluation. So, I found the counseling job a very easy one, but when I began to be less personal about the program, I didn't find it as fulfilling, although I worked hard to do a good job and I feel that I did, but I was moving more from the students personally than I had in the job as, as a counselor.
Speaker 1: So at work that you went from being a counselor, coordinating the Upward Bound programs, that's, that's part of the TRiO programs?
Speaker 2: Yes, coordinating, I was coordinating both--
Speaker 1: Both.
Speaker 2: --Upward Bound and Special Services (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Special Services.
Speaker 2: --so I had administrative responsibilities for both programs.
Story_ID: 596698
Speaker 1: And then you become the director of the who- the pro-, the Special Programs for Disadvantaged Students [sic. Special Services for Disadvantaged Students; Student Support Services].
Speaker 2: Yes, I moved from coordinator to director [at Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. As I mentioned before, Ms. Alethia Worthy [Alethia S. Worthy] was my supervisor. She had been the director; as a matter of fact, she wrote, she was the founding director of each of these programs and when she decided to retire, she told me that she was going to recommend me for that position and, of course, I was uncertain as to whether I could really do a good job at that because I know that it required, in addition to the administrative things that I was accustomed to doing, it required travel and I did not think that it was going to sit very well in my personal situation, but I had turned down a number of opportunities for promotion for that reason, so at this point I decided that I would take the job knowing that Ms. Worthy's shoes would be very, very big for me to fill, but she felt that I could do it and she felt that I could do it all, so that was enough for me. I, I accepted the position and she was the kind of person to say, "Now that you have it, you do it." It wasn't as if I would have the position and she would be doing--she insisted, she says, "No, you do it." And, again, it was a job that I did enjoy and I believe I did a good job. I also became involved in the political aspect of the TRiO programs because at the time, you know, of course our funds came from the federal budget and on the campus we were known as people working on soft money and that was not something that anybody wanted to do. Everybody would start with the soft money, but then eventually they wanted to move to something that the institution supported so that they could have more security; however, I saw it as an opportunity to be very creative and somehow control what you did and how you did it and, of course, this came as a result of writing the proposal and writing the budget and we, we were successful with that, so I didn't mind being on soft money at all.
Story_ID: 596699
Speaker 1: You also designed a format for the TRiO Achievers program?
Speaker 2: Oh yes. That is one thing that I am really proud of. I was asked as a part of, at the time, the National Council of Educational Opportunity programs [National Council of Educational Opportunity Associations], and I believe, now corrected it is called Council on Educational Opportunity [sic. Council for Opportunity in Education] and, of course, we were just developing our programs and our conferences, and our professional development so there had been, someone had established a TRiO Achievers reception, where we would ask people from, from the various programs to come back to our national conference to a reception and we sat around and chit chat about their successes and what they had done. So, someone approached me once; I can't remember who was the president at the time, but asked me if I would chair that activity for the TRiO Achievers, and I said, "Of course I'd do it under one condition, and that is that you will allow me to redesign it." So, he said, "Fine, okay." Well, rather than having just the reception where the TRiO Achievers were talking to the directors and the professionals in the area. I asked the conference chair at the time if they were to allow me to design the luncheon so it became the TRiO Achievers Luncheon where we would normally have a luncheon and maybe have somebody, a legislator or somebody, come in and speak. I thought that this would be a good opportunity to showcase the talent and the positive outcomes of our program. And sure enough, that's what we did. Our first luncheon was very successful. We spotlighted one achiever from each region and it was competitive the way we selected the people to come and after that, it has really become the big PR [public relations] project for TRiO programs. It continues even today, where the TRiO Achievers are selected. They do books, something that looks like a yearbook and they talk about all of the achievements, so it really turns out to be an excellent evaluation tool for our programs.
Story_ID: 596700
Speaker 1: You stay at Claflin [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] from '97 [sic. 1968] to 1986. And how did you make a decision to go to South Carolina--University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina], to work as a director of the program for disadvantaged students [Special Services for Disadvantaged Students; Student Support Services]?
Speaker 2: Well, I had, of course I was working on my doctorate at the University of South Carolina. I had good rapport with the staff and some very good friends at the university, so that when the director, Catherine Pillock [ph.], was the director of the Upward Bound program. The director of the TRiO programs at the university, Manning Hiers [J. Manning Hiers], who was a colleague and a friend, told me that he was looking for someone and wondered if I would make a recommendation, and so I said to him, "Well, what about me?" And he was really, he says "Oh, you wouldn't come to the university." And I said, "Oh, yes I would." So he said, "You can have the job right now if you wanted." So I said, "I'd like to be considered for that job," and so I went through the process and was interviewed and was offered the job. It worked well for me at that time, because it was during the time that Bill [Fairley's first husband, William F. Hickson, Jr.] and I were separated, which meant that I could just move on to Columbia [South Carolina], that I'd be able to spend more time working on my doctorate and I would be working at the university where I was also studying.
Story_ID: 596701
Speaker 1: How or did the programs differ, or did you, what did you do when you got to South Carolina [University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina]? Was there anything different from when you were director at Claflin [Claflin College; Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's interesting that you should ask that question because it was--the perception at the time was that the program [Special Services for Disadvantaged Students; Student Support Services] at the university, the flagship university, was head and shoulders over all other programs in the state and when I started to work there, I found that there were many things lacking in terms of the type of student that the program was supposed to serve so, needless to say, I'm not one to move into a situation and right away start to criticize it, because I thought highly of the director [J. Manning Hiers] and the staff there, and I didn't want to seem that I was being critical of them, but I guess because the university was an elite university, they just didn't think that they needed to do, or they had to do all of the things that were required, that I was accustomed to doing, that the university could pretty much run the program as it chose to, but I'm the kind of professional that if I commit to doing a certain thing, I want to do that and I wanted to be the director of a stellar program. I didn't want anybody to ever come and site visit and find that the program was not what it was supposed to be, and interesting enough the very first year I was there our program officer came to site visit and this person is Prince Teal. He worked for the U.S. Department of Education and I can remember saying to my staff at Claflin now, "We must operate this program so that any day Prince Teal calls and says that he is coming, that we will be ready. We won't have to get nervous about it." But needless to say, when Prince Teal came, when he announced that he was coming to the university, I was a bit nervous but I wanted us to be in good shape so we worked night and day. I'm not certain that the staff there really, I made any friends at that point, but we did get that program in, in good shape and I'm proud to say that it continues, but I do find some difference.
Speaker 1: And you made those corrections (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right. (Cough) And, now you're there for how many years?
Speaker 2: Okay, let me count. Sometimes I get mixed up with working on--I was there about three, three years-three, three and a half, three years.
Speaker 1: Okay. And in--so that would be 1989.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 596702
Speaker 1: And what happens in 1989?
Speaker 2: Well, I was still working, working on my doctorate [at the University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina], still very much involved in the TRiO professional programs. I became president of the regional association, which meant that I was travelling in and out of Washington [D.C.] frequently for meetings and for conferences, as the President of SAEOPP, the Southeastern Association of Educational Opportunity Programs [sic. Southeastern Association of Educational Opportunity Program Personnel], and during this time I was, I believe, I chaired, I must have chaired the SAEOPP conference as well, because now I remember how I met Dr. Richard Fairley [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley]. I didn't know him but I was chairing that conference and, again, wanting everything planned and everything to be implemented on time. I know it was my conference, but I wasn't the chair. I was the president. My conference chair called and said, "Well, everything is set with the exception of Dr. Fairley, who is supposed to be our keynote speaker. We haven't heard from him. We don't know whether he's coming or not and he hasn't made his hotel reservations." So, I became fairly concerned. I'd say, "Well, Randy [ph.], I spoke with him. I wrote a letter and he assured me that he would be here." And so I said, "Well, perhaps I should call him back." So, I called him back and I don't know, I guess I was kind of matter of fact, and asked him, you know, "We just wanted to be sure that he was going to be at the conference," so he did come and we spoke and so later on I understand that he said to one of our mutual colleagues, he said, "Who is that crazy woman who was so concerned about my getting there and where I was gonna stay?" And so, our friend, Anna Mitchum [ph.], said to him, "Oh Dick, she's a nice person. As a matter of fact, you should get to know her." And unbeknownst to me I didn't know that this conversation had transpired so the next time I was in Washington, he called and asked me if I would have lunch with him and I couldn't imagine why. Why would he want to have lunch with me? So anyway, I asked a couple of my friends and they said, "Oh, go have lunch with him." So, in the course of lunch we went to a little Chinese place and I talked about my family and he talked about his family and I found out that he was single and I was single, so he said to me, "Well, you're not ready yet but in three years, I'm, I'm gonna ask you to marry me." I said, "Oh, my goodness." I said, "I don't plan to marry again. I am very satisfied with my life the way it is. I have my children [Nina Hickson, William F. Hickson III and George O'Neal Hickson] and my work, and under no circumstances am I going to get married again. I, I understood that when I left my marriage. I did not leave thinking that I would go find another husband. I don't care to have another husband." So that's what I said to him on our first date. (Laughter) And, of course he was very much a gentleman and when I would travel in and out of Washington, he always knew I didn't know that he would come and pick me up from the airport, take me where I had to go, take me back to the airport, and was just very supportive as a good friend. He helped me find information from research. In other words, before I knew it, we were, I mean we were really good friends and once we became friends, then he convinced me of how valuable a marriage would be to the two of us, so the rest is history.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So when did you get married?
Speaker 2: We got married, let me see, March 25th, in, oh dear, I can't, I--
Speaker 1: Did he wait three years after--
Speaker 2: Oh no, it was three years--in a year--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) In a year.
Speaker 2: And then after we got married, of course, he did say, "Well I thought it would take three years, but it only took me one," you know. But, we laughed about that.
Story_ID: 596703
Speaker 1: So you worked as a consultant, an expert consultant for the Fund for the Improvement of Postsecondary Education.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did. For--
Speaker 1: Okay, for a year?
Speaker 2: It's known as FIPSE, FIPSE. I worked for them for a year. It was an expert consultant position and it's renewed annually and when I arrived at FIPSE I thought that I was going to have some other project, because usually when you come, when you're asked to come, they ask you to come to work on a given project and I thought that I would be working on teacher education and retention, but just as I arrived FIPSE had received a large grant for substance abuse prevention and higher education and because of my knowledge of the schools and students, they asked if I would take that on and I did, and during that year I organized their conference. We had a big national conference. I did site visits all over the country and, of course, well it was not again a permanent job and by this time, I decided, Richard [Fairley's second husband, HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] and I decided to get married and so I thought that, you know, I needed a permanent job so then I took, I was offered a permanent position with HHS, Health and Human Services, working in substance abuse prevention, and so I was at FIPSE only a year and then I worked with the [U.S.] Department of Health and Human Services and thought it was an interesting job. I knew right away that this was not for me because my work had been so much a part of me and I wasn't that comfortable 'cause I had to, well I had to learn a lot fast and, of course, Richard always believed that everybody has a capacity to learn, so he encouraged from days, today I would come home and say, "I don't know anything about that." "Oh, you can do it, now you do so and so." So, sure enough I became fairly proficient in that and worked with them but knowing all the time I always looked for, I was looking for a job in higher education but the drawback there was that the salaries in higher education in the Washington, D.C. area are not that competitive. The--actually, the jobs that I interviewed for and received the offers were on the same part as my master's [degree] job in South Carolina, so it just didn't make sense for me to leave, you know, to leave the government until I could find something that was comparable where I did not lose salary. So, I stayed with them.
Speaker 1: But you received your Ph.D. in 1990 [from the University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right. Now tell me, at this time, what is your husband's position, he's also in D.C. working, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, Richard, at this time, he is the director of Higher Education Programs, of all Higher Education Programs for the, for the United States.
Story_ID: 596704
Speaker 1: Sojourner-Douglass College [Edgewater, Maryland] tell me about this school.
Speaker 2: Okay. Well, you, you just might want to know how, how I got involved; as I said, I was not happy with the salaries offered in higher education, so I was working with the government and once we decided to move to Annapolis [Maryland], there was a job, substance abuse prevention job, opened here and I thought well certainly the local government would put me more in touch with people and it would be more suitable for me because in the federal government, I just felt so isolated from folk that I was supposed to be working for, so I took a job with, interviewed, and took a job here for, in Anne Arundel County [Maryland]. Still, not quite satisfied, so I always kept in touch with people in higher education and because Richard [Fairley's second husband, HistoryMaker Richard Fairley], because of his work, occasionally I would travel with him. Now, we traveled to Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], I believe it occurs at 1 August, and they have what they call historically black college [HBCU] presidents' retreat, and at this retreat during dinnertime, I met Dr. Charles Simmons [Charles W. Simmons], who is the founding president of Sojourner-Douglass College. Well, Richard knew him and we sat across from him for dinner and we were talking and Richard asked him how school was going and, you know, what was going on and so he says, "Oh, everything is fine. I'd just like to have a few more students," he said. "As a matter of fact, I would really like to have a site in Annapolis." So, he said, "Dick, you know anybody that I could interest in that?" Now that I think about it, knowing my husband he might have probably set this up, but anyway Dick, he said, "Oh, there's a person right, right here. She works with the community, she's in higher education. She can do that for you."
Story_ID: 596705
Speaker 1: So your husband [Fairley's second husband, HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] said that you would be the best candidate. So tell me what happens next.
Speaker 2: So, he, he, he volunteered me. And, so Dr. Simmons [Charles W. Simmons] and I made an appointment to talk and he made an appointment to come to Annapolis [Maryland] and talk in more detail about possibilities and that we did. We made the appointment there (unclear) later on we met and I was real excited about this opportunity. It was a part time, because I was still working for the county [Anne Arundel County, Maryland], but it also gave me an opportunity to do something that I love plus during the time while I worked here, I met a number of really bright people with some very good jobs and, of course, being from the Deep South, I automatically asked as I talked, "Well, where did you go to school?" And the answers that I'd get are, "Well, I went to Anne Arundel Community College [Arnold, Maryland], or I went to Bowie [Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland] for a couple of years," or, "I don't have a college degree." And so, over and over, I, you know, people would say this so that when Dr. Simmons asked me to start the program here, I was very excited because I already had in mind the people I would ask to become students because Sojourner-Douglass [Sojourner-Douglass College, Edgewater, Maryland] is an adult evening college and it is organized for midcareer people who, for whatever reason, had not finished college, some of them might have started, dropped out, but at this point in their lives, they see the need for college education and they are ready return, and the only thing that's holding them back are the job, the family, church, community work. So, Sojourner-Douglass actually organized the program so that these people can fulfill all of their obligations, yet embark upon attaining a college degree, and I say that we really try to make the process as convenient as possible without jeopardizing the integrity of our program, because we are accredited by Middle States [Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools], just as Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland], the University of Maryland, and so on. Many times, when we recruit people and we talk about our program and how flexible it is and what they can do, they'll say, "Well, is this a legitimate college?" We stated, "Oh yes. We're very, very much legitimate, but we are small enough and we're private. We're, we have the distinction of being the only private predominantly African American institution in the State of Maryland." So, being private, it doesn't take much for us to have our program fit the needs of our students. So, we started with ten students; ten students that I picked. People accused me of cherry picking, but I knew exactly who I would ask and they came aboard. We held classes, as I say, to some people, from pillar to post wherever we could; sometimes, held classes in my house, held classes at churches, at the Community Action Agency [Community Action Agency of Anne Arundel County, Annapolis, Maryland].
Story_ID: 596706
Speaker 1: At the time, only had myself and Dr. Catherine Henry [ph.] as a teacher. I did everything that my entire staff does now. That's hard to believe. As I say, we started with the ten students, and then in about six or seven years, we had two hundred students. We were outgrowing space all of the time and, of course, space in Annapolis [Maryland] is very expensive, and each time I would talk to my vice president about negotiating for some more space. We were at 49 Old Solomons Island Road, and every time somebody moved off of the third floor, I would ask my administration to negotiate for it, 'cause I knew that we were gonna eventually fill it; well, it got to be so expensive that Tom Schubert, who was our landlord at the time, offered to build us a school, that it would be, you know, more cost efficient if we had our own building, so we decided to do that and there's a whole story about finding this piece of land. I would just say that this property that we're on now, six acres, costs less than one acre would have cost in Annapolis and we just feel that we are tremendously lucky to have, first of all, identified the property, second of all to have been able to get somebody to build the kind of facility that we have. Now, of course, it did not come without problems. There were people who decided that we shouldn't be here and during the course of time, we worked through, we went to court several times and, regarding this, the circuit court ruled in our favor first, and then the Court of Special Appeals ruled in the opposition's favor, and then later on we took it up to the court of appeals where we prevailed. The good thing about it was that we really received more publicity than we could have ever paid for, and now everybody around knows Sojourner-Douglass [Sojourner-Douglass College, Edgewater, Maryland]. We frequently say that Sojourner-Douglass is the best kept secret in higher education in Maryland, but everybody knows we are here and what it took for us to remain.
Speaker 2: Now, the school began here in, was it, 1993?
Speaker 1: We began in Annapolis in 1993. We've only been in this building three years.
Speaker 2: Three years. Okay. Beautiful building.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: And you, and you share it with one of the charter schools? Or you rent out space (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We lease it, we lease it to them during the day. That's the KIPP charter school [KIPP Harbor Academy, Edgewater, Maryland], the Knowledge is Power Program. It's a national program. They're having, they were having and they continue to have a difficult time finding space in this area. We agreed to lease to them for one year and then they came back the second year and now they are back the third year, so we are really going to enter into negotiations to see what we can do. We've been mostly piecemealing, but we need to really determine whether or not they're going to move and if they're not, we can, perhaps, go on with our permanent expansion and build it so that it will, will accommodate them. But, they're here from 7:30 until 5:30, and our students come from six to ten p.m. every day except Saturday, and we're open from eight until four on Saturday, and occasionally KIPP will come in, well they co- they have class two Saturdays per month.
Story_ID: 596707
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned some people did not want you to be here. Was, was this the people in the community? What people didn't want to have a higher education, institution (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, this is the--that's hard to imagine, isn't it? But, South River Colony [Edgewater, Maryland] is a planned community with multimillion dollar houses on one side of us and then some other very expensive places on the other side. Now, one of the property owners in South River Colony decided that it wasn't a good idea. He attempted to get his community association to join in a suit against us. They refused, so what he did, he went across the community, across Mayo Road, and he was able to solicit the London Towne Association [London Towne Property Owners Association, Edgewater, Maryland] to file suit against us, and their position was that we had not fulfilled the covenant for this property. Our position was that we had, and it's my thinking that they really did underestimate us to think that we would embark upon such a project without understanding what our rights were; but, nevertheless, it did cause trouble for us and I think that they thought perhaps we would give up. Many people in the community on both sides believe that it was racial. Now, many reporters have attempted to get me to say that it was. I refused, and I refused on the basis of these things. People, both black and white, had helped us acquire this land and to build this building. Tom Schubert is white. We are an African American institution [Sojourner-Douglass College, Edgewater, Maryland]. I did not want to say racism, because the moment you say that then you divide the community. You just divide it, that's, and you know. And then the other thing is that I'd say to them, well you know I'm from Mississippi, and I am accustomed to working in racist situations, and it never stopped me and I don't intend this to stop me and I don't intend to spend the time to address whether or not it's racism. We know that we did the right thing. We know that there's no reason for us not being here, and so we continued to work. We continued to do what we needed to do. We continued to recruit and have classes. They even, at one point, wanted to have us torn down. That was to be the remedy. And, of course, all of this was a distraction and, but we continued and we prevailed and we feel good about being here.
Story_ID: 596708
Speaker 1: You have your hands full with just this institution [Sojourner-Douglass College, Edgewater, Maryland] alone, but you continue to do in the community also. Tell me about the different organizations that you work with.
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, well of course I'm a life member of Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], and I don't attend meetings as regularly as my sorors would like me to. I'm a member of The Links, Incorporated, and I continued to complain that it's hard being a good Link and I spend more time working for them than I probably should, but I do enjoy it. Of course, I have, I belong to church here. Richard [Fairley's second husband, HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] and I were members of the Northeastern Presbyterian Church in Washington, D.C., because he had a family connection there. His father [Richmond Fairley] was a founding minister of one of the churches that merged to become Northeastern, but since his death, I've joined the First Presbyterian Church here in Annapolis [Maryland], in the city of Annapolis. I serve on different boards. I'm a member of a 21st Century Club, that's a group of women, decision making leaders in the Annapolis, Anne Arundel County [Maryland] area. I rather enjoyed this. It gives us a chance to network, find out what's going on and many people in that group are people who are able to help us in what we are attempting to do here and, of course, I am a grandma and I have my grandchildren every now and then, but I enjoy being busy and I've said to people from time to time before Richard passed away, "We both failed retirement. We both retired but we continued to work and I find a lot of joy in my work."
Story_ID: 596709
Speaker 1: Tell me about your, your children, what they're doing today.
Speaker 2: Okay, my daughter, Nina--Nina Romelle Hickson [Nina Hickson], is in, I say living in Atlanta [Georgia], but she really lives in East Point, Georgia. She is the city attorney there. Prior to that, she was on the bench for the juvenile court in Fulton County [Georgia]. During the time she was the judge there, she adopted a baby girl and, of course, she found that her job and taking care of Wesley [Wesley Hickson] was a bit much, so she stepped down and now she's, you know, she's working as city attorney. My son, William Franklin Hickson III [William F. Hickson III], is a college football coach, and he's had jobs at many, many institutions and he enjoys coaching. He knew when he was five years old that this is what he wanted to do. I tried to discourage him and, because I thought, you know, it didn't offer enough security, but I find that he gets a lot of pleasure and joy out of, out of his coaching and his work, and he has a community of players that have gone pro and they keep up with him and that kind of thing, and his son says, "I'm gonna be just like my daddy. I'm gonna be a coach." So, he's at, he's coaching at Liberty University in Lynchburg [Virginia]. Then my younger son, George Gregory [George O'Neal Hickson], lives in Bowie [Maryland], and he's worked in the private nonprofit sector. He's currently working for, as a program director for the Boys and Girls Club [Boys and Girls Clubs of America] in Washington, D.C. Now Neal has two children, Samantha [Samantha Hickson] and Adam [Adam Hickson]. Samantha has just made sixteen. I can hardly believe it. Adam is nine, going on ten. My son, Frank, has two children, a boy and a girl, Leidra [Leidra Hickson] and Franklin IV, William Franklin IV [William F. Hickson IV], and, of course, Nina has Wesley Victoria, and she is quite a handful but quite delightful. I just enjoy having her around. She's seven, so she comes to visit me occasionally.
Story_ID: 596710
Speaker 1: Now, you were able to travel a little bit. Tell me about your trip to Zimbabwe.
Speaker 2: Oh. That was a wonderful trip. That was a trip that, I think, Richard [Fairley's second husband, HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] was down seeing Dr. Dorothy Height [HistoryMaker Dorothy Height] about something, and she found out that they were travelling to South Africa and Zimbabwe for the African, African American conference, and so he said, "You always wanted to go to Africa. I signed you up." So, I was real happy about that, and I had never traveled to Africa before and I really had, I wanted to and I had asked him to take me and he said, "No, I'm not going to take you. You go on your own." It was just wonderful. I just love, we went to Victoria Falls. The people, I'd say it's real interesting 'cause I could look around and see people who looked like my aunts and cousins and, you know, I just felt a real kinship there, and I can just tell you a little story. I don't know if we have time, but, you know our names have changed--we've been Negro, colored, black, African American, and so on, so when it was determined that we would be called African Americans, I'd say, "No, I am not African American, I am black." It took me, it was very difficult becoming black, I said, because it was during the time I was in graduate school [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. Black was beautiful. I wasn't quite black enough, but I had to be black and, you know, we had these circles of conversation, I said, but I became black and I can't become African American. But, when I went to the first assembly of this conference in Zimbabwe and looked around. I said, "Now, I am African American. I am definitely African American." I just felt (unclear) I'm real comfortable with that.
Story_ID: 596711
Speaker 1: Besides your directorship here, you also have positions at other schools?
Speaker 2: I had. I, I don't do as much, I used to teach in the graduate school at Bowie [Bowie State University, Bowie, Maryland], and that was, you know, part of keeping my hands in higher education. I have taught for Nova University [Nova University of Advanced Technology; Nova Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] I've done consulting and evaluations at various schools, but I really don't have time to do as much of that as I once did. When Richard [Fairley's second husband, HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] was alive, we have a small company called CRF and Associates [CRF and Associates, Inc., Edgewater, Maryland], and we divided the work so that I did the work with colleges and universities. He did work with school systems, K to twelve [kindergarten to twelfth grade]. That's how we kind of divided the work for our, for our business. Now that he's passed away, I'm looking to do, provide more services in the area of higher education. I don't think that I'm that equipped to work with secondary or with the school systems. However, I may find someone who's willing to work with me in the business. But, for now, most of my time is spent here at Sojourner-Douglass [Sojourner-Douglass College, Edgewater, Maryland], plus we have a number of exciting and outstanding projects on the drawing board. We have a benefactor, Mr. Harrell Spruill [HistoryMaker Harrell Spruill], an African American farmer down at Tracys Landing [Maryland], has given us forty acres of land, the equipment, the barn, and also he gave us funds to build an education center down there where we're going to have what we call our farm project. So, you know, we're right in the middle of that and I'm real excited about it, because the building we build will be a green building. We have a consultant now to look at the kinds of crops that we're going to grow; hopefully, crops that will be lucrative. I don't know that much about farming but I do think that it should be revenue bearing and, of course, Mr. Spruill wishes the land to continue to be farmland, as well as the people in the community. We've already talked with them about what we intend to do, and the people in that community would not like to see that land turned over to a developer or that the land be used in any other way other than for farming. So, we've got to complete that.
Speaker 1: Okay. I'm not sure I understand, what's CRF and Associates?
Speaker 2: CRF and Associates--that's a business that I started prior to my husband's retirement from the federal government. Because of his position, he was not able to work in it or do anything, so I started it because I was a civilian and it's a consulting business. It provides educational services--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to educational institutions, and I was saying my focus has been on higher education.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: His focus has been, has been on the K through twelve. So, it's, it's our business, the business that keeps us from retiring.
Story_ID: 596712
Speaker 1: You talk about Richard's [Fairley's second husband, HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] passing away. When did he pass away?
Speaker 2: On July 24, this year.
Speaker 1: So in 2006.
Speaker 2: Two thousand six [2006].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Is there anything that we haven't talked about that you would like to add?
Speaker 2: I can't think. It seems we've talked so much, I can't--I haven't talked this much since I was a little girl.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And told not to talk so much, but I would just like to say that I'm honored that, to have been selected for this interview. As I told you before, I didn't know that I, I didn't think that I'd done anything all that significant, but I know that Richard was interviewed early on, and he'd say, "Well, you need to be interviewed." And I'd say to him, "Not yet, not yet. I haven't done enough." You know, but I've had a very fulfilling life and my life with Richard was really great because we had similar interests, we had our life together, and then we had life apart and we could always come together and enjoy each other 'cause we shared, we could share a lot of things from a different perspective.
Story_ID: 596713
Speaker 1: Because this interview is going to be in an archive that generations down through the years will have access to, what message would you send to the future generations?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, the message, the thing that comes to mind is to never give up. Never give up on yourself, never give up on life. Never give up on a situation. You can always make it better. You just get up and start all over. Continue to follow your dreams. Follow your inclinations. Continue to fight for those things that you consider to be important and to be right.
Speaker 1: And what advice would you give someone entering college, or in high school?
Speaker 2: The advice I would give would be to study, study, study. Study hard. Don't just get by, 'cause there's so much information out there today that you need to have knowledge, just as KIPP says, Knowledge is Power [Knowledge is Power Program], and to the extent that you're able to manage and understand knowledge is the extent that you will be successful in life and will not be overwhelmed by life. So, it's very important to learn and to study as much as you can.
Story_ID: 596714
Speaker 1: Now, listening to your story, I believe that you have a great legacy. Tell me either what do you want your legacy to be, or how do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I want to be remembered as an outstanding educator and that's so contrary to the way I thought as a youngster, but I'd like to be remembered as an outstanding educator.
Speaker 1: And, your legacy?
Speaker 2: I'm not quite sure, I'm not quite sure. I'm not there yet (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, all right. Well, I want to thank you for taking the time to share your story with us for the future generations. I just want to say thank you from The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
