Story_ID: 7354
Speaker 1: We're gonna start by slating it--the piece.  So I want you to state your name and spell it for us and give your birth date and today's date.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What is today's date real quick?
Speaker 1: It's May 17, 2001.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm Doctor Harold P. Freeman.  I was born March the 2nd, 1933.  And today's date is May the 17th.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) 2001.
Speaker 2: 2001.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What does the "P" stand for in your name?
Speaker 2: Paul.
Speaker 1: Paul.  Okay.
Speaker 2: It is Paul.
Speaker 1: And can we have your profession and the location we're at today?
Speaker 2: I'm a medical doctor.  Actually a surgical oncologist.  And today we're sitting in North General Hospital in the community of Harlem.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give the address of the hospital?
Speaker 2: 1879 Madison Avenue, 10035 New York, New York.
Story_ID: 7355
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is corn (chuckling).
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yellow.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring to summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't have a favorite phrase.
Story_ID: 7356
Speaker 1: You know, we were talking right before we started about your family background. And I would like you to recount it for us on your--actually father's side.  But I'd like you--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 1: to go into that history and how you even found out about it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  In 1965, I was a resident in surgical oncology at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City [New York].  And one month, I believe it may have been March of that year, I happened to be getting Time magazine delivered to my apartment here in New York City.  My wife and I lived here with my two children.  And on the cover of that magazine was a picture of Robert Weaver.  The reason he was on the cover was because he had been appointed by President Lyndon Johnson as the first Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, a newly developed department in Government.  And he also became the first black secretary in government, by that appointment.  So his picture was on the front of the magazine. And, therefore, the main article in the magazine was about his life. Now it happens that Robert Weaver is my cousin.  In fact, I did not know him personally at the time that I read it. But I knew he was my cousin.  So I read the article with a great deal of interest.  And in the article, it told not only of his professional background and how he got to, to this appointment, which was a very important appointment, of course.  But it also told about his family background.  And his family background by virtue of the point that I'm his cousin is also my family background.  I had no inkling of my family background until I read this magazine on that particular day, in 1965.  Now the background is in essence--describes a slave in Raleigh, North Carolina who worked for a slave owner whose name was--I later found out the 'Honorable Mr. Badger' is the slave owner's name.  That's not in the article but I did find that out later.  And this slave apparently was a skilled carpenter. Which he had learned no doubt on his own.  And he was so skilled, that the slave owner allowed him to work off plantation when he finished his slave duties.  Which I presume was not just a forty-hour week.  So late at night and on weekends, he could go and work in the nearby village, surrounding the plantation and earn money, half of which the slave owner let him keep for himself.  And half he gave to the slave owner.  So the slave owner had a double value here.  He had a fulltime slave and then he kept--he, he was paid half of what the slave earned off slave hours.  But on the other hand, in a way--and in another--so thinking of it in a way, it  was a sort of a liberal slave owner.  Because he, number one, let the slave work off premises and he let the slave keep half of what he earned.  And so looking at the time, it was sort of a liberal act on the part of this slave owner.  If you look at that act today, it wouldn't be liberal at all. But that's what happened.  So the slave then earned enough money to buy his freedom.  And he bought his freedom in 1838 in Raleigh, North Carolina.  He was manumitted. That's the term that is used--was used then when slaves are handed over in a way.  That's the literal translation of manumitted.  In 1838 for $3,000.  And $3000.00 in 1838. I don't know how to calculate how much that is.  Because, you know, that's a very, very long time ago. $3,000 is not a small amount of money even today.  But that's what it cost him to buy his own personal freedom from his slave owner, the Honorable Mr. Badger.  And--But that did not allow him to buy his wife and his four children who, who remained as slaves.  He in fact, when--but an interesting point which is pointed out in the article in Time Magazine, is that when the slave became free by that manumission, he called himself "Freeman" because he was free.  In fact, that's how I got my own name, which is Harold Freeman.  Now the slave then was working full-time for himself after he was free.  And he saved up enough money in approximately four years--It was around 19--it was around 1842 this--the former slave bought his wife and his four children from slavery for, for $1500.00.  So by then--so by 1842, he was free and his family was free.  And interestingly, this former slave had a son. And I think the son was born after the slavery period.  I don't think the son was a slave according to what I understand.  But that son whose name is Robert Freeman finished Harvard Dental School in 1869, in what I believe is the--was the first Harvard Dental School class of any type.  And I think there were seven students in the class.  And this black man whose name was Robert Freeman finished dentistry at Harvard in 1869.  And became the first black dentist in America by that accomplishment.  So my--To indicate the relationship that I have to this slave, the slave then is my great-great grandfather.  Who bought his freedom in 1838 and called himself "Free man" because he was free.  And that is my name.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  Now--Oh, can you trace the history of your great-great grandfather and then down to your, you know, to your father?  What--do you know what that--?
Speaker 2: Sketchily..  It seemed that the family in which the dentist lived was a middle class family apparently.  Apparently they were educated people relative to the time.  And so I don't know--do not know what their, their jobs were, or  what their employment was.  But by looking at certain documents--they owned property for example.  My great-great-grandfather who was a slave--I have a document that indicates that he owned property in Washington, D.C. within fifteen years after he bought his freedom.  So some-, something happened to allow him to earn a certain amount of money.  He moved to Washington soon after he bought his freedom.  And there's a document that I have that indicates that he owned property.  And his brothers--There were many brothers and perhaps one or two sisters.  They seemed to be people who were educated and property owners by at least the 1860s.  So this, if you put it into perspective, recalling that the Civil War was fought and ended in 1865. Here we have a family that was black coming out of slavery that had some means, even before the Civil War was fought.  And had a son of the slave who finished Harvard Dental School four years after the end of the Civil War.  And I think this is a very interesting history. And one that--and one that--that strengthens me and, of course, I'm sort of standing on the shoulders of these ancestors who in a sense, you might say, had a head start.  By virtue of the history of what happened.  To have been free in 1838, a quarter of a century before the Emancipation Proclamation is a head start for the--for your progeny.  Because you've had a chance to earn money.  To be educated.  To have property.  So in a sense I would say, that was a tremendous head start for me and my brothers and people surrounding me and my family.  Because the history of America indicates that African-Americans who were then called blacks or Negro or various other terms, had no opportunity to earn money or own property until the end of the Civil War and a period of Reconstruction.  And even then, that was the act of freeing the slaves--it was not accompanied by any economic benefits for those slaves.  It was--it was an act of--by the President [Abraham] Lincoln.  He freed the slaves.  But what was missing was giving them an economic opportunity. I mean if you just free people who've been slaves all their lives, they only have slave skills.  They, they have no land, they had no money.  They became sharecroppers.  But my family just by contrast, had through what was done by them and through the opportunities that they had were--they were landowners and were educated. Even before the end of the Civil War.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So this is an important thing I think for us all to understand that this thing did happen in some families.
Speaker 1: You know, that's really a fascinating story. And when--during the break, I want to talk to you about the Freeman thing.  But I want to get--So your father Clyde [Freeman], did he know about the family history? Or was this a revelation to the whole family when you saw that article?
Speaker 2: My father did not know about this.  My father died when I was thirteen years old.  And so I don't believe he knew it.  At least he never discussed it with us.  My mother [Lucille Thomas Freeman] did not know it.  And she was alive at the time that I found this out.  So I don't believe my family knew this at all.  Until we found out from reading our family history in Time magazine.
Story_ID: 7357
Speaker 1: Now your father, his name was Clyde and he was a lawyer.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: Right?  Now can you tell me--I mean I didn't realize that he had, you know, passed away when you were thirteen. But can you tell me about your father, and what type of person he was? And--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: you know, what you--
Speaker 2: Well let me go back to his father.  My father's father was a physician in Washington, DC.  He was a schoolteacher prior to that.  And he went to night school at Howard University Medical School, which had a night medical school. Which allowed him to (chuckling) go to medical school. Kind of interesting.  And he finished Howard University Medical School in 1898.  That's my father's father, Doctor Henry W. Freeman. Then who was in the generation after the dentist who was called Robert Freeman.  He was in generation after that.  Now so my father, who was born at the turn of the century 1900, grew up in a family of--who his father was a physician.  So he had some means.  However, my grandfather did not believe in giving direct help to his children.  He believed, and argue right or wrong, that they should make it on their own.  And that's--that he practiced that very--in a very thorough way.  He tithed ten per cent of everything he earned to the church. I saw him do that.  I got to know this guy.  I would see him put some money in a box with a--and I'm sure he'd put ten per cent of what he earned in the box for his church.  But he didn't want to directly support his children.  He would do--give them the basics, food and clothing. But he said they had to make it on their own.  I think that was his philosophy.  So it meant that my father really had a bit of a struggle, even though his father had means.  And I think this is an interesting point.  So my father ultimately finished high school at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School in Washington, DC. Which is also the school that I went to and my mother went to.  Dunbar High School.  A very significant high school in Washington.  But he then went to the steel mills in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to work (laughing).  Because he didn't have any direct help from his father who had that particular attitude.  That he had to make it on his--so he went to work.  And ultimately, he came back to Washington and he, he--My mother and father were married at--I don't know the exact year that they were married.  But it was perhaps around 1920 or so that they were married.  And my father went to law school at so--a place called [Robert H.] Terrell Law School [Washington, D.C.] which was not a major law school.  But he could go in the evening.  He worked as a, a taxi cab driver and a security guard.  And he went to, to, to evening law school and he got his--got his law degree.  He got his law degree when he was about forty years old.  And--But he died when he was forty-six years old.  So that--But he was a very, very religious man.  We had to go to church every Sunday, my two brothers and I, Catholic Church.  We had to go to confession.  We had to go to communion.  And I must say that, although I am not a heavily religious person at this point, that experience did have a deep positive effect on my life, with respect to ethics and morals and concerns and spiritual concerns.  So--But he died when I was thirteen.  And so he didn't--Though he was a lawyer, he never earned very much money.
Story_ID: 7358
Speaker 1: How did your parents meet?  Do you know that part?
Speaker 2: I do.  My parents [Clyde Freeman and Lucille Thomas Freeman] met on the tennis court. And they were both living in Washington, DC.  My mother had come to Washington from the south.  I think she was in Birmingham, Alabama at a certain point.  And that's a different story.  But they met in Washington, DC, when they were about 18 or so.  See they were both born in 1900 or there about. And they met in 1918 or '20, 1920 when they both went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to play in a tennis tournament. Not having known each other in Washington, they met in Philadelphia. Because they both went to play in different events at a tennis tournament.  They met and a few years later I think after that they were married.  So in a way I owe a lot to tennis. Because my parents met on the tennis court  (laughing).
Story_ID: 7359
Speaker 1: I was asking about your mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And her, you know, her background.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Okay.  My mother was born in Galveston, Texas. And she--Her family history that I know about which is also sketchy, it seems that her mother's father was an Irish sea captain.  Irish sea captain. Who had a boat that went across the ocean.  He, he brought goods from some part of Europe to the port around Texas. And so we believe that my grandmother or my mother's mother was the daughter of that Irish Sea Captain. Who had the child by a black woman.  And we don't know anything about that black woman.  But--So my mother's mother was the daughter of an Irish sea captain and someone who was a black woman.  We don't know the nature of that--of who she was.  So that was--She was born in Galveston, Texas and she tells me the story.  And her financial situation was at least middle class  . Because of this connection--
Speaker 1: (Telephone rings.)
Speaker 2: Go ahead
Speaker 1: You were just saying that--you were explaining about your mother's--you know, that not much is known but she lived a middle class background.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That is where you were.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But what I wanted to know while you're telling the story, your mother's first name was Lucille. But what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name that she ultimately adopted was Thomas. But that was not her original maiden name which I don't know what that was.  I'd have to look that up.  My--Apparently, the husband of her mother left.  The marriage split up very, very early.  And there's a name of that person but I don't know the name of that person.  But then my mother's mother married somebody whose last name was Thomas.  So my mother called herself Lucille Thomas Freeman.  If, if I had the other information, I could find out if there was another person.  But that person was not on the scene very long. So I do not know the name of that person.  But I--but I understand that that person was heavily Native American in his background.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  So you said that, "Your mother lived a very middle class lifestyle." And you also said that, she--" wait.  You said--I thought you said she also lived in Birmingham. And that was a story.  And I'm  just--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah.  Well--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) --wondering what--?
Speaker 2: Now here my memory may not be--I--I'd have to look at all this again. But  my mother--my mother's mother was married to someone whose last name was Thomas, who was a minister. And he was a respected minister, and he traveled.  So he got assigned to different cities to do his work.  He belonged to a church that had a national meaning. And at a certain point, based on his moving around, she lived in Birmingham, Alabama.  And as a matter of fact, she said that they had a private tennis court.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So that would be an indication of some level of resources.  And she went to Spelman High School [Atlanta, Georgia].  Spelman [College] had a high school.  And so she--And she was a woman who grew up with a fair amount of me--not rich, but at least middle class, and able to get an education at Spelman which was a private school for, at that time, for black women I believe.  I don't think it was the Spelman College.  I think it was the Spelman High School that developed ahead of that.  And then  she--Her family then moved from Alabama [?] to Washington, D.C., at a certain point.  And that brought her in the same city where my father-to-be also lived.  So she then went to teachers' college, which was called Minor Teachers' College [Washington, D.C.], and  became a schoolteacher.  And so her background is interesting, in that she was from a family that had some means.  That was able to give her an education and an upbringing with some culture.  She gave us an interesting story that when she was in Galveston, Texas apparently there was a flood in Galveston [1900]. And her--Whether she was living during the time or whether it had just occurred in her family--her mother told her about it.  She remembers that the flood drove her family out of Galveston.  I think it was around the turn of the century.  It was a hu--very huge flood.  She also remembered that in Galveston, the white family that was next door built a wall that was as high as the second floor of her house in order to create a barrier between the white family and the black family.  She remembered that as well.  So that's something that struck me as being very, very different.
Speaker 1: Now she was raised--Her father was a minister right?  You said?
Speaker 2: Her--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Her stepfather.
Speaker 2: Her stepfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she--What was her religious--Was he--
Speaker 2: Well it was a Protestant religion. And so she came up Protestant. But when she married my father she never joined the Catholic Church. But she went to the Catholic Church as part of that family.  In fact, she continued to go to the Catholic Church until she died, at the age of 92 years old or just before that.  So she never joined the church formally. But even after my father died in 1946, my mother continued to go to the Catholic Church until about 19--until about 1990 or so when she couldn't go anymore.
Story_ID: 7360
Speaker 1: Now I know your parents [Clyde Freeman and Lucille Thomas Freeman] met in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--Philadelphia--it was on the tennis court.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: What I--what I'm curious about, was there any sense of the family sort of matching? I mean even though they met themselves.  Was there any--was there any sort of that among the black middle class that you, you know, that you got any inkling of from their story?
Speaker 2: By matching, you mean--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Meaning that, you know, how some families--you know--you would have to be from the right family.
Speaker 2: No, No.  It appeared that there was no matching in this case.  It looked in fact--apparently, my mother had other boyfriends at the time. According to what she said. And that this particular match, well it didn't fit into matching at all.  It was sort of a diversion from--She was going out with a physician at the time who apparently wanted to marry her. And she, she rejected that relationship and, and married my father.
Story_ID: 7361
Speaker 1: We were talking about your parents. And I was getting ready to ask about your siblings, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: and where you fit. You have--There were two other brothers.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Two brothers.
Speaker 1: So where are you in the--I'd like to know their names--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I'm--Okay.  They're both dead now.  Okay.  I'm the youngest of three boys.  The oldest, his name was Clyde, named after his father.  And he was a gynecologist. Gynecological oncologist actually,  trained at Memorial Sloan-Kettering.  And he died four years ago. He's the oldest son.  The middle son, his name was Thomas and he was named after my mother's maiden name. And he was a plumber in Washington, DC.  And he died in his early fifties.  And then there was me.
Speaker 1: Now what were the age differences between you?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Two years--My middle brother was two years older than I.  My oldest brother was three and a half years older than I.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 7362
Speaker 1: Now what are some of your earliest memories, you know, growing up?
Speaker 2: Well some of my earliest memories--I remember, go back to the tennis actually. Because my mother [Lucille Thomas Freeman]and father [Clyde Freeman] were real lovers of tennis back then--They were lovers because of tennis in a way (laughing). They met on the tennis court.  So my mother would take us three boys to the tennis courts when we were very young, even, even in a baby carriage.  And so as soon as I could walk, I was go--we were going to the tennis court.  The three boys, my mother.  She played.  By that time my father was not playing.  So instead of taking us to the swings and see-saws, we went to the tennis court.  Now that's a very, very early memory. And to begin to play tennis when I was about four or five years old.  And to get into the discipline of a sport like that was very important, with respect to forming my, my, my approach to life.  I mean at the age of eight years old I was playing in tennis tournaments. And so I was very--It was very critical for me to know how to hit the ball, to practice hard. To know how to hit a backhand cross-court, down the line, serve well. But I--And by age fifteen, I had won the [American Tennis Association] National Championship for--It was only for African-American or black people who were called Negroes I believe at the time.  So I was the National Champion in that age group by the time that I was fifteen years old.  So I remember tennis.  Tennis is a very big memory for all of me and my family.  And it kind of kept my family together. Because we traveled around the east coast to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], to Baltimore [Maryland], to  Wilberforce, Ohio. They had a big black tournament in Wilberforce for many years, the national championships--to New York City [New York] to play in tennis tournaments.  And even though by that time, my father had died [1946] for much of that, the family kept making tennis the center of its activity.
Speaker 1: Hmm. That, you know--That's decidedly middle class in many ways too.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm. .  It is.
Speaker 1: So you're back in that--Now what was the organization that, you know, the African--the black organization that you were a part of and that you won the championship?
Speaker 2: It was called the American Tennis Association. And see, when I was growing up, you could not play tennis--I could not play tennis with white people at all.  It was--there's just no mix.  And so the--Just like it happened in other parts of life, the Medical Association, the Lawyers Association, the Tennis Association, probably the Bridge Assoc--I mean, blacks formed their own organizations.  And so they--in the same light, they formed the American Tennis Association around I think 1906 [sic, 1916]. Where many black organizations--I believe the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and all those organ--many organizations that are national in scope were formed around the turn of the century or just after that.  And the American Tennis Association was one such organization that was formed.  And these things were formed I believe, so blacks could have a way to play together or to communicate together, across disciplines and within disciplines. Dental association, medical, law--Very significant.  And in fact, I think it's very significant even today that these organizations still persist.  That came out of a need to bring black people together culturally, economically, with respect to interest.  Because they had no--In a segregated society they were being oppressed.  And in fact, it's very interesting that during the Harlem Renaissance in the 1920s--That's something that I've looked into with respect to science.  The question came up about who is black during the Harlem Renaissance  (chuckling).  And prior to that, blacks had resisted the one-drop rule. Which indicates that anyone with one black ancestor is black.  But it's a racist rule.  Whites forced that rule on blacks indicating you couldn't be white if you had a black ancestor even though it was 200 years ago.  You're still--you're still 'contaminated.'  blacks had resisted that rule until the Harlem Renaissance right here in Harlem, New York in the 1920s. When essentially, black people who were educated people of all hues, some were very fair skinned and some were very dark skinned, came together.  And more or less said, "We're all being oppressed, we're all being treated the same way.  Let's be all--let's all call ourselves all Negro or black.  Let's call ourselves the same thing."  So it was the adoption of the one-drop rule not only by the white community, which had forced it, but also, then by the black community.  And that's the way it is today.
Story_ID: 7363
Speaker 1: Do you have other memories of growing up?  You know, and I'm gonna ask maybe even pre your father's death?  You know, because I--But are there memories of either home life or, you know, your--brothers or ch--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Um-hmm. .
Speaker 1: around church or --
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember that religion was very, very important in my family.  Very, very important.  There was no doubt that my two brothers and I had to go to church.  Not that we--We  didn't resist it either. But that was a part of our life really.  You know, very religious upbringing.  Church every Sunday, communion, confession.  This was a strong influence.  And I think it's an important point, for me. Because no matter what I believe now with respect to religion, it doesn't much matter.  I had that experience for--In fact, it lasted all the way through college for me. Because I went to the Catholic University of America, related to that.  And so I was a very strong Catholic, at least through college.  And irrespective of what my beliefs are now, that experience had a deep effect on me spiritually, morally, ethically.  It's just like you give baby milk, in a way, sort of an analogy,  because you say you need the milk to make your bones strong, your mother will tell you that.  In fact, my mother did tell me that  (laughing).  "You have to drink this milk."  They were saying a quart a day--that was kind of heavy (laughing).  But to--So at a certain point though, I got to the point, I said, "I don't like milk anymore."  I was about sixteen or sevent-.  I was old enough to--that my mother couldn't say, "You have to drink the milk."  But the point is that the calcium was in my bones. Even though I had stopped drinking milk, I couldn't take the calcium out of my bones.  In the same way, a religious upbringing I think is analogous of that. And it doesn't matter whether it's Catholic or Episcopalian or anything else.  That experience stays with you I think. And you, you cannot extract yourself from it.  You cannot forget it.  It's part of you.  And that's what happened to me. So I believe--I'm very happy in, in looking back, that I had this very powerful religious experience. Because I think it influenced me to be who I am today to a large extent.
Story_ID: 7364
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in the same neighborhood pretty much the whole time? Or--And what was your address in Washington [D.C.]?  And what--
Speaker 2: Well I lived at 3005 11th Street Northwest. Which was at 11th and Columbia Road. And I was born in Washington, lived in that house from the point of birth all the way until I got married in 1957.  I was born in '33 [1933]. I lived there until 1957.  So I lived there through elementary school, through junior high school, through high school at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.], through college at Catholic University [of America, Washington, D.C.] and into medical school-- in one, in one place.
Speaker 1: Now what was that community like that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Well the community--it was in northwest Washington.  All black communi--it's an all black community.  The interesting point to me is that, that, you know, it was an all black experience. And all black living conditions, neighbors, all black high school, totally black experience. And that was related to segregation itself that, that, that brought that on.  But the other side of that is that it was a very supportive experience. Very supportive.  If I was playing up the street or down the street or in the back of the house, and a neighbor would see me doing something wrong, she would call my mother.  And so it was a cohesive neighborhood.  Middle class to lower middle class people,  some poor people as well.  We, we, we were--I think would have to be classified as being poor at the time.  But cohesive, concerned community of people, which I think had a deep effect, had a deep effect.  An example of this sort of peculiar situation where the segregation, which is wrong but on the other hand, created a community of people.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry--(spoken to videographer:) Oh, he's going in the front, you need to hit--
Speaker 2: (Videographer:) I'm sorry, I can't (unclear)
Speaker 1: Okay, sorry. Go on.
Speaker 2: And then, th-, th- this sort of a striking situation.  You have a segregated society which we would all have to say is wrong to, to have to be segregated, on the one hand.  On the other hand, the society that I grew up in was very supportive.  A good example is Dunbar High School itself. Which historically was one of the best high schools in America.  One of the best high schools in America, Dunbar High School.  That's where I went to high school and it was one of the best high schools in America for a very peculiar reason.  Number one: if you were a young black person in Washington, D.C. during the time that I went to high school, and I finished high school in 1950.  So I was there for three years '47 [1947] to '50.  If you wanted to go to college, if that was your wish, your desire, your ambition, and you lived in Washington, DC, and you were black, you would go to Dunbar. Everyone knew that.  If you wanted to be a secretary or something of that order,  you would go to Cardoza [High School].  If you wanted to be--to fix automobiles or be technical, you would go to Armstrong [Manual Training High School] or Phelps [Vocational High School].  So there was a self-attraction of everyone from the whole city.  If you were black and you had ambition to go to college, you would almost certainly pick Dunbar.  So it picked--It was a magnet school for people, young people with ambition who were black.  At the same time, the teachers were teaching there for peculiar reasons as well.  There were teachers there who were Ph.D.s from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (laughing).  I remember a guy who was a Latin-Greek scholar, Mr. McDuffy [ph.] who was a brilliant guy. And there were many teachers like that who in the re--in a fair world, would have had I think, the opportunity to teach at the Harvards of America.  But they couldn't get jobs there.  And so they were attracted to this high school in Washington, DC.  So we had an extraordinary teaching faculty and a self-selected magnet group of young students who wanted to go to college.  And at one point, it is written that there were more Phi Beta Kappas in American who had finished Dunbar High School than Phi Beta Kappa's who had finished any other high school in America at one time. Related to this very peculiar relationship.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  No--th--Now the neighborhood that you were from, was it--did--was it given a special--specific name?  Did it have the community where you live?
Speaker 2: No.  There was no name for this community.  It was just 3005 11th.  It was 11th & Columbia Road. And it was a black community.
Story_ID: 7365
Speaker 1: In elementary school, where did you go? And  then to--did--Was there a junior high school?
Speaker 2: Right.  I went to Morgan Elementary School [Washington, D.C.]  Which was somewhat across town at 18th Street. And that was related to the point that my mother had a friend who taught kindergarten there.  And my mother at the point--at that point wanted to teach.  She needed to teach to--because of financial situation and she needed the money from teaching.  But I was four years old and I was too young to go to elementary school, to kindergarten. Because you had to be five years old.  And this particular friend of hers took me into her class when I was four years old. So my mother could teach elementary school herself elsewhere. And so I guess I--One of the failures that I have to admit in my life is that I spent two years in the kindergarten (laughing).
Speaker 1: (laughing) That's cute.  Okay.  That is cute.  (laughing)  (unclear).
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously laughing] They told me I was too young to advance. (laughing).
Speaker 1: (laughing) That's cute.  I know.
Speaker 2: (laughing) So I--
Speaker 1: (laughing).
Speaker 2: So then the reason I went to [Thomas P.] Morgan was that reason.  So I spent all the way through sixth grade. And then I went to [Benjamin] Banneker Junior High School [Washington, D.C.]. Which was closer to where I lived. And it was where actually I played tennis.  At the tennis courts at Banneker.  That's where my brothers and I played tennis for many, many years. And after that, I went to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School,, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 7366
Speaker 1: When your father passed away, what impact did that have on the family?
Speaker 2: My father passed away when I was  thirteen.  I was in the eighth grade.  My brothers were slightly older.  My mother was a schoolteacher.  My father was just beginning to earn some money. But had not quite got the (unclear) started.  He only--he died after being a lawyer for only 6 years.  And the last couple of years before he died he was ill. So he really had a lot of potential.  He'd become a lawyer late--relatively late in his life because of the struggle that he had to get educated, under the background that I told you about.  His father didn't really want to help him that much.  But then he died of testicular cancer.  Testicular cancer killed him.  And in looking back, I really have to say that influenced what happened to me later with respect to the direction that I took in my own personal education as a cancer doctor.  I think that had some influence on that. But that's a different story.  So my father's death was tragic. It was untimely.  It left my mother as the mother of three children who were between thirteen and sixteen at the time, as a schoolteacher. And schoolteachers of elementary school didn't make that much money. So it had a very deep effect.  Now my  grandfather was still alive at the time.  He outlived all of his sons by a few years.  So he died around the late 1940s.  And he could have helped, but still he had the same philosophy.  He didn't really--didn't really help at the--at that point.  So she was left to struggle with three young boys.  And she did a wonderful job.  She did an extraordinary job.  She kept us morally and ethically intact.  She kept us playing tennis.  We continued to play tennis.  Even if she had to borrow money for us to play in a tournament in Philadelphia.  She would--she had thought that was important.  And so on a meager salary, she kept the family together.  This was an extraordinary woman, Lucille Freeman.  An extraordinary--To whom I just owe everything.  Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean that--it's sort of--So she was a very strong woman in many ways?
Speaker 2: A very strong woman.  A very strong woman.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  Did you--So there was no--Did she--what were her support systems?  Do you know?  I mean at that point in time, does she have friends and, I mean--Because that's a lot, you know, three boys--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: and you're a woman.
Speaker 2: She had friends.  But she didn't have any other than being friends, there was no real support.  I mean there's no financial support.  She really--she--this woman was extraordinary.  She stayed the course.  She didn't even have romance that I knew of, or very little of it.  I mean--And my father died when she was 46.  And as I know, that might have seemed old to me when I was a kid, but now it's not.  It's not.  So  she focused on her children and left everything else outside.  Including relationships with other men, which were very minimal, to the best of my knowledge.  And she focused on her family.  So with a strong woman like that, who--the three of us were able to do reasonably well.  Two of us for example, finished medical school after that.  Two of us went on to higher training.  I personally went on to finishing general surgery at what was then called Freedmen's Hospital.  Freedmen's Hospital.  Which was established at the end of the Civil War as part of the Freedmen's Bureau.  Freedmen's Hospital existed before Howard University and was--it was built to take care of the medical needs of the slaves who had just been made free.  That hospital was the hospital where I did my training.  And Howard University Medical School was where I went to medical school,  became a general surgeon training at Freedmen's Hospital. Stayed there--Went from there to Memorial Sloan-Kettering [Cancer Center, New York, New York] where for three years I trained as a cancer surgeon.  So that's my background.
Story_ID: 7367
Speaker 1: Now what was the young Harold Freeman like as a young person?  You know, we all have--you were athletic obviously.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But you know.  What were your sort of--You know. Were you well behaved?  Were you mischievous?  Were you, you know--Were you a dreamer.  Were you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think I was well behaved but I also was mischievous.  I was--I was--but in a kind way.  I think I was a little bit of a mischievous young boy but--but was very, very disciplined.  Very disciplined and always stayed disciplined with respect to, to school.  For example, I finished Paul [Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.] in a class of 406 as the salutatorian of the class.  Having achieved a record of all "A's" except for two "B's."  And I remember giving the speech as salutatorian of the Dunbar High School class.  So that's an, an, an example of so being highly disciplined even at a young age.  Went on to--As a young boy, I, I had fun but I never went off track.  I sort of stayed on the track of studying hard and--and there was a religious aspect, which I've already described.  And had fun but the fun was secondary to, to the school.
Story_ID: 7368
Speaker 1: You were obviously talented in tennis.  Were you the most talented in your family or most athletic?
Speaker 2: My, my, my oldest brother [Clyde Freeman, Jr.] and I were about the same level of tennis skill.  We won the--in the same--the American Tennis Association men's doubles national championship in 1955, he and I together.  And we won many doubles tournaments together traveling around the country.  So we became--won a number of regional singles tournaments, personally myself and he did too.  So--we--he--my oldest brother and I were on a par with respect to skills.  And we actually were doubles partners.
Speaker 1: That's inter--'cause you both became doctors.
Speaker 2: And we both became doctors, yeah.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And did you--Was he like a mentor to you? Or were you more--was there sort of sibling rivalry of any sport going on?
Speaker 2: I think there was a certain amount of sib-sibling rivalry between the two of us.  I respected him.  At a certain point, I, I went ahead of him.  I finished medical school before he did for example.  And because he went in the Army, he, he didn't have as straight line of education as I did--he went to several different colleges.  He didn't find himself.  Ended up in the Army.  So whereas I finished medical school in 1958, my brother Clyde finished medical school in 1964.  So at a point, it may be and I don't want to judge this myself that--and I became sort of the, the mentor in a way.  I was the one that my mother, at least, thought of that way.
Speaker 1: So you were--were you the youngest child by any--you know how--you know, the baby of the family?  Was there any aspect of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I was the baby of the family but we were very close in age.  So it wasn't like baby, baby.  It was close but I don't remember being treated like I was a baby.
Speaker 1: Were you the one closest to your mother?
Speaker 2: I--I'm not sure.  I think that my mother--I think my oldest brother was very close and I too was very close.  And the oldest boy very often, you know, gets a certain kind of attention.  And I think that did happen.
Story_ID: 7369
Speaker 1: Who was influencing you in your, you know, sort of teens and your early, you know, adulthood?  Were there other people around the community--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: or people that you, you know, had an influence on you.  Or that you looked up to--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: or--
Speaker 2: There was one particular person that influenced me.  He was a gentleman who lived across the street from us on 11th Street [Washington, D.C.]  His name was William Penn McDonald [ph.].  And he was a highly educated person, though he worked as a postman.  Highly educated, finished City College in New York [New York].  And when my father died in 1946, William Penn McDonald came and asked my mother could he move into my basement [chuckled].  And at which point my mother said, "Well it's just a dingy little place.  You don't want to do that."  And he said; "Well, no, I'll do that.  I'll fix it up."  And so he moved into my basement (chuckle) in 1946.  And at that point I was thirteen years old.  My father had just died.  And so for--from that period all the ways at least into medical school, he lived in the basement of my house.  And became a kind of a mentor with respect to certain educational exposure.  He exposed me to literature and art and music.  And, and he would go over my studies with me.  So--I would have to say that this particular person who just lived in my house ha-had a deep influence on me in my early years.
Story_ID: 7370
Speaker 1: Was he [neighbor William Penn McDonald, whom Freeman describes as a mentor] of similar influence do you think to your brothers in some respects?  Or because you were at that critical age maybe--you think?
Speaker 2: Well he had a different influence.  My brothers influenced me a great deal.  But he--his influence was a scholarly influence.  Whereas my brothers, of course, were not scholars.
Story_ID: 7371
Speaker 1: You're at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C.]  and is it clear at this point that you're on the college track?  It's already clear that you're--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) It's very clear.
Speaker 1: --that you're on the college track.  What are the things--What is Harold Freeman like at this point?  (unclear)
Speaker 2: At this point?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What are your thoughts?  What are your sort of dreams and ambitions?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: What, you know, what things are you active in?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let me give you a little background about who Harold Freeman probably is.  I think that my background had a lot to do with who I am.  Not only what I've told you so far, but I've lived half of my life in legalized segregation.  It's a--I'm a very--I'm in a very special time--situation because I was born in 1933 and the Civil Rights Revolution was completed around mid '60s [1960s].  When Martin Luther King's movement took place, the Civil Rights Act, for example, of 1964, the Voting Act and the Fair Housing Act and the Fair Accommodation Act all occurred between '63 [1963] and '68 [1968].  So that is about roughly half of my life, '33 to that time.  And in the last say, 32 or so years, I am living in a country whose laws are fair, but the hearts and minds of the dominant society is not necessarily fair.  So I've lived on both sides of a chasm, growing up in a totally segregated city--but not being devastated by it at least outwardly, though I don't think you can escape devastation living in a segregated society for instance you can't go to the movies with white people, you can't eat in a restaurant, you can't go to school.  That has to have an effect. And I am sure it has, has had a deep effect on me, and then living half my life in, in this other society.
Speaker 1: But I was asking more a question of you at high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know. What were you, you know.  What was that young person like sort of at that point?
Speaker 2: Well in high school, I was a very, very driven student.  But I also continued to play tennis.  I won the regional high school championships related to high school three years in a row.  All three years I was there.  I was an outstanding tennis player.  So I concentrated on tennis and my studies and I did--and I excelled in both.  And I didn't have a lot of social life, but enough to please me at that time.
Story_ID: 7372
Speaker 1: How did the decision to go to Catholic University [of America, Washington, D.C.] come about?  Was that just assumed? Or, you know.  Or was--I mean just how did that come about? And were you at that point even thinking about medical school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was thinking about medical school in a way.  Because my mother always instilled into me that I should be a doctor.  And she instilled that into me. But let me tell you something very interesting.  This is something that I will never forget.  When I was in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.], probably eleventh grade, there was a counselor in the high school who was black. And her name was Miss Gaines [ph.]  I remember that.  And she called the whole school together in the auditorium and--to talk about counseling and so forth, and what--the future of the students and--. She essentially said that she knew that many of us in the high school were thinking about being doctors and lawyers and professional people.  But that we shouldn't think too much on that.  That most of us would not achieve that.  And so we'd be very disappointed. So most of us was just going to be ordinary people.  And so she didn't--She wanted to relieve us from the disappointment that we would have by hitching our stars too high.  I remember coming home that day.  This is a black woman who was a counselor of a black high school, Miss Gaines.  And that evening I came home almost in tears and I told my mother [Lucille Thomas Freeman], "I don't think I want to be a doctor."  I know I said, "I know you want me to be a doctor.  But I don't think I want to be a doctor.  Because Miss Gaines said that we'd probably be disappointed."  And my mother was angry and she really talked me back into it.  But just to show you how you can be influenced as a young person by people who have authority.  And and--so the question, did I want--was I moving toward being a doctor in high school?  Yes, I was.  But I almost got talked out of it by a counselor.
Speaker 1: You know that is an amazing (laughing) story.
Speaker 2: (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Usually  you hear that story told by people who attended white schools, you know, in the same period.  And that's--okay (chuckling). That's a story for another day.  But so you--How did the decision to go to Catholic University come about?
Speaker 2: Well first of all, I could not afford to go outside of Washington.  So the choice was between Howard University and Catholic University.  The point that I was a Catholic probably, in a small way, figured in.  But also, the main point was I think, that I got a scholarship to go to Catholic University, based on my scholastic achievement.
Story_ID: 7373
Speaker 1: Now this [attending Catholic University of America] is a different experience in many ways.  Because it takes you out of this sort of cloi--cloistered black environment.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: To a majority white environment, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Even though it's Catholic.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So how many blacks were in your, you know, in the school or in your class at that time? And what was that experience--Even though you're still in Washington--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) --this is a different--.
Speaker 2: There were very, very few blacks in the undergraduate school at Catholic University.
Speaker 1: Few meaning?
Speaker 2: I mean--in my--I'd say maybe four or five in my year.  Not more--not more than ten.  But I think maybe it's in the range of five or six, something like that, in my whole class.
Speaker 1: And how many people were in the class--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well--
Speaker 1: do you think?
Speaker 2: that I don't remember.  But you're talking about perhaps in the range of 800 or 1000--it, it was fairly big.
Speaker 1: And what is this experience like?  You know, because you--You know, this is--I often think of college as an acculturation process and this was definitely sort of taking you out and I am wondering what that exposure and everything was like for you?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well you know, I lived at home.  So it didn't get taken out.  I wasn't living on the campus.  I, I went to school on the bus every day.  And so I remember just going to school and doing the school part and coming home.  I ultimately became an athlete in the school.  I became a, a tennis player and a basketball player at Catholic University.  In fact, I captained both basketball and tennis teams in my last year at Catholic University.  And won the University's highest award which was called the Harris Award, for being an outstanding scholar, gentleman and athlete of Catholic University.  So I beca-became a well-known figure on this campus.  But I never really fully integrated into it.  Because I was always coming home at night.  So I was living in two worlds at the same time.  It's not like if you go to a campus, you're on the campus in a dormitory.  That I didn't have.  But--and I had some friends there that were white.  One or two friends that I considered reasonably close during that time, but not many.  But there was very little social exchange between me and the--and the whites who lived there--who went to school there.
Speaker 1: Were there things that were disappointing or that you, you know, had exposure to? Because I am just saying here you come into Catholic University.  I mean even if --it seems as if you are continuing your, you know, your rise.  But even operating in a white environment is--you know, you're still able to excel, because you were also inducted into the Athletes Hall of Fame.  Right.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That was later.
Speaker 1: Later.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.  Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But the thing is that you--you know, was there--? But you had been the salutatorian.  Did you find that you were able to compete easily?  You know, even though you had come out of a primarily black environment, and do you think that goes back to this whole thing about Dunbar and the caliber of the teaching--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, body that (unclear)
Speaker 2: Well I had no problem competing academically.  That--My preparation in high school was quite good and I had a good academic record at Catholic University, which was part of the awards that I finally got.  Which included 'scholar' as well.  So I had my high school preparation and the previous preparation in schooling certainly prepared me well enough for that experience.  And I think that the Catholic University exposure--Again there was at least outwardly, a sense of fairness.  I didn't have any obvious bigotry that I ex--expos--that I was exposed to there.  When we went off campus, I remember, I know, traveling with the various teams, the basketball and tennis.  And I remember very well traveling--We usually would go by either bus or automobile because we were going to close destinations to play a game.  Coming back with a team, say in a car, from a tennis match with all white teammates and a white coach, we could never stop and eat at a restaurant together.  We could never stop.  And I remember--I remember that.  That was something that bothered me because you'd expect to maybe stop and eat or have a drink or whatever.  We couldn't do that.  And--But when I was on the campus, I didn't have a sense of--of--I didn't feel the racism.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Didn't feel it.
Speaker 1: And even in the contact sport field, you know, I mean you--did you experience any racism among your teammates or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I don't--I didn't recognize any racism among my teammates.  They were all very kind to me, very supportive.  And ultimately I became the leader.  And at that point they were clearly supportive.  So I didn't have a sense of--I didn't feel a racist environment from my teammates--from my teammates.  I remember going to play basketball at the University of Virginia, however.  Basketball--that was around 1953.  And I told the coach befo--a little bit before we were leaving, I said, "I don't think I--I think--I'm not feeling very good. I don't want to go there."  And he knew that I was lying (laughing).  But he said, "Now--" It's a Jewish guy.  His name was Abe Rosenfield.  He was a coach.  He said, though "You're gonna  go."  He said, "You just stop.  Don't even talk about that.  You're not unwell. You're gonna go."  So I went to play at the University of Virginia in 1953.  Now the coach kept us--Now this is a team of about fifteen basketball players.  They wanted to go out and have some fun maybe the evening before the game.  He made us all stay in.  Because he knew if I went out in the city something could happen. So he made the whole team stay in the night before.  And so that was the kind of curious thing. That he recognized the racism in Virginia, which was heavy at that time.
Speaker 1: You know what is amazing about this story and I find fascinating about the pre-'60 [1960] movement is people like yourself.  The stories that come out they sort of break the, you know, the perception a lot.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And then even you're telling me that there is a Jewish (laughing)--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously laughing]
Speaker 1: Jewish coach in a Catholic University.
Speaker 2: (laughing) (unclear).
Speaker 1: (laughing) This is like--This is like not fitting. And, you know--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: the stereotypes (laughing) you know.
Speaker 2: That's right.  He was the coach.
Story_ID: 7374
Speaker 1: Anyway, so you graduate. You've done well.  Right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And is it assumed then--?  You know, I mean what is the decision of where you're going to go to medical school? Or is that once again you have to stay--
Speaker 2: Well I applied to a number of medical schools at that time. That's 19--now 1954 finishing college.  And I applied to perhaps eight medical schools at the time with a good scholastic record.  But the only school that accepted me was Howard University [School of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] So had there been no Howard University Medical School, I would not be a medical doctor. Now just to show you the very, very--the value of such a school.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: I would not have been a medical doctor had there been no Howard University Medical School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you start there right, in 1954?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Do you take--you don't take a break.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You're going straight on--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --the track.  Your mother's very happy?  And--(unclear)
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Very, very happy (laughing).
Speaker 1: (laughing)
Speaker 2: The thing had worked (laughing).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughing).  It worked. All that talking (laughing)
Speaker 2: (laughing) right.
Speaker 1: She was gonna have a doctor.
Speaker 2: Right. Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you--So how was this experience here? You know?  And who were the people influencing you? And what is this, you know, who's the Dean of the School at the time? And--
Speaker 2: The Dean of the school as I remember then--I know his first name was--I think it was Joseph [Lealand] Johnson.  I think that was his name.  He had no particular influence. But it's a nearly all black medical school.  I think about 10% of the people were white in every class. And I think that was perhaps--it seemed to be by design that they would accept a certain amount of non-black people.  But here again, a very supportive group of classmates. Because they were 90% black.  Medical school is a struggle for everybody. And  you really form some very close binds to people who you go through medical school with, because it's a--it's a tough experience.  But--of course, race is taken out of it now. Because it is now--It's a black school with all the support systems there.  So it--to me it was a tough four years with respect to--Because medical school in general is a very hard, tough experience.  But he-here again is a struggle.  But I was successful in getting through with a good record, and went on from there to intern at the same--at Freedmen's Hospital [Washington, D.C.]
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And at this--at this point that you go to intern, have you decided what your specialty wants to be? Or you're still in that development sort of phase of yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, I had not decided.  As a matter of fact, when I was in medical school, my first choice was psychiatry.  I wanted to be a psychiatrist early on.  And the reason I wanted to be a psychiatrist I think (unclear) as far as what I understand about myself, and who really knows everything that drives you.  But I was very interested in people, in the--in the non-physical aspects of people, the spiritual, moral, ethical things.  That always was something I was deeply interested in.  And then in the early course--In a book--textbook by Noyes, "N O Y E S" in psychiatry, they describe these clini--these psy--psychiatric syndromes and diseases, schizophrenia and so forth.  And when I--Soon after that when we went to see patients like at St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Washington, or even on the ward at Freedmen's  Hospital, where there were people who were, were, were psychologically ill, it appeared to me that the person who wrote the textbook was totally able to predict how these people acted.  In other words, if you had a certain diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia that I read about, then the person with that affliction was acting the role exactly like what the textbook said.  I said, "Well this is brilliant.  If you can predict this so well, this has to be really brilliant.  This is something that attracts me."  The patient acting like the textbook said they would act.  I thought it was really a wonderful, brilliant thing for--of understanding.  So I moved in that direction. But what disturbed me was as I learned later on, that we didn't have answers for this.  We didn't have answers for these serious chronic psychiatric illnesses like schizophrenia. And we still don't seem to have the answers except for medications that change symptoms.  And it sort of bothered me.  It--On one hand it looked like we know a lot about it. We can predict the way that people are gonna behave.  But when it came to what can we do about it, it looked like we didn't know much about what to do about it. So that turned that off.  Then I began to think in the opposite direction. Because then I was exposed to surgery, where you make a diagnosis of something.  You decide on a certain treatment, which was often an operation.  You find out the answer, you take out the offending organ, or part, or fix it, and the patient does well most of the time.  You've understood it, and you have good results.  So that, that attracted me.  I think that's why I became a surgeon.
Story_ID: 7375
Speaker 1: And at that time--So  in your internship at Freedmen's  Medical--it was Freedmen's Hospital [Washington, D.C.], what--You did your internship and your residency there, right?  Well you did part--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I did.
Speaker 1: Well and then you did your--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I did--
Speaker 1: You became a senior resident at--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well you'd have to say I did my internship and my complete general surgery resident--residency at Freedmen's  Hospital.  And then there was a separate res-  residency at Memorial Sloan-Kettering [Cancer Center, New York, New York], which was a different residency altogether.
Speaker 1: And, so you're--Wh-What is that experience like for all those years?  It's pretty brutal, you know, being a surg-, I mean it's pretty brutal in many ways, right?  Aren't you getting married around this time too?
Speaker 2: I got married in 1957 when I was still a medical student.  I finished medical school in '58. So I got married. And yeah, that--So during my whole internship and after that residency and everything else I was married.  I've been married to the same woman for--since 1957.
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Arti, "A R T I".  Arti.  And so we've been married for about 44 years just about.  And so then I had my first son.  I have two boys, was born when I was an intern at Freedmen's  Hospital. And happened to be rotating through obstetrics when she was brought in (laughing) yeah, yeah, to deliver.  So I was the intern in charge of the ward when my first son  was born.  I didn't participate in his care because I didn't want to do that. But--
Speaker 1: Isn't that--that's amazing.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughing).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And both of them are doctors. See that's amazing.
Speaker 2: And both of them are doctors.
Speaker 1: And all boys. Born of boys and--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Boys. Boys.
Speaker 1: And then had two boys.  Okay.  Now. So was there--but you're still--are you feeling this is what you really wanna do?  You're enjoying the surgery residency?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) I mean internship and residency.
Speaker 2: In--  As I look--as I was looking at it at that time and as I look at it now, this was the right choice for me.  Because it did satisfy some of the things that I was talking about.  That--the, the matter of getting results more on the positive side. It was the matter of knowing what my treatment would be likely to achieve was important.  The matter of knowing a diagnosis and being able to deal with it and follow through with it was very important to me.  And surgery fit those things.  Surgery fit those things very well.
Speaker 1: And what types of cases were you working on primarily?  You know, that came in for your (unclear)?
Speaker 2: At that time as a resident?  Well the whole spectrum. I mean the whole spectrum of surgery except that we didn't--we didn't do much brain surgery and open-heart surgery. But the whole spectrum of general surgery got exposed to.
Story_ID: 7376
Speaker 1: Now how does this then--how did Memorial Sloan-Kettering [Cancer Center, New York, New York] you know, play a part? Because all--You know, was that--Just tell me how that sort of came about? And was that something that you desired? And--
Speaker 2: Right.  Well when I was within my general surgery program at Freedmen's  Hospital [Washington, D.C.], which is now called the Howard University Hospital by the way,  I had the opportunity to spend a year at Memorial within that training. Because one of the professors had been at Memorial Sloan-Kettering as--in training.  So his name was Jack White. And he arranged for me to spend a year within the general surgery training of Freedmen's Hospital to rotate here--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Hmm.
Speaker 2: to Memorial, which I did.  And I liked it. And they liked me well enough to invite me back for the senior residency, when I finished the general surgery.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And so this is the whole thing. You're  moving your family to New York at this point?
Speaker 2: Right, Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Right.  And so where are you st--Where are you living? And--
Speaker 2: Well for the year--There's a single year within the residency and then three years after. We lived in housing arranged by the hospital, Memorial Sloan Kettering. And it was quite appropriate. And it was good housing for us at that time.  You didn't make much money, but the housing was given to you. And the experience was really first class.
Story_ID: 7377
Speaker 1: And who--is there someone mentoring you at this point at Memorial?  I mean I know you said,  you did that year there.  But was there someone there who was--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes. There was a person. His name was Arthur Holleb.  He was a surgeon at Memorial [Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York]  He was in charge of the residency program at Memorial and also had a lot to do with selecting residents.  So he was a surgeon, a breast cancer surgeon. And it was Arthur Holleb.  And I'd have to say this man had a deep influence on my life.  First of all, he picked me to get into the senior program there. Which was--which elevated my ability to do surgery to a much higher level than if it had just been general surgery, and set the tone for me to get to higher levels like being Director of Surgery at Harlem Hospital.  I don't think just a general surgery training would have allowed that. So I had specialty training.  Arthur Holleb was the one that gave me the opportunity.  And then to--and just to finish the story of Arthur Hollub, if you don't mind me jumping ahead.  Beyond that he--This gets into the current experience. Because then I became Director of Surgery at Harlem Hospital in 1974, having finished Memorial in 1967.  And in 1978, Governor Hugh Carey, the then Governor of New York State, set up a blue ribbon commission to advise him about what he should do about breast cancer in New York State.  His mo--his wife was dying of breast cancer. And she did die of it--of breast cancer.  I was called to testify before that commission around 1978.  At that time, I had collected the data on breast cancer at Harlem Hospital. Which in summary, showed that more than half of the women were incurable when they came to the hospital with breast cancer.  And only 30% were alive at five years.  This was very devastating information. And so I presented this to this commission, which he [Arthur Holleb] was a member of the commission.  And in fact he--The co-chairperson of the commission asked him, who was then the vice president of the American Cancer Society--He had moved from Memorial to that. Asked him,  "Well what is the American Cancer Society doing about this Harlem problem with cancer?"  And I was asked the question. And I said, "Well there's no evidence of anything they're doing.  They have no presence in Harlem." And so he tried to say, "We tried to help, but we couldn't.  The people didn't accept us."  And I said, "Well Dr. Holleb, you know,  with all due respect, I have no problem communicating with these people at all.  And they, they--if I sit down and explain things to them, they do follow my directions. And they're very reliable people if you take time to explain things to them. Even when they have cancer."  And he--I think he was a bit disappointed that this had come out. Because he was now working with the American Cancer Society and he wanted to paint a good picture. But that was the fact of the matter.  So but here's what happened.  A few days later, Arthur Holleb, the same man, called me and said, "You know, I've been thinking about what you said. And I think you have a story to tell to the American Cancer Society, and I want you to be on the Board of Directors of the American Cancer Society."  He put me directly on the board of directors, and that was in 1978.
Story_ID: 7378
Speaker 1: Let me finish with Arthur Hollub.  So  Arthur Holleb effectively caused me to become a member of the Board of Directors of the National American Cancer Society in 1978.  And ten years later, I became the National President of the American Cancer Society.  So did Arthur Holleb have an influence an on my life?  Yes, he did.  He did have a big influence.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) A Jewish man.
Speaker 2: Yes.  See, that's what I found.  Your coach was a Jewish man who--I mean not that--That he--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: played a role and then--And there is some discussion about blacks and Jews in that respect.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm, um-hmm.
Story_ID: 7379
Speaker 1: But I just want to get an idea of timetable sort of too.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Because you started Howard University medical school in 195--
Speaker 2: '4. [1954]
Speaker 1: '4.  And you graduate in 195--
Speaker 2: '8. [1958]
Speaker 1: 8.  And then you went--Your residency was from 1958 until--I mean your internship--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) internship.
Speaker 1: for residency.
Speaker 2: one-year internship '58 - '59 [1959].  Residency '59 through '64 [1964], with a year of that being in New York City at Memorial [Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then '64 to '67 [1967], trained as a--what was called a senior resident in surgical oncology at Memorial Sloan Kettering.  And after that '67, went to Harlem Hospital as an attending surgeon.
Speaker 1: Now what's the environment? And when I say that, the social environment. You know, because there's sort of this undercurrent right now.  The Civil Rights Movement undercurrent.  Did that influence you at all during this period? Or was it sort of a--were you sort of--sort of separate and apart from all those things that were sort of happening?
Speaker 2: During the 1960s?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: In particular?
Speaker 1: I'm not talking about were you active in the movement.  But I'm just saying was this--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Did it influence me?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was very much aware of the things that were happening. Because I read the newspapers.  I even, you know, was in Washington during the 1964--during the march.  I think it was '6--whatever year that was, '63 [1963] or whatever.  Yes.  So  I was very deeply involved in understanding, and trying to understand those things.  But it didn't seem to get into what was happening in my education.  And I mean at Memorial I had a sense of being treated fair. Prior to that, I was in a black setting. So you didn't have--there was no opportunity much for controversy, because you're in a black school, Howard University.  So while the--these huge social events were being played out, the Civil Rights Revolution, I was going about my schooling in a way that seemed to be a little encapsulated.  At least on a day-to-day clinical basis, I didn't have a sense of racism raising its ugly head in a day-to-day basis. While I was working, for example, at Memorial Sloan- Kettering.
Story_ID: 7380
Speaker 1: I have one other question I've gotta get out of my head. And that is, when you said ten per cent of the student body at Howard Medical School was white, who were these--I mean people that attended?  I--just--(laughing) I mean well--I mean--well--(laughing)
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) How did they get selected?
Speaker 1: Well how--who were--who would want to go to, at that point, you know, a black medical--basically, a black medical school?
Speaker 2: Well fundamentally, there are an awful lot of white people who can't get into medical school.  And I don't want to say I understand what their motive was for coming to Howard. But you know, I think--My sense of it is that that's where they were able to get in. And when you become a medical doctor you become a medical doctor. You know.  It doesn't--people aren't often going to ask you on a day-to-day basis, "Well what school did you finish?"  So they were very happy.  The non-blacks were very happy to get into Howard Medical School, and they got a good education.
Speaker 1: And have they been supportive of the school afterwards?  Or, you know, where it was (unclear) I mean--because I know people even go abroad and things.  They go wherever--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: they can to get in. But--
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, you know, in my going back to the medical school for various reunions as I do about every year, but, you know, I don't see evidence of whites coming back.  I do not see that.  Um-hmm.  I think there are some exceptions.
Story_ID: 7381
Speaker 1: Now I'm back at Memorial Sloan-Kettering under--Now you--you have--you know, you've done your general surgery.  And you-- you know. And (unclear) Arthur Holleb, okay--is definitely a mentor and he's focusing on cancer research, oncology research right?
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: That's his--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well the whole area of cancer.
Speaker 1: Correct.  Correct  Okay.
Speaker 2: He's a cancer--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) specialist?
Speaker 2: Breast cancer specialist.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Breast cancer specialist.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But the thing I find--Isn't this even sort of a prelude? I mean 'cause you don't even hear cancer in the common lexicon.  This is early it seems to me in the--You know, what I remember.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now I was a kid--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Um-hmm, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: at that time. So who am I--? Oh, except my grandmother died of cancer around that time.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So this cancer is coming into the--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) You mean the public arena?
Speaker 1: Right.  The public arena.  That's what I'm tr--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well, you know, I think you're right to say that cancer was not a public issue at that time.  Not for the general public.  There was something called the war against cancer declared in 1971 by Richard Nixon. And I happened to have studied the history of that.  I've written something on it.  And it took something for that to happen.  You had--Prior to that, cancer was not a word that most people wanted to even use. It was like the "Big C."  They didn't wanna talk about it in the 1950s, into the 60s.[1960s]  It was not something that people tended to talk about.  But--there--Some things were beginning to happen in the field of cancer. And the thing that really happened that was most important was that pediatric cancers began to be cured.  The leukemias began to be cured by chemotherapy. And in the '50s and 60s there were some good results. So that set the tone  that "there may be some answers" for the, for the public. There also had been some events that had happened like landing men on the moon and the polio vaccine was successful.  And so people began to think that maybe we can beat this disease. So there was some good things percolating, some research finding.  So there was a commission formed in the late 1960s [sic, in 1970] called the Yarborough Commission. And he [Ralph Yarborough] was a senator from Texas.
Story_ID: 7382
Speaker 1: President [Richard] Nixon with that background, declared a 'war against cancer' in 1971.  And the American public began along with the scientists, because more money was given for cancer research, began to focus on this disease.  So I think that you could say that before 1971, there was not a lot of attention being paid to cancer. But after that, it became a major problem in the minds of the public. And today, of course, it is extraordinarily major.
Speaker 2: Now your focus on breast cancer, was it a focus on breast cancer, at that point because of Holleb? Or did it become later when you got to Harlem Hospital [New York, New York]?  That's what I--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, you know, no it was not.  My focus on breast cancer was not particularly related to [his mentor, Dr.] Arthur Holleb, although he was a breast cancer surgeon.  At Memorial Sloan-Kettering, I was trained across the whole spectrum of cancer. Whether the head and neck, breast cancer, and colon, soft tissue, thoracic. We had a urological, gynecological.  So there was nothing that would have necessarily led me to get into one site.  What happened though, was that when I came to Harlem Hospital, I began to shift over to an interest in the breast.  Because the experience in seeing women come in with breast cancer. Which I was one of the people who was in charge of treating, with extremely advanced disease.  That was the thing that stimulated me to ask some very deep questions.  The problem was not that I didn't know how to treat breast cancer.  Technically, I was very--on the cutting edge of that.  But the problem was people coming in at a point where my technical ability was not the answer for them.  And that, that was a very--That was a big turning point for me. And breast was the organ that I focused on. Because these were--More people come in for--to clinics for breast cancer than for other diseases, which tend to be hidden organs like the colon and the prostate.  So this organ caught my attention, the breast.  And the women were very advanced . And it drove me to ask, "Well what had happened in the society to cause a woman to come in for the first time for an examination with her breast replaced by cancer?"  That drove my career.
Speaker 2: Hmm.  And when you--you know, what I find interesting about that is that your story of even how originally you were interested in psychiatry.  And I just couldn't help but think that the thing--You know, that maybe your--that questioning led you to, you know, looking at other causes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I'm being sort of intrigued.  I don't know if that's--
Speaker 1: That--that's very--I'm sure that these things are all tied together.  I was sort of a person's thinking about social causes of things and thinking about psychological issues, well almost driven to go into tho--that kind of a discipline.  But I ended up going into surgery. But I come into surgery with a background of a person who is sensitive to a lot of human type of issues.  And I--so I think that's really what happened to me.
Story_ID: 7383
Speaker 1: Now when you--This appointment at Harlem Hospital [New York, New York].  What is--who is controlling Harlem Hospital at this point?  Is it Jewish controlled? Or is it--? I mean who--Because you came in--you came in--You all--You came in to be head of it. Right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.  Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I came in to be just an attending surgeon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And at that time, the Director of Surgery was a white man, at that time.  His name was Jose [Marie] Ferrer. The brother of Mel Ferrer.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And--But there were departments at Harlem Hospital where there were black directors, but surgery was not one of those.  Columbia had just recently taken over Harlem Hospital in the same year.  The same year I came in '67, Columbia had moved its Bellevue [Hospital] part to Harlem.  And so they brought the professors there. And many of them were white professors. But the hospital had a rich history of being in a black community. So there were a significant number of people who were black attending people in that hospital.
Speaker 1: And so you're saying that because Columbia moved--is this Columbia University or Columbia--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That it always had a teaching component? And that made it or--
Speaker 2: It had a teaching component at Bellevue and along with NYU [New York University] I think. And there--Some political decision was made to move the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons component out of Belleview, and place it at Harlem.  So at that point in 1967, Harlem Hospital was placed under Columbia University.  So when I came to Harlem Hospital, I had had an appointment with Columbia University at that point.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And so were you teaching also at the same--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: time?  Okay.  Is this--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I was--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Is this typical though that sometime--I mean that's not always typical. Right?
Speaker 2: That you would be teaching?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: If you are in a university setting it would be very typical. Because see there're residents in--Of course, the residency had preceded the Columbia affiliation.  But if you come into a program that has residents, you will be a teacher, usually.  And then the fact that it had affiliated with a university made that even a stronger component.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And so you were--you're essentially on the--on staff at Columbia.  Okay.  How many--(unclear) how many--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well I was an instructor of surgery. My first appointment--first academic appointment was instructor in surgery under Columbia University, but working at Harlem.  And an assistant attending surgeon.  That's how I started.  Seven years later in 1974, I was promoted to being Director of the Department [of Surgery].  And I ultimately became a professor of surgery at Columbia.
Story_ID: 7384
Speaker 1: During this period from like 1967 to 1974, you are seeing these advanced cases coming in. And you're actually documenting. You know.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: You're doing a lot of documentation of--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, what's coming in.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  By 19--say mid '70s [1970s], I had--because we had a tumor registry.  I--Not only what I could see anecdotally, but we were actually documenting the cases that came in, stage of the disease, treatment and so forth.  So by the mid '70s, I had documented enough of the--of the experience for breast cancer to be able to in 1978 make a convincing argument, to this Commission that had been appointed by [New York] Governor Hugh Carey, that led to that discussion at Memorial [Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York].  And also the--Based on that discussion, I mean that testimony that I had to the Commission, Governor Carey decided to place the resources in Harlem to counter breast cancer.  So that was the birth of the--what is now called the Breast Examination Center of Harlem, on 125th Street and Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard--which I've been the Medical Director of since its inception in 1979.
Speaker 1: You know, now what I find intriguing, see, you come in. You come from a very classically, you know, sort of advanced training, you know, at Memorial Sloan-Kettering. And then you see--you make this assessment pretty earl--you know, quickly that, you know, these people are at advanced stages, and you wanna look at other causes.  And I'm just--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: wondering what types of things? Because the belief was, you know, that you have to remove the cancer. You know.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And the--But you start looking at other causes. And I would like you just to start talk--you know, to talk--to address that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause this is--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: This is what you used in your testimony is what I'm saying.  But I'm just wondering-- if you--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) It did.  And ultimately it's what I've built, I guess,--What I'm known for at this point was based on what happened then.  Which is the thing that I'm known best for is being, I guess, the nation's authority on the interrelationship between race, poverty and cancer.  That's what I'm known for.  And so it had its inception (chuckle) in this kind of experience.  It was kind of interesting to me. Because, you know, as you look back, I mean I had no intention or plan. You couldn't--you could not plan my life, I don't think.  I mean I could not have planned to become who I became.  But when you trace it, you can see the continuity --. But I mean even from childhood all the way to which you're hearing about.  But when it came to Harlem, the thing was that I was highly trained as well as one could have been trained in cancer surgery at the time.  But the frustration was that the skills that I had, although they were helpful to people, they didn't help most of the people who came in because they had disease beyond what I could help them with.  That forced me to think about the causes. The social causes of why people come in with late cancer.  And that drove my career.  Because now you're saying you have a 52-year-old black woman who comes in with not a breast, but just cancer. And you can't see anything but cancer.  Well how could this happen in a country that has the highest technology in medicine in the world? How could it happen?  And so it--the--I began to ask--One of the first things I wondered about really, is there some relationship between being black and these conditions? Coming in with late cancer, is it related to race in itself?  A question I began to explore. These people were almost all black.  They were 98% black at that time.  And is it related to being poor?  They were all poor. Because you're coming into a public hospital. And that's the kind of person that comes into a public hospital.  So they were poor and they were black.  And I was driven to try to understand the meaning of race, being black in America, with respect to coming in with incurable cancer.  I was forced to try to understand, at least in my mind, "What is the effect of being poor on coming in with incurable cancer?"  And really ultimately, "What is the effect of being poor and black?"  Which is even different. I mean than either or.  And so this drove me to ask those questions, and to begin to study these issues.  And so from my experience in a particular community, which is Harlem, a poor black community with a high death rate, I asked--I think I asked the questions that needed to be asked, and I began to try to answer those questions.  And then being promoted to positions where I had a national prospective: And was able to look at the whole nation from the perspective of information that I had gained in a particular community. And ask the same questions for the whole country. Because I got to be promoted all the way up to being the president of the American Cancer Society. Which I made poverty and cancer the main theme of that presidency.  And have--and dealing with race in the context of poverty.  So that's what happened to me.  And being promoted to (unclear) now-- for the last ten years chairman of the President's Cancer Panel, and still taking those issues even higher . But it came out of the questions that I was driven to ask under the circumstances of a highly trained person whose technology was not the answer for most of the patients.
Story_ID: 7385
Speaker 1: Can you just talk about some of your findings?  I mean you say you've gone into this, you know, through being able to, you know, address this Commission. And [Arthur] Holleb then, you know, saying, you--You know, who you were really challenging.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: The Institute of American [sic, American Cancer Society]--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: saying that, you know, they're not really present.  You know?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: They may seem that they're present, but they're ignoring this part of society.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: and that's the reason.  So--But I'd like you to, you know, just talk about some of the things that you found out and the things that you explored.  And what your whole platform has been, you know, to, you know, bring this whole issue of--the issue of antho--You know, culture and race. And, you know--And a lot of times the belief--a lot of times, you know, in the you know, when they say, "Okay, blacks have this incident."  It's as if because, you know, we are black--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: that these (unclear)
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That's right.  True.
Speaker 1: (unclear) that these (unclear) and I want you to--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) And that's a very important--that's a very important question. Because I personally wondered about that myself early on.  I have to--have to say that. And I guess I would have to say just as, as an overview thought, I--my thoughts have evolutionized over time as well.  I mean first of all I was being confronted with a set of major, major problems of people who are dying at a high rate, who present with late disease, cancer in particular. And asking certain questions.  And, and so it's driving me into, into disciplines that are far beyond surgery, which I am trained to do.  It's driving me into, into sociology.  It's driving me into, into anthropology, anthropological considerations.  It's driving me into things that are spiritual and mental and, and, and the understanding of things far beyond the technical things that I was really trained to do.  But I was forced to ask those questions.  And I did ask them. And ultimately, I began to, to formulate some concepts.  And this, this--and I don't want to--There's not enough time to go into everything. But I'll say, I was appointed to, in 19--in 1979, to a Advisory Committee at the National American Cancer Society of which I was a member at this point on the Board.  An Advisory Committee on cancer in minorities. And so that committee began to look at cancer minorities. Beyond black, we got to Hispanic, Native Americans and  others.  I became the chairman of that Advisory Committee.  And I then raised the question, which had kind of percolated based on my experience. "What is the effect of poverty?"  We're dealing with it from a perspective of race or minority. And so we stimulated the American Cancer Society to form a study group for a two year period.  It took two years to gather all this information.  But--so by 19--so by 1986, it was, that study was done. And I, I was the Chairman of that committee. And we were looking at the relationship between race, poverty and cancer.  And the conclusion was made that most of the black and white differences in cancer results could be explained by economic status.  But it left some part of it not explained.  But that was the major, major finding. And then in 1989--'88 [1988], '89 when I became the president, I made that the major issue.  And we conducted hearings around America to hear the testimony of poor people with cancer of any race or culture.  And that information really sort of focused the nation on the relationship between poverty and race and cancer. Reporting it to the White House, to the Congress.  And it became the biggest media event in the history of the Cancer Society that I reported on these hearings.  So to get to th--the, the question, my, my, my theories began to percolate.  I began to think of what does poverty cause? And when you think about poverty and irrespective of race, poverty causes sub-standard living conditions. Poor housing, less social support.  Poverty is associated with unemployment, poor nutrition.  Poverty is associated with people having less information and less knowledge. Poverty is frequently associated with people who have a risk-promoting lifestyle.  Heavier smoking, heavier drinking, wrong diet.  And poverty is associated with diminished access to health care, particularly preventive health care.  So all those things together have to be considered as effects of poverty.  You can't just separate out the access to health care part of it and say--and then ignore the poor housing or the lack of knowledge.  So I began to think of these things together like, "You can't separate health care." Which, you know, we have a hospital that could give good  health care, which I was part of. But the point was that the people had come in too wounded to save their lives.  So, so, the thing is, driven by poverty, which had to do with their total living conditions, poor housing, lack of education, and their lifestyle--So we had to form a concept that was beyond simply providing access to health care as a solution.  That's the thought I came to.  Now with respect to culture, in the early part of my deliberations, I equated culture to race in one of the things that I actually published.  I later changed my opinion about that. Because I think culture--First of all, there're many cultures within any race.  So culture is not equal to race as I earlier said. It was one of those evolutions that I underwent.  So in my later writings, I have separated culture out as a, an extraordinary powerful force in determining human outcome. Because part--The way I'm defining culture: Who are your ancestors?  What is your physical and social living environment? How do you communicate? What is your communication system?  How do you--How do you hear information?  Or how do you give information?  What is your language of communication?  And what do you believe in?  What are your--what is your belief system?  What are your values?  Your value system, your traditions?  Your--How you see the world?  How the world sees you?  This is culture.  Ultimately, what is your lifestyle, your attitude and your behavior?  So putting these things together in, in the--under the label of culture, then culture becomes an extraordinary force in determining what happens to us as individuals.  And as a--as groups who are in the same so-called "culture".  But culture is not equal to race.  And so the way that I formulated this then which--many times around the nation I've said this, "I'm saying that poverty is a powerful determinant, or low income, of what happens to people related to decreased survival. Whether it's cancer or anything else.  And you have to see the effect of poverty across the whole spectrum of what it does.  Not just the health access part, but also the other things.
Story_ID: 7386
Speaker 1: You were saying that how, you know, you saw the culture and you were defining culture, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The culture.  And so I think that the two extraordinary determinants of survival, of whether people survive or not or high death rate or, or low death rate--the interface between economic status and culture.  And I believe in my theory, poverty causes negative human events, which I've described.  And poverty acts to what I call the lens of culture in causing these events.  And if that theory is correct,  this, this interface--interaction between poverty and culture,  then it gives culture the opportunity to modify poverty's expected effects.  For example, poor people who are in the culture of the Seventh Day Adventists, which is a religion that dictates culture.  These people do not smoke cigarettes, they don't drink alcohol and they tend to be vegetarian.  So even when these people are poor, they don't develop lung cancer.  They're protected by their lifestyle, their attitude and their behavior.  So on the other hand, poor people in Harlem, New York where we are, and poor people in Harlan, Kentucky, which is in Appalachia, which I visited and exchanged scientific thoughts with other investigators there.  These are people who are somewhat similar in many respects with respect to lifestyle.  People in Harlem, New York and Harlan, Kentucky smoke heavily, drink heavily and have a high fat diet.  They tend to have the same diseases.  They also are both poor populations, black and white respectively.  And they have re- results that are very similar with respect to survival.  People who are Hispanic, Mexican, who we have found by looking at their culture in southern California, tend to be people who have an extended family.  The part of the Mexican culture is--is--there's support built into the family.  Grandmothers, grandchildren, everybody staying together.  So here's a culture that gives social support within the culture itself.  Whereas poor people in general expect to not to have good social support systems.  There are some poor people--
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: (jump cut--camera briefly turned off)
Speaker 1: --are in cultures, some of the Jewish cultures and some of the Asian cultures who have had--where education is a very critical part of how they grow up.  Their parents emphasize that you have to go to school.  Well this has an effect on--Whereas you expect people to have less information and knowledge when they're poor, if you're in a culture that stimulates you to study and to be scholarly, that has an effect.  So these are examples where culture can accentuate poverty's negative effect on one hand.  But also it could, could, could eliminate or modify it down.  And so this--This is what my thoughts have brought me to.  So if you then wanted to have an impact on this thing of poverty, culture, decreased survival, you--there are many places where you could try to have an impact.  You could reduce poverty itself.  And you could pay attention to correcting housing conditions and creating social support systems in communities.  You could improve nutrition.  You could improve--improve employment.  You could educate people so they don't have a risk promoting lifestyle.  You could improve the hospital system of America.  The access system.  So that there're not 43 million uninsured people.  An access issue.  So you could educate people who have cultures that are destructive, to eliminate that part of their culture, that is, is destructive.  Such as heavy smoking, wrong diet and so forth.
Story_ID: 7387
Speaker 1: Now but there's a third element that, that I have not touched on yet.  And that is race.  And I think that getting right to the end, where I am now, I've, I've evolutionized through my--this understanding of race.  Currently what I would say about race is, there's no evidence of race having a genetic meaning.  The, the classifications of race are not based on genetics.  So I'm talking about biological--there's no biological race.  If you look at the information that's come out of the human genome, which is only very recent.  Where they've mapped the entire human genome.  There's no race that you can identify in the human genome.  The American Association of Anthropology has declared for the first time in 1998, that races do not exist, from a biological perspective. There are no races--biologically.  So--that, that, that frames your thinking differently from if you believe that races are biological categories of people.  Whereas races do not exist from a biological perspective, and I can go much deeper, but I won't take time to prove that.  While biological race does not exist, racism does exist.  And so it appears if you look at what has happened to African-Americans in this country as an example, which is the chief example of racism in America, other than the Native Americans' experience.  You have a country that brought slaves in shackles in 1619 to this country 380 years ago.  There were 250 years of actual slavery, until the Emancipation Proclamation in 1863.  The slaves were emancipated.  There was a period of Reconstruction, where things got a little better temporarily.  Went back to square zero with, with the Plessy versus Ferguson decision in 1896, where "separate is equal".  If people have the same accommodations as--like on a train which was the Homer Plessy case--that's equality.  Leading up to Brown versus Board of Education 1954--[finding that] separate is innately unequal--race.  Leading up to Martin Luther King revolution 1960s law's now fair.  Now we're dealing with the hearts and minds of white folks, primarily, which are not fair in most cases.  And so we now have a country where we have this extraordinary history of racism.  And currently I think I'm leaning toward bringing in a new term, which I call racialism.  Because I think we need languages to fit new developments in our country.  The country in 1950, when I finished high school was completely racist.  The country in the year 2000 is not the same country.  And it's different.  I think we need to bring our language up to date.  The linguistics needs to suit the progress.  So I'm bringing in the term racialism.  Meaning that we--all of us in American are programmed, whether we're white or black to see each other through a powerful lens of race.  And if you're walking down the street, and you see somebody who is white or black, you--that's how you see them.  It doesn't matter what race you are.  You see them.  But the problem is in doing that, and being driven to do that by this history that I've just laid out briefly, we tend to make assumptions about each other according to race.  Some of those assumptions are false.  And some of them do harm.  Particularly by people who have power, and who have control of institutions, who control society who control police forces, who control courtrooms.  These are all--And I think you have to separate, in a way, overt intended racism--harm type issues from people who do through the society they were grown up in, see people according to race, and make assumptions and make decisions that hurt people, which seems to be the case in the field of medicine.  Where we have now perhaps a dozen studies that have--in peer-reviewed medical literature--that are showing that black people statistically, significantly get treated differently from white people with diseases like cancer, cardiac disease.  Who gets referred for renal transplantations, who gets treated for pain, even at the same economic status and educational level are getting treated different.  Well here I think is a manifestation in the medical profession of a societal reality.  After all, no matter how educated you are, you can become the highest level of Ph.D. or medical doctor in the world, you still have been socialized and acculturated before you become educated.  So we're bringing all that baggage with us.  Particularly the people who have the power.  But also there's an element of the people who don't have the power, seeing the lens of race and the elements of distrust, and fear and some of it may be justified.  So the lens becomes a concept that I think is a very important lens, for us to understand the races in America.  But it--Let's take it out of the biology.  Biology is not there.  But race--race and racism and racialism I think are very powerful determinants of what happens to people.  And then when you put in the argument about culture and poverty, I'd have to say that the point that black Americans are disproportionately poor--and we're talking about a huge disproportion, nearly a third of black people are poor in America and only 10% of white people are poor.  And the thing about the point that black people in America are disproportionately uninsured and disproportionately less educated.  These realities are clearly associated with the history of racism in America over the 380 years that people have not been able to break out of this.  In the generation and a half that has occurred only since the Civil Rights Movement.  That's a very short time.  Half my own life legalized segregation, the other half in a country that freed minds and people not necessarily fair.  So I think that part of the disparity that we've seen as reflected in medicine, but also reflected across other parts of society is related to the history of what has happened in America.  To create a group of people who are more poor, less educated, less access.  Native Americans, you could paint another picture there.  Actually, the Native Americans are not given the credit they should be given for discovering such a famous person who was Christopher Columbus on their land (chuckle).  They should have been given more credit for that.  But--so--now the historical racism sets the tone for how we coexist in different economic categories in America today.  Added to that, is the point that is current social injustice going on.  Current.  Still today.  This, I think is increasingly of the type where people are, are biased without intending to harm people.  Increasingly.  That's my judgment.  There are still a lot of skinheads.  There are still a lot of true racists and you call 'em that when they occur.  But I think there's a growing element in American society where people in the dominant society, the whites of America who are the dominant society still, are biased according to race, without intending harm.  And without even knowing many times that they are biased.  But this has a very deep effect, and it's difficult to solve.  I mean somebody going around saying, "I hate niggers." Then everybody rejects that person.  Or, "I hate Jews."  That is not the huge American problem.  Those people are marginalized.  The huge American problem in the year 2000, different from 1950, is this growing segment of people.  I believe are people who are seeing people according to race, never knowing them for the--as the individual people that they are.  But seeing them through the lens of race and making generalizations about--and assumptions about how they are.  And this is the American problem in the year 2000.
Speaker 2: And that's what you would describe as racialism.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) I would.
Speaker 2: As opposed to racism.
Speaker 1: I would.
Story_ID: 7388
Speaker 1: Are you saying as a physician that--well first one question is, in your mythology of how you got--methodology of how you got to where you are right now--were you looking and reading and consulting with people in these other disciplines, and the work that was being done in that area?  Or was this something that you sort of came to yourself?  That's what I'm--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) It's something that I actually came to through my own thinking.  I was not consulting with social scientists or anthropologists.  This is something that grew from my own experience and my sort of insights that I developed.  That ultimately, I think became insights that people respected.
Speaker 1: And, you know, you also--Are there--So are you saying that in the case where they say, you know, still today that African-American women have higher incidence of, you know, breast cancer.  Is that tied strictly to this whole thing of culture and racialism?  Is that what you are saying?
Speaker 2: Well let me correct you on that.  African-American women have a lower incidence of breast cancer than white women.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: They have a higher death rate.  So that's a very important point.  Because--And then you asked a good question.  So let's make the--Let's distinguish this then.  The question would be why does any group of women have a higher incidence of breast cancer?  We believe scientifically at this point that this is related somehow to the menstrual and menopausal menarche experience.  In other words, the window of estrogen influence in a woman's life.  The wider the window of estrogen influence, the menarche when you have you first menstrual period through menopause when you have your last.  The wider that window, the greater the chance that you'll have breast cancer,  number one.  Number two:  if you have no children, you have a greater chance of developing breast cancer.  If you have children very early as a teenager, you have a lesser chance.  The societies that have--and there may be some dietary issues that we don't fully understand with breast cancer.  But it appears that it is the estrogen influence and how intense it is or not intense that influences who--which societies develop breast cancer.  And so Western women in general, whether in America or Europe have a high instance of breast cancer.  Japanese women, low.  African-American women, not as great as white women.  So--But that's a different set of issues.  You have to study the epidemiology of why people develop cancers of various types.  And you'd have a different study for every cancer.  Because there're different exposures that could lead to that.  Plus the genetics, which is familial, not racial.  Did you understand the difference there?  But the, the question of who dies is a different question, with a different set of reasons.  So you die from cancer fundamentally--to take the cancer which I know most about--you die from cancer, because you don't get in early enough and get treated the right way.  And that is the fundamental answer about why black women die.  They're poorer, they come in later.  They, they don't necessarily get the treatment they--that is appropriate.  But we found in studying breast cancer, colon cancer and, and lung cancer that when black and white people are treated with the same treatment at the same stage of the disease, the results are the same.
Story_ID: 7389
Speaker 1: This was something that I found interesting is this whole theory of navigation that you developed.  That if people could be navigated.  Can you just talk--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: quickly about that.
Speaker 2: Right.  There're several--there're several possible solutions to the disparity issue.  You know, you can look at some people don't do as well as others.  And you can look at race as one of the indicators.  But I think you need to look deeper than race.  You need to look at--to try to find the real variables that are causing disparities rather than assume that the group that you've been assigned to is the cause in itself.  Which was the first question I entertained when I came to  Harlem [Hospital, New York, New York]--are people dying because they're black?  Well, no.  Let's look at the--through the category that you put people in.  And say, "What has.--What is really happening?  What are the real barriers that are causing people to have late diagnoses and not the right treatment."  Well there are many instances to approaching that.  But one of the answers that I thought of, since I didn't have the power to change the whole American system, because  there are 43 million uninsured people--that's a big job.  Particularly politically now.  [President Bill] Clinton tried doing it in 1994.  It failed.  But there are some things I think we could do locally.  Even in the face of the problem of people who have no insurance and who are poor, with all that poverty means.  The question came up and then I--that I've answered now.  Suppose you created systems of support in a community--in a given community like Harlem.  And we picked the term 'navigation.'  Because when I held hearings in 1989, the poor people who testified with cancer, they said, one of the things was that they had barriers.  The faced barriers when they tried to get through the health care system.  Even when they have cancer, they can't get through.  So I thought of navigating them.  A gentle word.  It doesn't cause any--no one's against navigation as far as I know.  It's a good term.  And so could we create a system of patient navigation.  Where at the point of the finding, the suspicious finding, or the outright cancer, the first time that is known, that there be a person that this woman or man could sit down with to discuss whether there are any barriers to get to the next point that the doctor has advised.  Which may be a biopsy.  And so there's a real human being to sit down to talk to a woman.  To say, "Okay--"  The woman says, "Well I don't have any insurance."  They say, "Okay.  Well look, we've set up a system of rapid financial clearance.  A system where we're gonna go ahead and do your biopsy.  We're gonna apply for the Medicaid.  While we're waiting financial--"  It could be a communication barrier.  Somebody either doesn't understand what is being said or even speaks a different language.  That's a barrier. It could be a barrier where the patient needs medical clearance because of a heart or kidney problem, and could get lost like that.  So the navigator makes sure the patient gets right through.  So, so financial, communication, lost results, even fear are the frequent barriers that people face.  And  we have a group of people called navigators who have three characteristics.  They are competent culturally related to the people that we're trying to help.  Number 2:  They know the system through which the patient must go.  They've been educated about that.  And number 3:  They're highly wired to areas where people need the financial clearance.  The director of the department, whatever.  They're highly wired.  So this is something that communities can do, even when people are uninsured or when they don't have education.  So that's how they came about. I've been doing this for 10 years.  It works very well.
Speaker 1: And you were able to--
Speaker 2: (Videographer:) Five minutes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. (Unclear) But just real quickly on the navigation.  You were able to cut down--Give some--the percentage.
Speaker 2: What we did in a group of 200 women who came in with findings.  I was then at Harlem  Hospital.  We cut the time between the first time of finding to the biopsy to about 10 days, for the uninsured.
Story_ID: 7390
Speaker 1: -As someone who has accomplished a great deal in your life.  And you're still--You're sixty-
Speaker 2: -eight.
Speaker 1: Eight.  Okay.  Right.  What--you're still a very youthful 68.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Were you--have you been playing tennis all this time?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Still do.  Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you want to accomplish at this point in your life?  And with your career, that you haven't?  What--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, you know, I've been put into--I've been given an opportunity to--where I may be able to carry things to a higher level.  I've been appointed as the director of a--the new center [National Cancer Institute's Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities] which I've--they've asked me to create--a center to reduce cancer, health disparities at the National Cancer Institute.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: This was only a few months ago.  So now I'm traveling back and forth to Bethesda [Maryland] to pull this together.  So I'm still the Chairman of the President's Cancer Panel.  Which I've been appointed for the fourth three-year term by President [Bill] Clinton.  It was [President] George [H. W.] Bush, Senior one--three years, Clinton, Clinton, Clinton. That's four times.  So now I'm the Chairman of the President's Cancer Panel under the son [President George W. Bush] of the person who first appointed me.  That'll never happen again I guess.  So (laughing) it's gonna be a twelve-year experience.  So I have an opportunity to influence national politics and thinking, I think, in that position.  And I have an opportunity to be creative about how to move the--to change the disparities issues in America through the new center.  Some--We have two divisions.  We have a research division related to disparities in cancer.  We have a policy division.  And so I'm gonna spend my energy in the remaining years that I work in continuing some local work here in cancer, trying to create a cancer center here in Harlem [Ralph Lauren Cancer Center].  With Memorial Sloan Kettering [Cancer Center, New York, New York] being a partner and Ralph Lauren putting up $5 million, so far in that.  I'm gonna continue some local work.  But what really interests me is, since I have gained a certain level of respect in the areas that I'm dealing in, whether I can influence the nation--again, to a higher level--with respect to the issue of disparities that go beyond race.  May really go--They're driven by human conditions.  Diseases occur always under human conditions.  And no matter how well you understand the molecular biology of the disease, if you don't understand the point, what happens to people who are poor, who are of a different culture, who are living in certain environments, who--live under certain political systems.  If you don't understand those things, you really don't understand the disease.  So I  would try to extend the scientific understanding to extend it out into a kind of a human understanding of the disease.  And that's  what I hope to better clarify in the next years.
Speaker 1: (Videographer) One minute
Speaker 2: Hmm.  Okay, and you--Does your move to this hospital, does that play a role in that?  I mean you had been at Harlem Hospital [New York, New York] for--That was your--
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.  No it's that I'm the same person.  I came here [North General Hospital, Harlem, New York, New York] as President [in 1999].  I stepped down from President by the way, just recently.  'Cause I couldn't do everything.  So now I'm just gonna work clinically and try to do the national work that I described.  No I think being in--It doesn't matter that I'm at one hospital versus another.  My work is for the community here locally.  I can do it from any building.  And my work is whatever effect my ideas have nationally.  And so it doesn't matter whether I'm in Harlem Hospital or North General or anywhere else.
Story_ID: 7391
Speaker 1: In, in 1990, a colleague and I wrote a paper, which was published in the New England Journal of Medicine, one of the respected American medical journals, which concluded that a black male growing up in Harlem [New York, New York], has less of a chance of reaching age 65, than a male growing up on Bangladesh. This sent shockwaves throughout the nation and throughout the world.  We got inquiries from as far away as China on this, after this paper was written.  What it essentially means is that within America,  within America, there are third world communities.  We all think of the third world  as being 8,000 miles away.  But there, there are third world communities within America, that need to be much better understood.  We need to delineate areas of excess mortality in America.  Geographically and culturally.  And we need to direct special resources and attention, education and access to people who are in these communities,  with culturally targeted information to try to save lives and advise people about how to save their own lives.  So what came out of that paper was we can't--we shouldn't just approach the whole nation like it's one under, you know, one nation.  We have to go to  the communities within America to solve this problem.  And particularly the communities which have a high death rate.  When you have a high death rate from cancer, in a community, you--you almost always will have a high death rate from other major diseases including cardiovascular disease and AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome], which is now in the picture pretty big.
Story_ID: 7392
Speaker 1: When you look back over your career, of which has been really a wonderful, wonderful career, do you have any regrets at all?
Speaker 2: I really don't have any regrets.  I think that even when you look at the years of complete segregation that I lived within, in a way, I think that I came out strong.  I came out strong.  Unfortunately there are many people who lived through that kind of environment whose lives are destroyed.  In my case, I must say that I came to that environment of complete segregation.  And I came out a very strong person.  Partly because of the experience itself. I don't advocate that people have--need to have that experience.  But I think that if you can come through a difficult set of circumstances, and come out whole, and, and come out with yourself intact--
Speaker 1: (Telephone rings)
Speaker 2: Oh--some--
Speaker 1: (Cut)
Speaker 2: I was saying--
Speaker 1: You were saying that having come through that--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah.  I think that if you can come out of an experience that is difficult, like, for example, growing up in a segregated society as I did.  If you can--if you can come out whole and intact, and, and with, with values, positive, and, and with ambition and with a good sense of spirit  I believe that you may come out a stronger person compared to somebody who never had anything bad go wrong.  So there's something about coming through a tough experience that can make people strong.
Story_ID: 7393
Speaker 1: The other thing I wanna ask is--your father.  What do you think if he had, you know, he would say about you if he could see you now?
Speaker 2: Well I think my father would be very proud of me if he saw me now.  He, he had some deep convictions.  He had a work ethic.  He was very disciplined.  He, he didn't take any stuff off of us when we were children.  We had to toe the line.  And I think that he could say that, that he helped me and he helped me to be the person--I think he'd be proud of the person that I am.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And in terms of when you think about the legacy that you came out of, what do you think your career represents?  And the progression of that legacy.
Speaker 2: I think that  I'm in a pivotal time position within the history of what has happened in America.  And that there have been some people that came before me that were much more pivotal.  But in my, my lifetime, having lived half of my life in complete segregation and half of it, you know, in a country whose laws are fair, I've been able to see both sides of this, rather well.  And I've tried to see it with clarity and fairness.  And, and so I think that a person like me hopefully could be a person that could be seen by young people--and I hope this--I hope this is  really the case--as a person that could show that if you come out of adversity, and, and carry things to a higher level, because of the adversity itself and that you will not give up hope.  But use the adversity to help you to transform your life and transcend the conditions.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And one last question.  And you may have answered it.  Paul, please just watch. Please. What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well I don't look for a personal legacy myself.  I'm not looking for somebody to remember me personally for something.  If they do, it is fine.  But what--The legacy that I look for is that maybe I brought some understanding to a very complex set of circumstances.  And I--that I used the field of medicine and in particular, the area of cancer to really focus on the human condition.  And that I took local circumstances and was able to universalize from the meaning of those circumstances, to ideas that, that have some influence on the entire world.  I hope that is my legacy.
