Story_ID: 663305
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: It's [HistoryMaker] Ricki Fairley, R-I-C-K-I, F as in Frank, A-I-R-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: And ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 17, 1956, I was born at Walter Reed hospital in Washington, D.C. [Walter Reed Army Medical Center; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: The name of my company is DOVE Marketing [DOVE Marketing, Inc.].  I'm an entrepreneur and I'm the president and thought leader.
Speaker 1: Okay, thought leader, okay.  Now, all right, is that--okay, do you want to talk about that for a minute?
Speaker 2: Sure in marketing--it's a marketing consulting company and it's all about thinking great things and giving people new ideas.  So I'm always trying to think about something new and different and innovative, and so.  I kind of made up that word, made up that title and really everybody in my company has a wacky title.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so my head of account service, her title is expeditor, my photographer's title is sharpshooter and everybody kind of makes up their own title just to be different.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  And what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is January 31, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 663306
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chocolate, hot fudge sundaes (laughter). That's my favorite food.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Jamaica, Negril.
Speaker 1: Okay and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No is never the answer, it's always how.
Story_ID: 663307
Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to start with your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] side but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --one at a time.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It is Wilma, W-I-L-M-A and her maiden name is King and her last name is Holmes, H-O-L-M-E-S [Wilma King Holmes].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 25, 1933 and she was born also here in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: I knew you were going to ask for this and I actually brought it with me and I forgot to look.  So, we have traced it back probably to about 1860.  So what I can tell you and I've been working on that lately.  I had--I had done a lot of work on my dad's side and I just really started working on my mom's side but my mom's family--the King family actually owned the land that is now consumed by Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  So that was my, my family's farm and they sold it to Howard and built the university.  But she grew up around that area, Girard Street and then Kenyon Street in D.C. and that's her dad's [Elton King] side of the family actually.  We don't know whole lot about her mom's side of the family.  She was born in--my grandmother [Edith King] was born in Virginia but we do have good background on the King family.
Speaker 1: So they were--well tell us a little bit something about them--a little bit about them.  They owned the land that Howard--Howard is occupying today (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they sold them--that was their farm.  I don't have a lot of detail because we were just starting to dig into it but we haven't--I haven't been able to trace back to slavery on my mom's side.  There's a lot of mixing and, and a lot of white people and a lot of the people passing.  So actually we found a couple of like great-great-aunts that actually claimed to be Cuban to pass.  So I'm not--I wish I could tell you more because I'm still trying to learn about it but they were all entrepreneurs and farmers and then my grandfather actually owned a gas station in D.C.
Speaker 1: Now, well--well the King family were they considered colored people in those days or black people or?
Speaker 2: They were, but there was a lot of mixing and we can tell that there's been a lot of passing and some of the old pictures which I'll show you are--they kind of look like Confederate--Confederate old white men, it's pretty funny, yeah.  When we showed them to my mom, she is like, are you kidding, this is my family?
Speaker 1: Yeah I'm sure they were probably free to own land back then (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes, we haven't been able to find slaves probably back to--you know, the, I think we've gone back to about 1870, 1865 so we're still working on that.  I have a really good friend, actually my Dartmouth roommate's [Victoria Samuels-Stewart] husband and he is a genealogy buff so he is really doing the research for us and has been able to find a lot of stuff.
Story_ID: 663308
Speaker 1: So you say your [maternal] grandfather owned a ga- a gas station?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Elton, E-L-T-O-N King [Elton King].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he owned a Sinclair [Sinclair Oil Corporation] gas station in Northeast Washington [D.C.].  The one with the dinosaur, I remember it vividly and he had a penny candy store in the gas station and so all the grand- I was the oldest grandchild.  So we would all go there and work on Saturdays and sell the candy for him.  The best day of the week was on Friday, he would pick me up from school [St. Anthony Catholic School, Washington, D.C.] and we would go to the warehouse, the wholesaler of the candy and I got to pick out the candy that we were going to sell that weekend.  We would all come home with like big bags and our mothers would have a fit--you know, all the cousins.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting so you started working at the age of--?
Speaker 2: Yeah I didn't really work.  I got paid in candy, I wouldn't call it a job but I was probably in third grade when I started doing that with him.  And then once when I was in third grade I went to school--we, we had lived in New York [Hempstead, New York] for a couple of years and then we moved back to D.C. and we stayed with my grandparents on Kenyon Street Northwest while our house was getting ready for about a--probably about two months and I went to a school in the neighborhood where my grandmother [Edith King] was friends with the principal and I hated it because we had just moved and I wasn't really feeling the transition and so I'm crying one Monday morning.  My grandfather took me to school he was like, "Forget it, we're not going to school today," and I literally played hooky for a week.  And finally--probably on Friday the principal who knew my grandmother called my grandmother and said, "Where is Ricki [HistoryMaker Ricki Fairley]?  She hasn't been in school, is she all right?"  My grandmother said, "What are you talking about?"  Because my grandmother would actually drop me off on one corner and my grandfather would pick me up on the other corner and I would like run across--down the street and get in his car and we'd go hang out.  So it took them a week to figure out that I was playing hooky with my grandfather (laughter) so.
Speaker 1: Was your grandfather in trouble?
Speaker 2: He was in trouble, he was no longer allowed to like take me to school, pick me up or have anything to do with me getting to school so, it was great though.  I was the first grandchild so I was quite spoiled by the grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay what about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother actually worked as a teacher.  She went to Miner Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  Worked as a teacher for a few years and then she ended up working for the government for her career at the bureau, engraving [U.S. Bureau of Engraving and Printing].  So she was always coming home with funny coins and I still have a bag of two dollar bills and bar dollars and a bunch of coins that she thought was on the market for a day or something and she would bring them home.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now your mother [Wilma King Holmes] grew up in Washington too, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes she did.  She went to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] like many African Americans in that day and then she went to Miner Teachers College.
Speaker 1: Now was Miner associated with Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: It eventually--you know I think it had actually kind of merged into Howard, eventually [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she's been a--she's been an educator her whole life.  She taught first grade when I was little and then eventually became a principal.  She just retired from being a principal in Montgomery County [Maryland] a year ago--a year and a half ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she was a first grade teacher.  I grew up all the time--we always grew up with like hatching chickens and bunnies and guinea pigs because she was always doing something in her classroom and bringing animals home, so.
Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about growing up--what life was like for her?
Speaker 2: She--you know I think she was pretty middle class black, you know.  My grandfather, her dad didn't go to college but he owned a business, entrepreneur and my grandmother worked in the government.  I think she kind of had a model childhood, the way she talked about it, she, you know, grew up in a single family home and had a great life.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now let me--so any other stories from your mother's side that you?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I'll probably think of some when I talk about my dad [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause the two of them knew each other since they were eight.
Story_ID: 663309
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Richard Fairley, F-A-I-R-L-E-Y, who also grew up in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he--what is his date of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth is July 16, 1933 and he passed in 2006 in July.
Speaker 1: Was he born in D.C. too?
Speaker 2: He was born in D.C. and his family we know a lot more about because we have just been working on it a little longer.  But, my grandmother--paternal grandmother her name was Gladys Wilkinson Fairley and we know a lot about the Wilkinsons.  We know the most about the Wilkinson family.  We have been able to trace them back, pretty far, to I believe about 1820s, and there were no slaves even back to that point.  The family roots were in Charleston, South Carolina, the Wilkinson family and my dad's mom's name is Gladys Wilkinson.  Did I say that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and his dad's name was Richmond Fairley and he actually was from North Carolina.  And we're still planning on working on that family but my--I have a lot of information from my dad's family actually from his grandmother [Fairley's paternal great-grandmother, Cora Wilkinson] and I have several letters that she, she wrote as a young adult or young--like a teenager about what was going on in their lives, which is pretty cool.  We found these letters.
Story_ID: 663310
Speaker 1: They're from your [paternal] great-grandmother, I guess right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Cora Wilkinson.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So you've got her letters, that's really--
Speaker 2: Yeah they are very, very cool, handwritten letters.  She tells the story of moving to Washington [D.C.] when she was about twelve and her dad was actually run out of Charleston [South Carolina] by the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK].  He was very kind of rebellious and kind of a (background noise)--you know, and they owned--the family owned a oak farm in Charleston and he was kind of run out of town and fled to D.C. and built a house in Anacostia [Washington, D.C.] using the oak from the farm and they were sitting on the porch one day and Frederick Douglass happened to walk down the street and walked up and knocked on the door and said, you know, "Who built your house?  I just bought the land next door and I'm looking for someone to build a house."  And her dad, I guess my great-great-grandfather said, "I built the house from my farm in Charleston."  He's like, "Well build me a house."  So he actually built Frederick Douglass a house next door.  And her letters talk about how she was afraid of Frederick Douglass because her--him and her dad used to argue at night sitting on the porch.  Her dad would always talk about him because he had--was like I think somewhat of a womanizer and always had white--had several white wives.  They would have these arguments over politics or whatever and they always would kind of wake her up from sleep arguing about stuff.  It was probably--you know, that was their relationship, I don't think it was mean, I think it was sort of how they talked to each other, it was fun.  But it distur- it disturbed her as a kid and she told these stories like I don't know they woke me up again and I don't know what they are fighting about, I wish they would shut up and the letters are pretty funny.  But, but that was sort of the story there and then later there is actually an area in Annapolis [Maryland] called Highland Beach [Maryland], you know Highland Beach?  It's a black beach, so Frederick Douglass actually bought this peninsula in Annapolis called Highland Beach and sold the land to black families to have--to let them have a beach house.  So, my--so, I think Highland Beach was established in 1896 [sic. 1893] and so somewhere in there our family did buy land there.  So we have some land in Highland Beach.
Speaker 1: Yeah I think it was all--it was purchased in Douglass' name from what I recall on the tour, you know Douglass died in 1895--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but his son [Charles Douglass] actually managed the development (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Managed the development, and actually his daughter [Rosetta Douglass]--he never lived in the, in the house there.  There is a house there that's his house but his daughter did--lived in the house and the house is like a museum.  It's a very, very cool place to go to, and--
Speaker 1: Right, I think Mary Church Terrell's descendants operate the museum.
Speaker 2: Yes and she lives next door, Jean [Jean Langston], yes.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: So they all grew up with my parents.
Speaker 1: So Douglass would argue about his--his girlfriends.
Speaker 2: His girlfriends, his politics, whatever and the way Cora described it, it was like gosh they are arguing again, now what are they talking about.  I think she was probably like a young teenager.
Speaker 1: What--what was your--now this would be--Cora would be your great-grandmother so it would be your great-great-grandfather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --who was arguing with Frederick Douglass.  Do you know his name?
Speaker 2: No but I can tell you later, I can look it up.
Speaker 1: He was the one who was chased out of North Carolina [sic.] by the Klan (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Out of North Carolina, yes I do have his name I just--forgive me, I have a really great memory but I just don't have same day service (laughter).
Speaker 1: No this is good because it gives people a clue.  That's why I asked the question just to give people a clue because if you don't know his exact name that's all right (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have it though, yeah, we have--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --a great recording and actually--actually what we've been able to find is that they--they all went to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio].
Story_ID: 663311
Speaker 1: I think the first one graduated--first Wilkinson graduated in Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] in like the--in the 1830s or '40s [1840s], pretty far back.  And--my grandmother [Gladys Wilkinson Fairley] was the last of the family to graduate from Oberlin, my father's mother and she was the vice principal of Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], of the high school that my parents went to and most of the--I guess there were two black high schools in the '50s [1950s] Dunbar and Armstrong [Samuel Chapman Armstrong Technical High School; Armstrong Manual Training School, Washington, D.C.].  Dunbar was like the college prep school and so she was the vice principal of that school and her uncle, Garnet Wilkinson was actually the superintendent of the schools [District of Columbia Public Schools].
Speaker 2: Now Garnet Wilkinson I'm sure (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, and he did go, and he went--there is a school in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] named after him.
Speaker 2: Of Wilkinson?
Speaker 1: Yes, Garnet Wilkinson Elementary School [Garnet C. Wilkinson Elementary School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: I'm sure he's named after Henry Highland Garnet--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --more than likely.
Speaker 1: Probably yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So he--and he also went to Oberlin and all his siblings went to Oberlin so all of my grandmother's parents' siblings all went to Oberlin on her--the Wilkinson family.
Speaker 2: Now that was--Oberlin being the first school to really admit blacks back in the--
Speaker 1: Yes so, yes.  Interestingly my niece--my sister's daughter when she was applying to college she considered going to Oberlin and so they went to Oberlin to check out the school and make a visit and they pulled out the archives and showed them my grandmother's application, handwritten from when she went there and her transcript was pretty cool.  So we have that too.
Speaker 2: Okay but at some point the family broke the tradition of going to Oberlin (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes so when my grandmother who was the vice principal at Dunbar insisted that my dad [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] go to an Ivy League school.  My dad could never--we never really got clear on why he picked Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] but he picked Dartmouth.  She said, "You can go to any college but it's got to be Ivy League," and that sort of started our Dartmouth tradition and my dad went to Dartmouth and I went to Dartmouth and my two daughters [Amanda Brown and Hayley Brown].  My sister [Sharon Fairley] was the wayward child, she went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and my dad was pretty heartbroken over that (laughter).  He talked about that all the time.  But her daughter ended up going to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] which was great because my dad got his, my--both of my parents actually got their master's degrees at Stanford so she kind of redeemed herself when Leslie [Leslie Rogers Nickerson] went to Stanford.
Story_ID: 663312
Speaker 1: So your father [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] he, he grew up in an accomplished family.
Speaker 2: Yes so, so my grandmother [Gladys Wilkinson Fairley] was an educator and his dad was a Presbyterian minister.
Speaker 1: Okay what was his father's name?
Speaker 2: Richmond Fairley.
Speaker 1: Richmond Fairley, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he pastored a church here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yes and I know you are going to ask me the name of that and I can't remember, I'm really bad at this stuff.  Too many things going on in my brain but I can definitely give it you.  He pastored that church--he actually was my caretaker probably until I went to school, nursery school, I stayed--he stayed home with me because I went to church with him and we used to go to Hot Shoppes [Washington, D.C.] every day and have grilled cheese sandwiches and Cherry Smash for lunch.  I have like great memories of being, whatever, two and three years old and walking with him.
Speaker 1: Okay now did your father talk about his experiences growing up in D.C. or Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire]?
Speaker 2: All the time, you know he was a totally D.C. kid.  He played basketball, he did ROTC [Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps] at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] and he was the star of the basketball team in high school and in college.  I have great picture and all his like basketball clippings from newspapers and he saved everything.  We actually just found a bunch of stuff a couple of weeks ago because his younger brother [Paul Fairley] is turning seventy-five tomorrow--today actually, today, and we are having a big party tomorrow.  So we started digging through some old stuff.  My cousin and I a couple of weeks ago and we found even more clippings and--of his basketball days.  He played basketball and he was a high jumper.  But he was, you know, a force to be reckoned with, in D.C. (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay now Dartmouth--was he like one of the few--he had to be one of the few blacks--
Speaker 2: There were twelve, three in a class.  He graduated from Dartmouth in '55 [1955] and actually my mom [Wilma King Holmes] and I were in Hanover [New Hampshire] a few months ago.  We went up to visit my daughter [Hayley Brown] and we were driving somewhere like in White River Junction [Vermont] like the next town over from Hanover and my mom was like, "Stop the car, stop the car," and I'm like, "What's going on," and she said, "See that diner right there? We went to that diner one night at two o'clock in the morning and your dad and I took a cab there and we couldn't pay the cab fare and we had to walk home--walk back to campus in the freezing cold," (laughter).  She has great stories of going to visit him in Hanover.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But she even tells the story about how he really had no clue what it was like to live in New Hampshire, you know growing up in D.C. and he really didn't have a warm enough coat for the climate and he called home and said, "You know, I think I need a coat."  He didn't want to ask for anything because he was so blessed to be able to go to Dartmouth but his older brother [Alvin Fairley] actually sold his car to buy him a winter coat.  I remember when he told me that story, he cried, you know.  It's like he sold his car to buy me a coat, that's how, you know.  You know, they were middle class but they were, you know, still struggling, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause this is, this would have been--yeah, in '55 [1955].
Story_ID: 663313
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?  So they, they met at eight years old?
Speaker 2: They met in third grade. They went to grammar school together [at the Bruce School, Washington, D.C.] and the stories that my grandmother--both my grandmothers used to tell us that my maternal grandmother [Edith King] did not like my father [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] at all because she was a--you know, she sewed, she sewed everybody's clothes.  She made all my clothes when I was a kid but she made my mother [Wilma King Holmes] clothes every day.  Like she had a new dress every day, she was totally into fashion, but she made the clothes and she would stay up all night making my mother like the perfect little dress with the perfect everything and then she would go to school and she had long braids and my dad would sit behind her and stick her braids in the inkwells and then the ink would get on her brand new dress.  My mother really didn't realize it until she would get home and my grandmother was like, "What happened to your dress?"
Speaker 1: That's an old story; you hear that all the time.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: You see it in old movies but they actually did this (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they had both told the story and--to the point when one time she called my paternal grandmother [Gladys Wilkinson Fairley] and said, "You need to get control of your child because he's ruining my daughter's clothes."
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So they became like friends and adversaries at a very young age.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they went all through school together and they actually--they were married for twenty-five years.  They got divorced when I was like twenty-four and I think they just grew apart.  But really until the day--three days before my father died I talked to my--both of my parents at eight o'clock every morning and they were both remarried but they became best friends even after they were divorced and on every day it was different who was going to call who but we'd all end up on the phone.  If I had my mo- my dad on the phone first, my dad would say, "Get the love of my life on the phone."  But I talked to them every morning at eight o'clock, we'd have a three way call and sometimes we'd call Sharon [Sharon Fairley], my sister and she would like, "I don't have time to talk to you people," because we would just talk on the phone.  Usually I would be driving to work or something and we'd talk on the phone about whatever, about the kids, the grand kids.
Speaker 1: Now they didn't go to scho- they didn't go to college together, right?
Speaker 2: No because my mom was here [Miners Teacher College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] and my dad was at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], yeah.  But they stilled stayed together and they got married right after he graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay in '55 [1955]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 663314
Speaker 1: Now when you think about their personalities, their dispositions, how--what they look like, how they walked, how they talked, sense of humor.  Who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Both of them, both of them.  I think that I'm probably a little more like my dad [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] because my dad was 6'6" and I'm 5'9", we all sort of got his height.  But I probably have more his body type; my sister [Sharon Fairley] has more my mother's body type.  But in terms of personality traits, I think I got hopefully the best of both of them, I don't--I don't know.  My dad was very charismatic.  He was a total flirt, we would go anywhere and whatever restaurant we were at we were going to get a table no matter how crowded it was.  He was like mister charming, he could work a room anywhere and charm everybody and I sort of got that talent, I'm totally a flirt.  But my mom [Wilma King Holmes] too is very, you know, very outgoing and very gregarious and she too--she can pretty much motivate people to do anything.  When I left home when I went to college [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] I hadn't really lived here in Washington [D.C.] for most of my life.  I just moved back here a year ago and so now I've been spending a lot of time with my mom and her sort of circles and I can see how she totally influences people like for example, I'm in her Links [The Links, Incorporated]--we are in the same Links chapter now and she wanted raise money for a homeless shelter in Montgomery County [Maryland] and she literally got thirty women to write a check for two hundred dollars in five minutes.  Like I need this money, I've to take care of these kids.  So they both had a social mission in terms of their lives and what they did for the world and they were both very committed to it and I think, you know--I've seen them--how they are able to convince--motivate people to, to have behavior that they want, which is pretty good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's pretty funny, that's what marketing is; that's what I do for a living.
Story_ID: 663315
Speaker 1: Is it just you and your sister?
Speaker 2: My sister yeah, she's four years younger.  Her name is Sharon Fairley and she was born September 12, 1960 and she is a U.S. attorney in Chicago [Illinois].  Actually how I met Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] was Sharon when she moved to Chicago had a fund raiser for HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers], so.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so in your household growing up is your mother [Wilma King Holmes] and father [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley], you and your sister.  And, did any other relatives live with you?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  My grandparents were pretty close so we lived in--our first house in Washington [D.C.] was on 6th Place Northeast and was very close to my grandfather's gas station and then my dad had got a job working in New York and we lived Hempstead, New York for two years.  When I was in first and second grade and it was some kind of government job and the--and actually when I think when I was really young he taught at Spingarn High School [Joel Elias Spingarn High School, Washington, D.C.].  Then we moved back from New York when I was in third grade and lived with my grandparents [Edith King and Elton King] for a couple of months and then moved to where I grew up in Silver Spring, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we were like the first black family to move to the neighborhood, and.  But my, my grandparents were both within like fifteen minutes of where we lived.
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I think probably one of my earliest memories is walking on the sidewalk from my, from my father's parents' house where we probably lived when I was, you know, young, probably two, two, three, walking to Hot Shoppe [Hot Shoppes, Washington, D.C.] with my grandfather, with my paternal grandfather [Richmond Fairley].
Story_ID: 663316
Speaker 1: Okay, I was asking you about your, your first childhood memory.
Speaker 2: Yeah I think that's probably the--what I remember first.  I love Cherry Smash soda to this day, right, and grilled cheese sandwiches and hot fudge sundaes.  That's what I used to do with my grandfather [Fairley's paternal grandfather, Richmond Fairley] but I remember walking to get lunch.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was my caretaker.
Speaker 1: Okay so when did your family move to Silver Spring [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: When I was in third grade.
Speaker 1: Third grade, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. And that we lived in that house until I went to college [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].
Story_ID: 663317
Speaker 1: Can you describe the house, the neighborhood and some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sure, it was--you know, we lived in Silver Spring [Maryland].  We were the first black family to live in the neighborhood and probably were the only black family for a while.  It was suburban D.C. [Washington, D.C.], we were probably about just a mile from the district line and it was very close to downtown Silver Spring so I could walk pretty much everywhere.  I walk to my grammar school which was St. Michael School [St. Michael the Archangel School, Silver Spring, Maryland] and I could walk to the movie theater, to McRory's [ph.] my favorite hangout where you could buy records and junk and whatever.  I walked to school every day.  We were kind of like latchkey kids because my parents were both working.  My mom [Wilma King Holmes] was a teacher and she would get home by like 4, 4:30 but I would walk home with my sister [Sharon Fairley] and go into the house and pretend to get along until my mother got home.  But I had a great childhood.  My mom did not like to cook at all so literally on Sunday we would have Sunday dinner at my grandmother's house, my maternal grandmother's house with my cousins and she would pack up everybody's food for the week and we would take it home.  Thank God for my grandmother [Edith King] because my mother would feed us Chef Boyardee and TV dinners if it weren't for her.  So usually my grandmother's leftovers would last to about Wednesday.  I was so thankful when I learned how to drive, my sister and I would jump into the car and drive to my grandmother's house to eat dinner because my mother did not want to be bothered with cooking.  My dad [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] cooked every now and then but she clearly--both were very involved in their careers.  My mom was very active in the school system [Montgomery County Public Schools] and had a lot of meetings at night.  So it was a great growing up environment.  I really thought we were the, you know, the Cosby family.  We were involved in an organization called Tots and Teens [National Tots and Teens Inc.] which I think was sort of a precursor of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] because I think my parents felt like we needed some African American influence because of our--you know we went to all white schools.  We were probably the only black kids in our grammar school and definitely in our high school.  We both went to Holy Cross--Academy of the Holy Cross high school in Kensington [Maryland].  My parents were fanatics about education so we got paid for A's, got paid nothing for Bs.  So I think probably when I was younger we--we got paid two dollars.  I don't remember what the increment of dollars was then but my sister and I--we would actually plan what we were going to do with the money before we got our report cards and my father continued that tradition through the grandchildren.  So I think the latest going rate is ten dollars an A, nothing for Bs. So we were like it was mandatory you got straight A's like that was not a discussion; that was your job.
Speaker 1: Did you have to pay if you got a C (laughter)?
Speaker 2: You--I wouldn't even think about getting a C. You know what, I got my first C at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and I cried relentlessly in chemistry.  It was--it was traumatic; it was a traumatic experience to have to tell my father that I got a C because that was not, that was not appropriate.  So we were very focused on education and, and it's funny that my younger daughter [Hayley Brown] who will graduate from Dartmouth in June, she describes me to her friends, "Oh my mom let me do whatever I want as long as I got straight A's."  I didn't really have rules as long as I got straight A's because that was, that was the mandate.  So we sort of continued the tradition.
Story_ID: 663318
Speaker 1: Now you started school in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], right, or?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What--what was the name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Keene Elementary School [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Keene, K-E-
Speaker 2: K-E-A-N-E Elementary School [sic.] in D.C. for kindergarten and then I went to first and second grade in Hempstead [New York] and I've no idea what the name of that school was.  I do remember that my, my teacher when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] died was Mrs. Ball [ph.] because she walked us home, she walked all the kids home from school and then I went to St. Anthony's school [St. Anthony Catholic School, Washington, D.C.] for a very hot minute when I was living with my grandparents [Fairley's maternal grandparents, Edith King and Elton King] when we moved back from New York.  And then I went to St. Michael's school [St. Michael the Archangel School] in Silver Spring [Maryland] to eighth grade and then Academy of the Holy Cross [Kensington, Maryland].  My little sister [Sharon Fairley] went--really went to St. Michael's from first grade through eighth grade and then Holy Cross.
Speaker 1: Now your family was not Catholic, right?
Speaker 2: No, my--actually my mother [Wilma King Holmes] converted to Catholicism so that we could go to Catholic school and I think my parents were just adamant about education and it's funny because my mom worked in Montgomery County Public Schools, she was a teacher.  She took a little heat for--as she sort of got promoted up in administration--for having her children go to a Catholic school but I think that was like probably the closest thing to what they could afford in terms of private school in those days, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Right, I remember those kinds of debates and arguments.  A lot of prominent school administrators sent their children to Catholic schools--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or private schools or some other school.
Speaker 2: My father [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] loved--he talked about, "You will wear a uniform to school," he loved uniforms.  I grew up with bobby socks and saddle shoes and little plaid dresses and to this day I cannot wear plaid because I wore plaid my whole growing up life.  He was adamant that everybody should be focused on education, be focused on your school work, no worrying about what you're going to wear to school, that's an important thing.  So it was all about getting A's.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And even when I--even when I got ready to go to college, my father was like, "You can go to any school you want but if you want me to pay for it you've got seven choices, Ivy League.  So pick which one of those you want. You want to go someplace else then you are on your own."
Speaker 1: Okay.  But what a choice to have though--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I mean, so a lot of people don't have that choice.
Speaker 2: But he was always adamant, he was adamant.
Story_ID: 663319
Speaker 1: Did you consider going anywhere else?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, and it's funny my sister [Sharon Fairley] wanted to go to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] because a bunch of her friends were going to Duke and my father [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] was like, "Whatever you are not going to Duke, I mean, you can go to Duke but you better get the money" so, so, "because it's not going to happen."  She was kind of like a rebel teenager and she went to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] as her rebellion.  But no and I guess we had been going to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] probably since I was about twelve.  The first time I went to Dartmouth I was probably about eight and then when I was twelve we went up and my dad was one of the founders of that black alumni association [Black Alumni of Dartmouth Association] and once that was established we probably started going pretty frequently and we sort of had a family tradition to go up there for Winter Carnival which we still do today.  I'm going up next Friday to Winter Carnival for Haley's [Hayley Brown] last Winter Carnival.  But so, so Dartmouth was kind of like home for me in a lot of ways because I had been there.  You know it was familiar and we went to visit.  Actually I think we went to visit Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], we went to visit Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], we went to visit the other schools but Hanover [New Hampshire] is magical, it's like Camelot; I can't describe it.  It's like an amazing, amazing little town.  When you get to Dartmouth's campus it's to me what a college is supposed to look like and feel like.  So it was sort of an easy transition for me to go there, and, and when I went there, I was in the third class of girls.  When I first started talking about going to Dartmouth my dad was like, "You can't go to Dartmouth, it's a men's school."  I was in the third class with women and he actually voted against coeducation and so I told him, "I'm serious, I really want to go."  He was like, "All right but you know there are going to be wolves up there."  So but it was an argument to like get him to say it was okay to go to Dartmouth, it was like why don't you go to, you know.
Speaker 1: Was there a companion school to Dartmouth like Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is to Harvard?
Speaker 2: No, no.  And Radcliffe was okay.  Like he--I think he really was sort of pushing me to go to Radcliffe, but, but even Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] weren't on his list.
Story_ID: 663320
Speaker 1: Well back to grade school for a minute.  Did--what were you interested in, in grade school?
Speaker 2: I was a dancer, I took, you know, I took ballet.  I, I was always interested in government probably for as long as I can remember.  The president of the class, the vice president, I was always running for something, some kind of office, which is crazy.  I was--'cause my, my daughter [Amanda Brown] is sort of in to politics now.  I was always a cheerleader like in high school [Academy of the Holy Cross, Kensington, Maryland] and at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] as well.  I was very much into family, I was the oldest grandchild so all the cousins were younger than me so I was always the Pied Piper.  I always had some kid with me especially when I started driving, I was always--I had a car full of cousins.  So I've sort of been ringleader of the cousins.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I used--I was always babysitting for somebody's kid.
Speaker 1: Now was there at that grade school level, say at a--I don't know, was there any special teachers that you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh.  I just remember being a goody two shoes, I was like, you know, always the teacher's pet.  I have more recollection of my high school teachers probably than grammar school.  I know that probably in about seventh grade the nuns in my school needed to buy a new car and they made us save S&H Green Stamps [Sperry and Hutchinson Company] and so I was sort of the ringleader of the S&H Green Stamps saving thing because I would--I was relentless about getting my family to like get the green stamps.  I think I was like one of the, you know, biggest whatever raisers of stamps but we saved them for a year and they bought a car and I remember the day when they drove this like blue Impala [Chevrolet Impala] into the school parking lot they had bought with the stamps we saved so I was very proud that I was like a ring leader of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's something to be able to buy a car with green stamps.
Speaker 2: I know, isn't that crazy but I can visualize it.  It was a blue like, I don't know 1968 Impala or something I don't even remember the year but it was a brand new car and it took us a year to raise them.
Speaker 1: So you--you would have been in kindergarten in '61 [1961] I guess, right?  Sixty-one [1961], or--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So you would have started high school in--
Speaker 2: In '72 [1972], I mean '70 [1970]--
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], okay.
Speaker 2: --in '70 [1970], yes.
Speaker 1: Now did you have like middle school or something, or?
Speaker 2: Eighth grade, my grammar school [St. Michael the Archangel School, Silver Spring, Maryland] went to eighth grade--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then I went to high school in ninth grade.
Story_ID: 663321
Speaker 1: Considering what you do today, what was your relationship to popular culture in those days?  Did you watch a lot of TV?  Was the family exposed to a lot of the marketing, and, you know, the radio, and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably, you know, I mean I was definitely into media then watching the TV.  Watching the commercials and it's funny now because one of my favorite shows on TV is 'Mad Men,' do you know 'Mad Men'?  A lot of the content is based on real advertising from the '60s [1960s] and I remember those ads (laughter).  It's like that's why I remember that ad.  So I remember though, I used to love Look magazine and I would always like to read--my grandmother always had the best magazines at her house and I used to love Look magazine, looking at the ads, and definitely Ebony and Jet were like, you know--I would sort of comb through them to see what was going on in the world, and--
Speaker 1: Were, were you aware at all of, of the black advertising--
Speaker 2: Probably not--
Speaker 1: --agencies, in those days?
Speaker 2: Not in tho- no, definitely not, definitely not in those days.
Speaker 1: I didn't expect you would be but I just wondered because sometimes people are--depending on where they are they might be privileged to more information than some others.  I know I wasn't--growing up, I wasn't aware.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When I became aware, like a button clicked.  You know, I can understand why certain ads were the way they were.
Speaker 2: I think probably I didn't become aware really probably until I was an adult but I mean--or at least in grad school [at Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois] because then I--in those days it was still like the novices sort of in black advertising.  Like maybe Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company], McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation], were some of the early advertisers they were like the first.  There was an Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] commercial that Tide did, that was one of the first black commercials where the dancers all had on white tee shirts and white--all white and they washed them in Tide.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh.
Speaker 1: Were you in high school then?
Speaker 2: No, this was probably in college, college, grad school, yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm thinking in late '60s [1960s] early '70s [1970s].  I'm not sure when 'Soul Train' came on air.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was going to say I definitely watched 'Soul Train.' I definitely watched 'Soul Train.'  I think 'Soul Train' started in like, early '70s [1970s], '70s [1970s], '72 [1972].  I don't know if it was around in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just can't remember (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's actually an article in the paper yesterday about 'Soul Train.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's when I first got--when I saw--what I knew what, or what I thought was a black ad, "Watu Wazuri, use Afro Sheen," (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right Afro Sheen sort of black hair products.  Hair products were probably the earliest black advertisers if you think about it.  I was sort of thinking about general market for Tide but you're right, hair products you know Afro Sheen and perms and--
Speaker 1: I really can't--I'm trying to think the first time I saw a black person in an ad for a general product--a white product, I can't remember.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was probably--I would say that was late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe in late '60s [1960s], there may have been in the late '60s [1960s] because that's when we had 'Julia' the TV show and 'Star Trek' had, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Had Uhura, yep.
Speaker 1: So black folks were on television, at least in roles--
Speaker 2: Yeah and even 'Fat Albert' ['Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids'].
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Cosby [Bill Cosby] had his--the cartoon (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Cosby--'I Spy' was in '64 [sic. 1965].
Speaker 2: 'I Spy,' right, yeah, was that '64 [1964]?  Okay.
Speaker 1: So, now--that's kind of, you know, in the movie 'Putney Swope' about the ad industry--
Speaker 2: Oh really, yeah, that's a--
Speaker 1: --yeah, taken over by the brother (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a great movie.
Story_ID: 663322
Speaker 1: You weren't really thinking about it in those terms, so, but (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, I wasn't thinking--and actually in those days I wanted to be a doctor when I grew up and I think that was the influence of my dad [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley], I'm pretty sure he stood over my crib saying, "You want to be a doctor, you want to be a doctor, you want to be a doctor," and actually when I went to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] I took all pre-med courses.  I took all the pre-med prep but I had--but I found comfort being an English major.  So I took chemistry and organic and biology and physics and all that stuff and I did it because my dad wanted me to.  But I would go like find solace in the, in the English library reading books and writing.  So even though I took all the pre-med courses, I majored in English, so, and then finally I remember my junior year having a heart to heart talk with my dad saying, "You know I don't really think I like the sight of blood.  I don't think this doctor thing is really going to work for me," because I think he was so driven, you have to be a doctor or lawyer when you grow up, you can't work in--you know.  For them they were educators who worked for the government and it was like to go into business was like, are you kidding, what would you do?  Do you want to be a salesperson; do you want to sell vacuum cleaners door to door?  Like, what does that mean?
Speaker 1: He couldn't really envision a business (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He didn't have a concept for it.  And even when I went to business school--you know I said, "I want to go to business school and get my M.B.A.," and he's like, "Why, what does that mean?"  He actually came to Kellogg [Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois]--went to Kellogg with me and sat down with one of the older marketing professors and had him explain what marketing is.  My professor sat with him for an hour and explained what marketing is and how it's different from sales because he really thought I was going to like be a door to door salesman, he had no concept for it.  And then when I graduated he went back and sat with the same professor and said, "Okay what does this mean, what is she going to do?"  He went with me to my first job [at McNeil Consumer Products Company; McNeil Consumer Healthcare], like, he was like my date at all the business dinners because he wanted to see and understand what I was doing.
Speaker 1: That's really something, I mean to think that someone's parent would --I mean father would do that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you know, he was very domineering.
Speaker 1: --take that kind of keen interest.  I mean, it's not like--it doesn't seem like it's wrong, it just seems like it's a very--it's interesting that someone's father would be that involved (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had this umbilical cord that was really never cut.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: And people used to always like--even my, you know, my husband [Fairley's ex-husband, Rodney Brown] was like you really need to cut your umbilical cord. I'm like I like my umbilical cord, I don't want to cut my umbilical cord.  So, I was pretty attached.
Speaker 1: That's a, yeah, that's a--like, yeah, as long as it's good, I mean it's a good--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --connection, then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 663323
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) High school you're a cheerleader, you're making good grades, you're in student government, you're doing all these things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, president of the class all of that stuff.
Speaker 1: --want to be a doctor, you're a teacher's pet (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I was like a, I was a goody two shoes kid, I was totally.  I never really got into trouble and it's funny because I'm really--I'm now--my high school class we have sort of re-found each other on Facebook and we have like reunions now; pretty much every other month and they tell me these stories about how this one was in trouble and this one like did this in the bathroom and was smoking over here.  I'm like I have no recollection of that and they were like, "You didn't know, you were the good girl."  I had no idea that like five of them almost didn't graduate because the day before graduation like they painted the bathroom blue or something crazy and they were about to get evicted from graduation.  I'm like, "How did you--where was I?"  I was totally a goody--I was totally oblivious.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Academy of the Holy Cross.
Speaker 1: Academy of the Holy Cross.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's in Kensington, Maryland.  And--
Speaker 1: Now did you have to stay there?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, it was not a boarding school.  I actually--my mom [Wilma King Holmes] drove to school every day and then when I could drive, I drove.  The best part about it was we had these--it was like a very hilly area and it was like the best for tobogganing and everything, and sledding.  We use to go out at lunch time in our gym uniforms and like slide down the hills and stuff and it's now become Strathmore center for the arts [The Music Center at Strathmore, North Bethesda, Maryland].  They--the school sold the property to Strathmore to--really to stay alive, to survive.  I think it's still one of the few all-girls schools in the area that remained all-girls.  But I do think that going to an all-girls high school was an uplifting experience.  You know, it's, like to be sort of in this girl fest that you are just taught to have confidence and taught to express yourself and really when I went to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] the ratio of men to women was six to one.  I'd never been in a classroom with guys and I had never not worn a uniform.  So it was like kind of going to a totally different experience.  But I do--I felt like my high school was very nurturing and supportive and very, you know, very academic.
Speaker 1: So you graduated in 1970?
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974] from high school.
Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974], okay, you started in '70 [1970].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Graduated in '74 [1974], all right.  And, was there some spe- was there anything special about your graduation, did you get any special honors or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah the National Honor Society, I think I was seventh in my class and my class was 105 girls.  Two days before my graduation I was wearing those platform shoes that everybody wore in the '60s [1960s], ran down the steps as my godmother was coming to my house to visit for graduation and broke my foot.  So I walked in my (unclear) my high school graduation on crutches with a cast.  And my mom was like, "I don't care what you do but you're walking across that stage."  I think I did have like, a couple of rebellious moments in high school.  In senior year when I started to feel my oats a little bit, they made you take a class called marriage and the family taught by a priest.
Speaker 1: Yes, an expert.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  So I remember being in the class saying, "Well what do you know, like how do you--how can you even talk about this topic," and I challenged him and of course they sent me to the office, they called my mother.  My mother was like, "Can you just like make it, we're almost--it's like March and you're going to graduate in three months, just shut up, you know, don't challenge the priest."
Story_ID: 663324
Speaker 1: What were you reading in those days? What were you reading and what was influencing your thought?
Speaker 2: I think what sort of took me over the edge--I loved [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni.  'Ego Tripping' ['Ego Tripping (there may be a reason why)'] was like my favorite poem, I could recite it.  I loved poetry, I loved poetry, I loved the Lost Generation, kind of the early 1900s, Ernest Hemingway, F. Scott Fitzgerald, 'Great Gatsby' ['The Great Gatsby'] is one of my favorite books.  I loved kind of the Roaring '20s [1920s] and that whole scene probably like--I'm trying to think of the black book ['Native Son']--I'll think of it.  Where the guy kills the woman and puts the woman in the incinerator.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah Bigger Thomas is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bigger Thomas.
Speaker 1: But the story is--what is it, it's Richard Wright.
Speaker 2: Richard Wright, I love Richard Wright, I loved that whole era.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so did you have any black literature course?
Speaker 2: Oh no, are you kidding, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to--so I was the only black in my high school [Academy of the Holy Cross, Kensington, Maryland].  There was actually when I started there was one black senior her name was Bernadette [ph.] and she kind of took me under her wing and then I was it and then my sister [Sharon Fairley] was literally four years behind me.  So we never overlapped in school.  But when she went, she was the only black and I think another kid came when she was there--while she was there.
Speaker 1: Now did you go to the black book stores at times or that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No my parents probably brought books home.  My mom [Wilma King Holmes]--you know, we always had books because my mom was a teacher.  So she actually taught first grade probably until I was in about eighth grade [at St. Michael the Archangel School, Silver Spring, Maryland] and then she became the director of the department of human relations for Montgomery County [Montgomery County Public Schools] which was a newer department.  Really their first attempt to diversity, dealing with diversity, and so she ran that department and she did that when I pretty much was in high school and then she became a principal after that--kind of worked through administration.  But she always sort of brought--you know, we always had, "Read this, do this," exposure.  And we also--we always went to a lot, we went to plays, and we went to the ballet.  We used to go to a play every holiday pretty much.  My dad [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] was very into musicals and theater and we went to Radio City [Radio City Music Hall, New York, New York] every Christmas, and, you know, we did a lot of theater (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's in New York [New York], you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'd get on the train and go to Radio City and eat in the automats and.
Story_ID: 663325
Speaker 1: Did you travel when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: We did travel a lot.  Probably a lot of driving travel.  You know we went to Atlantic City [New Jersey] a lot, we went to--you know my dad's totally a water person.  We probably had a boat from when I was in first grade.  So we always had--we, and because of our property in Annapolis [Maryland], we were in Annapolis a lot.  I spent a lot of summers in Annapolis and we had our property in Highland [Highland Beach, Maryland] and then my dad [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] actually bought a house in a rental on the bay and that's where I really spent most of my--definitely my high school summers in Annapolis.  Probably if I ever got into trouble it was skinny dipping at night (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you actually did this, okay I thought you were too good, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was probably my wild side.  My wildest side was skinny dipping; I would get in trouble for skinny dipping because I would, you know, get a jellyfish burn on my butt or something (laughter).  My mom [Wilma King Holmes] was like, "What were you doing?"  I think my dad--my mother tells the story that my dad literally picked me up and dropped me in the Chesapeake Bay when I was six months old and said, "Get out," so I've been swimming my whole life.  He did the same thing with my daughters [Amanda Brown and Hayley Brown]; they were in the bay two months old.
Speaker 1: They say you can do that, you can drop a baby in the water and it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah my daughters learned to swim by nature, both of them.  My dad was like, "Everybody has to swim."  So we always had a boat, we were always doing something with water. But when I was in seventh grade my parents--my dad--my parents took a sabbatical and we drove across country and they went to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and got their master's degrees and we lived in student housing.  My dad had a little moped and we all had bicycles and we lived in--lived in Escondido Village [Stanford, California] which is still I think the graduate housing at Stanford now and then we packed up and drove back across country.
Speaker 1: Okay, it just took a year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did this year program and got their master's degrees.  And then while I was in high school [Academy of the Holy Cross, Kensington, Maryland], my dad went to U Mass [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] and got his Ph.D.  So the year I graduated from high school, he also graduated with his Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Okay and it was in education.
Speaker 2: Education, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, okay, so you--you chose Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, Hew Hampshire] because that was your family's school?
Speaker 2: Yeah and I was really--I think it was just comfortable and it's a magical place, I love Hanover [New Hampshire].
Story_ID: 663326
Speaker 1: What did you do the summer before you went to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire]?
Speaker 2: The summer before I went to Dartmouth I worked at a day camp that I had worked at all through high school [Academy of the Holy Cross, Kensington, Maryland] and I was a lifeguard.  I taught swimming lessons and was hanging out with the kids.  I did that probably for three summers in high school.  It was a Y [Young Men's Christian Association] day camp.
Speaker 1: I just get the feeling you'd be good with kids, you know, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I love kids, I'm always around kids.  I guess that's probably my mother's teaching bug, I don't know.  But I think it skipped a generation and went to the grandchildren.  But I always had kids, I was always a Pied Piper, I always had a car full of kids.  All the cousins always wanted to be with me.  I had this really hot car in high school.  I had a '68 [1968] Camaro convertible [Chevrolet Camaro] and I used to drive around with the top down regardless of the weather and in the wintertime we would just put blankets in the car, in the summertime--because with the top down you could fit more people in it because it was real small.  But I always had--and my parents' rule was I could have a car but I would have to drive Sharon [Sharon Fairley] wherever she wanted to go.  So Sharon was a cheerleader so I was always driving around with like twelve cheerleaders in my little Camaro with the top down (laughter) so, to the point where Sharon, you know.
Speaker 1: So you are working in a day camp over the summer and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --then went to Dartmouth.  You were not unfamiliar with it--you knew something about it, so.
Speaker 2: So we got into the car, we drove to Hanover [New Hampshire] and my parents settled me into my dorm and so I'd really never been away from home for--I never wanted to go away from home for camp or anything.  I never wanted to sleep at anyone else's house except for my own so everyone came to my house.  So I'd never really slept away from home except with my grandparents.  So my parents were about to leave me and we were in the car and they were driving down this sort of a main street and this girl was walking on the sidewalk and so my dad [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] stopped the car and said, "Hey you, get into the car," so, a young black woman.  So she like reluctantly gets in the car like who are these people and said, "What's your name," and she said, "My name is Victoria [Victoria Samuels-Stewart]," and, "Where are you from?"  "Chattanooga, Tennessee," and he's like, "This is my daughter Ricki [HistoryMaker Ricki Fairley], now get out and go be friends," and they left me.  I was crying, my mother [Wilma King Holmes] was crying, my sister was like, "I'm so done with this," and she's still my best friend.  She's the godmother of my children and she's my best friend.
Speaker 1: So it worked?
Speaker 2: It worked.  Yes she was my Dartmouth roommate.  We were--we were co-captains of the cheerleading squad and she's still my best friend.
Speaker 1: All right so, what was--
Speaker 2: She thought I was crazy at the time.  It took us like a month to--she like ran from me immediately because she was like, "Who are these crazy people."  Because she had spent her whole life--her mother said she had never been out of Chattanooga, Tennessee.  Her parents put her on a plane to come to Dartmouth, she had never been there and so she had been there for a day when this happened and her mother had spent her whole life saying, "Don't ever get into a car with strangers," and what did she do the first day she's away from home (laughter).  So, she tells the story a different--a different way.
Story_ID: 663327
Speaker 1: So was the, the ratio of black students higher when you were at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] than it was when your father [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] was there?
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh yes.  So when he was there it was twelve, when I was there it was three hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they had gone out of their way--actually and my dad takes responsibility for--he and the alums in his era really kind of pushed Dartmouth to recruit black kids and actually in the late '60s [1960s] they had what they called an (air quotes) experience--experiment and they literally went to the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] and pulled kids off the basketball court, off the streets, off the ghetto and brought them to Hanover [New Hampshire].
Speaker 1: Was that the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] experiment (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah and part of it also is ABC [A Better Chance] and so they put some kids in Hanover High School [Hanover, New Hampshire].  They did it I think in Chicago, in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I think Chicago and Philly were the two main cities and pulled kids out of the urban areas and brought them to Hanover and put them either in high school if they could handle it--if they were young enough and put them at Dartmouth.  There's this whole group of guys that were there--that was still when it was all male they are a clique.  They actually have a club called Hanover Partners [ph.] and they would not allow women in it.  But they're--they have a convention every year.
Speaker 1: What's interesting, we interviewed the man that was in charge of that project for the Ford Foundation.
Speaker 2: Oh really, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah he works NAFEO [National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education] now or something but he lives in Silver Springs [sic. Silver Spring, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Across from the--Father Divine's house [Reverend Major Jealous Divine] or something (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh really?  Okay, I think I know who you're talking about because I think I may have recently met him because they had their convention here in October and they allowed--now women can go to the cocktail party, now they want us there but for a long time they were all guys.
Speaker 1: Yeah because some of the students attended Antioch College in Yellow Springs [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right, but it was a, it was, you know, a great initiative and then--and so we had a good number of blacks.  Actually there were more blacks at Dartmouth when I was there than when Amanda [Fairley's daughter, Amanda Brown] was--when Amanda went, she graduated in '07 [2007].
Speaker 1: So we're losing numbers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now they are trying to keep the numbers up.  So now they call them (air quotes) people of color and Dartmouth claims to be 37 percent people of color but there are a lot of international kids and Asian kids and Hispanic kids; the black kids number probably about 10 or 12 percent--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: --now.
Speaker 1: That's actually high (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Dartmouth is a--
Speaker 1: --for what I imagined it would be.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we work at it, though, we work at it.  The alums really are pretty--we, we aggressively recruit.  You know Dartmouth alums are kind of this green cult, we all--we're all very close and very fo- very committed to the college.  We all interview students and it's pretty crazy.
Story_ID: 663328
Speaker 1: You're taking pre-med there--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, and you--
Speaker 2: And I was a cheerleader.  My first boyfriend was like the captain of the basketball team and I loved it.  It was a transition as I said earlier because I had never been to a class--my eight o'clock class freshman year was, I was the only girl in the room and I had never--it was English five and I had never worn, you know, clothes and we were studying Milton [John Milton].  I really had to study, had to read 'Paradise Lost' that was like the Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] mandate.  I think they just stop doing that when Amanda [Fairley's daughter, Amanda Brown] went but that was like your freshman English class to teach you to write.
Speaker 1: Was it difficult to find out--figure out what to wear after wearing uniforms your whole life?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was like a chore because I had never thought about it and I remember we were buying clothes for college--so I forgot one thing, one of the things in high school [Academy of the Holy Cross, Kensington, Maryland], every month you could pay a quarter to not wear a uniform, it was like a fundraiser.  So every fundraiser was like about giving us an opportunity not to wear uniforms.  So the weekend before that day, it was always on a Wednesday, my [maternal] grandmother [Edith King]--I would spend the weekend with her and we would make me an outfit and she was an incredible seamstress.  So I would say--we were looking through magazines, "Okay I want that skirt with these sleeves with this top, with this bottom," and she would make it.  So every Wednesday, you know once a month I would have this brand new outfit that nobody else had.  So it sort of made me like a fashionista but it was like the one time a month I could wear, you know, clothes, and so.  So then I didn't have that in college.  All of a sudden and I had never worn jeans, I'd never worn jeans so I was like buying jeans for the first time, and like, jeans and sweaters and it was pretty trans- it was pretty amazing.  And then you know like you try to look cute for about a week in Hanover [New Hampshire] and then it's October 1st, it's cold.  So the whole wardrobe thing got dwarfed by the weather at some point and you're just like where are the boots, where are the, you know, where's my coat.
Story_ID: 663329
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or instructors that you remember?
Speaker 2: I loved all of my teachers.  I have the best, best memories of Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  My favorite professor who I still adore is, is Bill Cook [William Cook] and he's who got me to really fall in love with English as a major and he was one of the few black professors there and actually in that day we had a couple of black deans and one of the black deans, her name was Joan Nelson, she was our cheerleading sort of captain and I got--was very close to her.  She passed a few years ago.  But Bill Cook was like my special friend.
Speaker 1: Did you say Jill Nelson?
Speaker 2: Joan.
Speaker 1: Joan Nelson, okay.
Speaker 2: Joan Nelson, she actually was from California.  Her and her husband--her husband's name was Berkley--Berky Nelson [H. Viscount "Berky" Nelson], I think Berkley was his real name [sic.].  And we had a few really good black professors that we all babysat for. They would take us home, and feed us fried chicken and you know give us some little culture when we were in Hanover [New Hampshire].  But I have like the best memories of Dartmouth, I had a ball.
Story_ID: 663330
Speaker 1: And, we did have an all-black cheerleading squad for basketball and we were totally hot.
Speaker 2: How did that come about, you had an all-black cheerleading squad (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We did, I have great pictures, I'll give you some of the pictures and Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] did too at the time.  I'm not really sure how it happened but we worked it in, but by senior year we had one kind of token white girl, Van [ph.], because she loved--she wanted to join.  She would come and stand behind us and we're like, "Okay, okay you can be a cheerleader." (Laughter) But we did and we were like totally hot, we were the rage.  There was one Winter Carnival weekend where they had just built the brand new arena, it was called Thompson Arena [Rupert C. Thompson Arena, Hanover, New Hampshire].  It was like the first sort of game in that big arena so a lot of the old alums came back for this big game with Winter Carnival.  So Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] really didn't have a team name because it was called the Indians and they stopped doing that in early '70s [1970s].  So the team was called, we, I guess we'd say, "Go Green" or something.  On the back of our--we had like little bloomers under our cheerleading uniforms.  We spelled the letter go Green and did this like flip and flipped our skirts up, and like kind of stuck our butts up in the air and the alums went crazy.  We were like twelve black women right, and so I remember seeing Joan Nelson like up in the corner like going like this (gesture) I'm like, oh, here we go.  It's funny because Vicki [Victoria Samuels-Stewart], who was--she was the co-captain with me, she kept saying we really shouldn't do this; we're going to get in trouble.  She is an attorney she was like, the good, and I was like why not?  I was sort of the rebel kid then so.  It was funny and the alums wrote lots of letters about these little black girls showing out at the basketball game.
Speaker 2: So who came up with the routines?
Speaker 1: We all did but I did, Vicki did, we all did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was like a sisterhood.
Speaker 2: Was the team any good?
Speaker 1: The team, you know the team was really good for a few years and I think what saved us was that day we did win the game.  The basketball team was doing well then.  I mean probably within the Ivy League not within the world but you know I think we had, you know, a pretty good, pretty good team then.
Story_ID: 663331
Speaker 1: At a certain juncture you said when you were a senior, I guess you changed your major, your focus from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, I majored in English so I just took everything pre-med and then my, my junior year in the middle of the year I remember talking to my dad [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] saying, "No I don't think I can do this doctor thing," and I actually started exploring going to Medill [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois] 'cause advertising was kind of not really not really a concept at that time.  It was kind of new but Medill had an advertising program.  You know they had a journalism program and an advertising program.  So I went to visit Medill and while I was there--there was actually a black person in the recruiting office and she says, "You know you should go check out Kellogg [Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois]," and it wasn't even called Kellogg at the time.  It was named Kellogg while I was there, my first year of business school, said, "You should go check out the business school.  I think you may--that may be better suited for you," and so I went over to Kellogg and I said, "Yeah I think I want to do this."  So I ended up going to Kellogg.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So actually--so Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] when they took on women they didn't want to reduce the number of men that attended the college so to accommodate enough people having beds to sleep in they changed over to the quarter system and made Dartmouth have year round school.  So, Dartmouth actually has four quarters, summer, fall, winter, spring.  And so what that did was have more flexibility for when people would attend school and you had to go eleven quarters to graduate when I was there.  So now they have all kinds of programs and even then we had language study abroad.  They really encouraged you to go see the world.  So I spent a summer in France and did all--you know, did an internship in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for a term but it really was--it still kind of not well defined.  We didn't all know how to take advantage of it.  When I talked about my daughters [Amanda Brown and Kayley Brown], you'll see how they just had a different experience.  So I ended up grad- finishing Dartmouth the summer after my junior year because I really--I took I think the summer after freshman year I was home, the summer after sophomore year I went to France and then you had to spend a summer on campus.  So the way they sort of controlled the traffic was they required you to spend a summer on campus.  Now every sophomore goes on--they have sophomore summer, back then we didn't have a mandated summer but I ended up finishing like in August of my junior year.  So I came back home and worked on the Hill.
Speaker 1: On Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], okay (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Til my graduation and I worked for Daniel Akaka, senator from Hawaii, and then I went to business school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I didn't get the--I didn't get like the motivation for going to business school.  Because you wanted to write, you were comfortable with English (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't, I think I was--
Speaker 1: --and Medill that's journalism school (unclear).
Speaker 2: Actually Medill had an advertising program so even within their school they did have an advertising degree that you could get that was different from the journalism degree.  I'm pretty sure Bill Cook [William Cook] kind of recommended me to look at Medill, that's where I sort of got there and I was sort of just fascinated by ads and how people would just buy stuff because somebody told them to because they saw a commercial.
Speaker 1: Had you ever considered that before, like why people behave what--the way they do, in terms of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really, actually what prompted me, I took a psychology class, I took like Psych 101, you know, a basic psychology class and it had me thinking about why people do things and what motivates behavior.  What makes people change their mind about something?  But I didn't--I wasn't really convincted about marketing. I mean I really didn't know enough about it.  I was sort of just interested in why people do, why people think, how people think and why do they think this way.
Speaker 1: I'm scratching my head, I think during that period of time it seems like a lot of books, there were popular books about marketing and psychology and that sort of thing.  Marshall McLuhan, I think, wrote something and then later on a guy named Wilson Bryan Key wrote a book called 'Subliminal Seduction' about the little things they do with ads to get you to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh really, how they sub- underneath the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the little--
Speaker 2: Yeah and I remember also though my dad [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] gave me 'What Color is Your Parachute' [Richard Nelson Bolles] probably sometime in there and I remember kind of taking a survey about what you're good at that kind of probably led me in that direction as well too.
Speaker 1: Okay now what is 'What Color is Your Parachute' about?
Speaker 2: It really helps you figure out what you want to do with your life.  It's a great book, it's still--I gave it to my daughters too.  But it helps you kind of figure out what you are good at.  It's almost like an aptitude kind of analysis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. But all along my dad was like, "I don't know about this," you know, like, so he went with me to check it out, and.
Story_ID: 663332
Speaker 1: I think it's really remarkable he took such a keen interest, I mean, you know, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my gosh, yes.
Speaker 1: I don't know how anybody could show their concern any better. You know.
Speaker 2: I think he was trying to get me off his payroll (laughter) you know, a little bit.  Because I think he was always like, "You will be independent, you will take care of yourself, you will not be dependent on a man, you will have your own career," and that was part of being able to take care of myself.  So, "Figure out how to do this girlfriend because I'm done with you."
Speaker 1: Now that's the kind of bond we don't see these days.  I mean not just his willingness to do it but you're acceptance of that kind of guidance or that kind of shepherding by your father [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley].
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was totally--he was very domineering.  He was very, you know, in control of the world.  When he died he left us a box that had everything in it.  He had planned his funeral, he had planned everything.  The bills had been paid for a year, he knew he was going to die, he just didn't tell us. The bills had been paid for a year.  He had written out--everything was taken care of.  I mean he said, "Call this lawyer," and it was all there, like he was a control freak even after he died.  My stepmother [HistoryMaker Charlestine Fairley] at one point, she was like--I guess, I guess my number was on the backup for the light bill and they called me and said the bill needed to be paid.  I'm like, "Honey, you don't understand, you have to write a check, this is not going to happen by itself," because it was like a year after my father died, she was worried about paying the light bill because she had never done it, he took--handled it; he took care of everything.
Story_ID: 663333
Speaker 1: So, here we are, Northwestern University [Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois], this is 1978 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is ni- yeah, '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so what were you learning at Northwestern?
Speaker 2: I was fascinated by marketing, fascinated.  I loved it, it was--I was fascinated by marketing and I was also fascinated sort of by entrepreneur studies so in those days you could go to school and easily get a fellowship and literally the first week of school every day--during orientation there was a reception at five o'clock sponsored by some company and somebody would walk up to you and say--you know talk to you and literally on my third day I met this woman from Quaker Oats [Quaker Oats Company] and she's like--and she called me the next day and said, "Do you want a fellowship," and I'm like, "Sure, whatever," you know, people just wrote checks.  It was crazy.  But pretty much everyone in my class got a free ride to business school.  Because that was the days of affirmative action, companies were getting pressured to sort of bring black people into their companies and so paying for their education was the way to do it.
Speaker 1: Yeah but some affirmative action--here, here you're a graduate of Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], a honors student it's not, you know, it's really not a big gamble to put money on (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah so I got a free ride, thank God for Quaker Oats.  They paid for my graduate school.  But I was, you know, I was just fascinated by everything to do with, you know, marketing and manipulating people.  You know, figure out to make them something that they don't necessarily want to do.  So it was great, I had a ball there and I guess I change, I transferred--I danced also at Dartmouth, I danced pretty much my whole life, I danced at Northwestern kind of--and we started a dance company and the graduate school was really fun.  I had a blast in graduate school as well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you doing modern dance?
Speaker 2: Modern dance, hip--jazz whatever and actually that was sort of the beginning of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] if you remember and so I danced with all of these gay guys and somebody would sneeze in the room and say, "Oh no he's going to die," and they didn't really know why, and he did.  It was pretty crazy like all my friends that I had danced with died of AIDS. It was like an epidemic.
Speaker 1: Yeah there was an epidemic.
Speaker 2: It was--it was the beginning of that whole era.  You know, and I, I look back on that saying, "They were sick."  They would panic when somebody got a cold, but that was one of my dance memories.  I don't know Kellogg was booming at the time, I think they were--it was kind of a budding school and it was even back then named the number one marketing school.  So, and actually that's really kind of why I went from Medill [Medill School of Journalism; Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois] to Kellogg too because it was sort of getting that rapport of being the number one marketing school and that kind of made my dad [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] feel better about, if you're going to go there, make sure it's the best one you can go to.  Because even then he was like, "Should you go to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], should you go to an Ivy League business school," and what sold him was that it was the number one marketing school.  If that's what you want to do and that's the best place to go, then that's okay.
Speaker 1: I think the M.B.A. was sort of a new (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was.
Speaker 1: --thing in the mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: It was and actually my degree was called master of management.  Kellogg eventually changed it over to calling it a M.B.A. but it was called a master of management back then and Kellogg--it was named Kellogg during my first year of business school.  I remember when they put the letters on the building.
Story_ID: 663334
Speaker 1: While in grad school did you do any internships with any--?
Speaker 2: I did.  My, my good friend who, who had gone to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] with me and she was a year ahead of me, she went to Kellogg [Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois] and she had had an internship at McNeil Consumer Products [McNeil Consumer Products Company; McNeil Consumer Healthcare], Tylenol at the time and so she had a great internship and so I was kind of thinking about internships and she was like, "Oh my gosh Ricki [HistoryMaker Ricki Fairley] you should go work at McNeil, it's the best place, it's so much fun, it's like booming business," and McNeil was part of Johnson and Johnson [Johnson and Johnson Products; Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.], and Johnson and Johnson actually had a fellowship program for black kids that they were like paying for business school and do whatever.  So their interns were funded by this program and so they really weren't hiring interns and so my girlfriend at the time had said, "If you call Wayne Nelson the president at five o'clock," this is during spring break, I was home for spring break and McNeil was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and I knew I wanted to get back to the West Coast [sic.] because the Chicago [Illinois] climate was too much for me, I hated the cold.  I wanted to go back to the East Coast and so she said, "If you call Wayne Nelson the president at five o'clock his secretary will be gone, she leaves at five o'clock.  Call him about 5:05, he'll answer the phone," and so I did.  So I called him up and he's an--he's an amazing marketer.  Wayne Nelson he is the guru behind sort of making Tylenol taking it over the counter from being a pharmaceutical drug and making--building that whole OTC [over the counter] pain reliever business category.  So I called him and he said, "Well you know Ricki it's nice to talk to you but we've already hired an intern for the summer but, you know, since you have been so aggressive in reaching out to me why don't you come to Philadelphia tomorrow and we'll have lunch."  So I drove to Philadelphia the next day with my dad (laughter) and I had him wait in the car, like, "I'm going on a job interview, can you like--can I go by myself please?"  So, I--he offered me a job and that was my summer internship and that's where I went after--I had an offer at the end of the summer and I went there after business school.
Story_ID: 663335
Speaker 1: You were there in eight- you were hired in '81 [1981]?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that, is that right?  As an associate brand manager [at McNeil Consumer Products Company; McNeil Consumer Healthcare].
Speaker 2: That was, if my--so, my first job really in brand was when the seven people died of Tylenol poisoning.  Do you know that case study (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Y- yes, this was in the news, a big item in the news.  Some guy--well tell us the story, what happened?
Speaker 2: It was in Chicago [Illinois] and seven people went into the drugstore, got a bottle of Tylenol, at the time they were in capsules and somebody laced them with cyanide and the people literally died before they got out of the store.  And it happened almost be- it was really between about four and five o'clock on a Thursday afternoon, seven people died, instantly and they didn't know why.  And Tylenol at the time was growing and it was just like growing, growing, growing, huge growth trend.  It just took off and it was a new drug on the market acetaminophen and taking aspirin by storm.  It was really marketing 101, you know.  So all of a sudden it went (gesture) because seven people died.
Speaker 1: Yeah now the guy that did this, I think supposedly was planning to sue or something to get his money.  Is that how you (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well no it's still an unsolved murder mystery.  It's still an unsolved FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] case and it turned into like a Harvard Business [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] case study and how J and J [Johnson and Johnson Products; Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.] dealt with but they've never really solved.  They think it was corporate espionage (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --and they don't really know.
Speaker 1: I know they arrested a guy [Bruce Nickell] and his wife [Stella Nickell].
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did and then actually it happened again and they did arrest some people in the second one.  It happened again a few years later, I think only three people died but in this first case I don't think it's ever been really solved for.
Speaker 1: So in those days you could open a bottle of Tylenol, pull out the cotton (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and take--
Speaker 1: --and just--
Speaker 2: And it was a capsule and you could just open it up and take it.  So what did J and J do, what I learned was--several things.  First of all they came out and said, "We're sorry, something happened in our product, we don't know what it is but we're going to take it off the market because we don't know what's going on here," and they apologized.  Burke [James E. Burke] was the president at the time.  They went on television, spent a lot of money on ads apologizing to the public.  Then they said, "This will never happen again."  And they changed how--they developed safety seal packaging.  So then you had to rip the seal off the top of the bottle then on top of that was like a safety twist bottled cap that you now take for granted and then on top of that was another seal, so there were three seals to make the--the product tamper resistant and they immediately put that into practice.
Speaker 1: And a warning, right?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: And a warning--
Speaker 2: And a warning.
Speaker 1: If these seals are--
Speaker 2: If these seals are broken, don't buy this product.  And then they put into test market--they developed the caplet so they got rid of capsules all together.  So you could not open something up and put something into the pill, it became a caplet.  If you notice, on the market you can't buy a capsule, they are all like, you know, the same shape but it's a caplet.  So they did all the--they took all those precautions and then they said, "How can we regain the trust of consumers?"  So then they developed--they basically did a sampling program where we sent people all over the country, knocking on the door and saying, "Here's our new package with all these safety seals, I'm going to give this to you so you can try it.  The next time you have a headache, it's okay."  And it was like a one to one sampling program that was funded by the company Donnelley--I mean Donnelley [RR Donnelley, Chicago, Illinois] participated in it, it was like the biggest sampling company at the time.  But literally they went to millions of households and gave away product for free and put it in people's hands to give them the trust back in the product.  The other thing that they did which was brilliant is they launched Children's Tylenol and they hired a salesforce of part time moms--women to go detail physicians, and basically get the physician to give Tylenol to their own children and say, "We're going to give you some samples, can you give it to your patients.  But why don't you give it to your own kids and use it in your own house?"  And then did a research study so they could make the claim in marketing that Children's Tylenol is the one pediatricians give their own kids.  Do you remember that tagline?  That was all contrived through this whole process.
Story_ID: 663336
Speaker 1: Then they did a similar thing with hospitals to get a hospital claim and they basically had a detailing force going to hospital pharmacies, give away the product for free.  So the hospitals could use Tylenol for free with their patients and then later--you know, a few months later were able to go get a research study done and make the claim, Tylenol is the one hospitals use most.  So, that sampling basically resulted into marketing claims that they had been in the market for years. I don't think they've changed the hospital line for twenty years.  So--until a lot more compe- ibuprofen actually took the market by storm like years later but Tylenol ruled that category for many, many years.  The other thing interesting that they did was they wanted to be able to measure performance, to watch the brands rebound because it had taken a dive.  Back then we used something called SAMI data [Selling Areas-Marketing Inc.] to measure brand performance and literally they would have people that would go into the warehouses of the stores and count the number of pills that they were going to sell--you know, bottles they were going to sell.  You would get these reports three months later saying, you know, "Walgreens [Walgreen Company] sold ten bottles of Tylenol and all between June 1 and June 30th."  But it was like a three month delay.  Nielsen [Nielsen Company] had just come into the market to sort of track data and track sales off of store shelves and that was still all new technology and it was the beginning of scanner data.  So literally before then if you went to the grocery store you would punch in a cash register and the product would move down the thing.  They didn't count it on the scanner which is now practice.  But McNeil [McNeil Consumer Products Company; McNeil Consumer Healthcare] actually funded--J and J [Johnson and Johnson Products; Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.] funded the development of that technology so that they could get the data faster.  So they participated in helping Nielsen develop scanner technology--
Speaker 2: Bar codes and all that for, okay.
Speaker 1: So they could see that they were selling Tylenol because they wanted to see--track the performance with more than the three month--earlier than the three month lead time so all of those things went into place because of that incident.
Speaker 2: Do you know of a story where a product was involved in a similar crisis and went out of business?
Speaker 1: Oh I'm sure there are tons of them.  I can't think of them off hand but--I don't know.  I think that the tobacco industry has suffered from disease, obviously.  But I'll--I can't think of one right now but I think what J and J did was they took the high ground by admitting that something happened.  They took responsibility for it and then they fixed it and they changed the dynamic of how we do business in the drug category.  But I'm sure businesses fail all the time because people aren't honest necessarily and don't take the heat.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know with ci- with cigarettes I don't what kind of high ground to take (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there is no high ground to take.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) for someplace to land.
Speaker 1: Yeah someplace to land, right.  I'm trying to think if there is any--where a client has died from not being--doing the right thing.  I mean even for New Coke, when Coke [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] did New Coke they went back to their old Coke but it took them a minute.  They didn't listen to consumers.
Speaker 2: Now that was around '85 [1985] or so, when they?
Speaker 1: Yes that was like mid to late, mid to late '80s [1980s], yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, New Coke.
Speaker 1: --before I was there.
Speaker 2: And--you weren't at Coke then?
Speaker 1: I wasn't, I wasn't then, I wasn't then, it was after.
Story_ID: 663337
Speaker 1: You managed Children's Tylenol and CoTylenol.
Speaker 2: CoTylenol which is now Tylenol Cold. It went away but I managed the baby brands and back in those days, you know, (air quotes) a girl couldn't manage Tylenol.  The girl brands were Children's Tylenol and CoTylenol and Sine-Aid but you wouldn't think of managing one of the bigger brands because you were a girl.
Speaker 1: So this is basically an unwritten rule, or it was a rule (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, it was pretty obvious, like, you know.  Girls could work on these brands.  And I remember there was one very dynamic white woman who went to, she went to Kello- no, she went to Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], she had gone to Wharton, and she was probably the biggest feminist in the company and she fought like crazy actually to manage Children's Tylenol.  We all like supported her.  It was a big deal for her to get that job to be the brand manager of Children's--Children's Tylenol and she ended up getting it.  But it was a man's world, a man's world.
Speaker 1: So that's why 'Mad Men' resonates.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was very much like that and also we had to work harder.  I mean I was always--I was very often the only black and-or the only woman in the room, in those days.
Speaker 1: So you were working in Pennsylvania, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, Fort Washington, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Fort--Fort Washington which is--
Speaker 2: That's out of Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Outside of Philly, okay.  So you, any--well how did you pitch Children's Tylenol especially after the scare?
Speaker 2: Well it was really based on that claim, that, the pediatrician claim and then that took the brand through the roof.  Because we could say, "This is the one pediatricians give their own kids."
Speaker 1: So were you a part of that thinking--that campaign?
Speaker 2: Yes and we had a great print campaign, I remember shooting the first print ad with the pediatrician in the room with this baby in his doctor uniform but with his own kid giving him Tylenol.  Yeah.  But that was really the marketing message and on that brand we very much had a brand--we learned brand management discipline.  The whole J and J [Johnson and Johnson Products; Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.] marketing team actually had come out of Procter [Procter and Gamble Company] so it was very disciplined.  I think on the Children's Tylenol brand we had eight assistant brand managers and everybody had a job and you rotated every eight months.  So somebody did forecasting, somebody did advertising, somebody did budgeting, somebody did promotions.  So you had to do that intensely to learn that discipline before you could even--and rotate through those jobs before you could get promoted to brand manager.  It was very, very specific.  I got a lot of memos back with red writing on them.  And I--it's funny because people don't learn marketing that way now but it was really-this is how you manage a P and L [profits and loss], this is how you tell the plant how many pills to make, this is how you talk about it to consumers, this is the research that you do so you really learn each discipline of marketing because you had to do it for eight months, intensely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And focus.
Story_ID: 663338
Speaker 1: Now in '84 [1984] you moved to Nabisco [RJR Nabisco, Inc.].
Speaker 2: I left because--I left McNeil [McNeil Consumer Products Company; McNeil Consumer Healthcare] reluctantly because I got married and my husband at the time [Rodney Brown] was working on Wall Street and living in New York [New York] and I was living in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  So for a year while I was at McNeil, we lived in Princeton [New Jersey] halfway in between.  I had a couple of snow storms of commuting and so my husband was like, "I'm making two thousand dollars a year more than you do, so you should move to Manhattan [New York]," and he got a big Wall Street bonus.  So we decided, "All right I'll move north and get a new job."  So I went to work for Nabisco and I worked on actually on Life Savers candy, all the candy brands and it was totally different from the drug category (laugh) but it was really--it was a great experience to work for another household brand name.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the candy--you had some experience with candy as a youth, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter) a little bit.  But it was great.  I worked on Life Savers candy and Bubble Yum bubble gum.  I don't know if you remember the days of like banana berry split.  I launched the first like two flavors in one Bubble Yum; that was my claim to fame.  It was just fun, it was really fun.  I got promoted to brand manager there and those were really fun days.  I worked on Carefree gum and then at the time Nabisco just had bought Planters peanuts.  So I worked on snack brands and it was a great, great marketing experience.  I still have a Bubble Yum surf board; we did a promotion with a surfing company.  I don't know, we did like, I forget what surfing company and they gave us a Bubble Yum surf board and I still have it in my garage.
Speaker 1: Baby Ruth--
Speaker 2: Baby Ruth, Butterfinger, I've pretty much worked in every category and I've always sort of had a kid brand in my repertoire of brands I've worked on.
Story_ID: 663339
Speaker 1: In '89 [1989] you went to Reckitt and Colman [Reckitt and Colman plc].
Speaker 2: Yes, Reckitt and Colman it's called now Reckitt Benckiser [Reckitt Benckiser Group plc], you've probably never heard of it.  It's a British company and they make Woolite, French's mustard, Easy-Off oven cleaner, Black Flag insecticide, Mr. Bubble bubble bath, Neet depilatory [Veet]; I worked on all of those brands across every category household product.  Lysol--did I say Lysol, Woolite.  So I kind of worked in every package goods category you can work on from bug spray to depilatories.  But it was a British company so it enabled me to travel a lot because we had centers of excellence for the different categories around the world.  So I spent three weeks in Australia one time learning about bug spray where they have a huge business.  I spent three weeks in Paris [France] and Geneva [Switzerland] learning about skin care when I worked on depilatories, I spent three weeks in Jackson, Mississippi where we have a French's mustard plant, so--at the time.  So it was great really learning how to manage a business.  Brand management is all about how to manage a P and L and that was a great focus.  One of the best things that happened at Reckitt and Colman was it was the beginning of the heydays of Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] and Sam's [Sam's West, Inc.] and Costco [Costco Wholesale Corporation] the big box stores.  And so it was the beginning of what we call trade marketing and trade marketing kind of grew out of when all of a sudden Sam's and Costco were selling huge volumes of product but they wanted special packaging.  "Well I want the case to be twenty by forty [inches] and I want to sell forty bottles in one package," and so there became a cost associated to selling to them because the company had to reconfigure the production line and to make the right configuration of the product they wanted.  They wanted to serve these companies because they were selling boatloads of product.  So it then became a P and L issue because I'm now going to spend money to sell, what a concept.  You know, I have to invest in infrastructure and change my production line and my timing and how I ship product to this account--to this store that now wants it a specific way and will only buy it that way.  So we established this concept called trade marketing--kind of grew up in the industry and so I actually was tapped to start the trade marketing department at Reckitt and Colman and bring sort of brand management P and L discipline into how we were managing ourselves and managing our accounts.  So that's when you started to see where a lot of companies now--if you go to Bentonville [Arkansas], half of the people in Bentonville worked for other companies that are selling to Walmart and Sam's, because it--they basically built a P and L around the Walmart business.  And so it was basically bringing these P and L and marketing disciplines to managing account performance.  So that when I sell to Walmart, yes I'm going to make money because I have to price it this way, market it this way, package it this way and make it different.
Speaker 1: Now what do you mean by P and L, maybe I missed it?
Speaker 2: Profit and loss.
Speaker 1: Profit and loss, okay.
Speaker 2: So, basically you know I am responsible for--every year on a brand, you're responsible for I'm going to sell this many widgets, I'm going to sell this many bottles of French's mustard at this price.  I'm going to spend this much on advertising and promotion, I'm going to spend this much as my cost of goods and I'm going to make this profit and you were held accountable for that.  So we are now bringing that discipline into managing what we sold to these bigger box companies where they were growing like crazy and making lots of money.  But the companies were all of a sudden feeling pain about, "Oh no this actually cost me--I lost money on this.  These Walmart people--I sold thirty cases but it cost me twice the money if I had sold it to ShopRite or to Giant [Giant Food]."  So it was sort of bringing those sort disciplines into that.  So it was a great sort of stomping ground and I think what I've learned is that almost in every job I've had, I've had some kind of entrepreneurial opportunity and that was probably the beginning of it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because I started a new department that didn't exist and a new discipline and--for the company and really was industry wide.
Story_ID: 663340
Speaker 1: You were at, at Reckitt and Colman [Reckitt and Colman plc; Reckitt Benckiser Group plc] from '89 [1989] to '95 [1995]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for about eight years.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Then you went over to the Sega Channel.
Speaker 2: Sega Channel, so Reckitt and Colman had just gotten back their acquisitions and I was sort of getting sick of like selling bug spray and I said, "Okay I want to do something a little more fun," and at the time the Sega Channel was like this crazy thing, entrepreneurial thing that was headed by a guy named Stan Thomas [Stanley B. Thomas, Jr.] who came out of HBO [Home Box Office] and he was one of the early gurus, actually black managers in HBO and an amazing person and he--I  met him through a friend and he basically recruited me out of Reckitt to be the VP of marketing of this new entrepre- this new entrepreneurial endeavor that was video games over TV.  It was really before it's time.  So it was really putting video games on a cable channel.  So like you would subscribe to HBO and Showtime, you would subscribe to the Sega Channel and get video games into your house.
Speaker 1: You could actually play them on the cables--
Speaker 2: Yes play them on the TV (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) on TV. Now--
Speaker 2: --and it was like the beginning of--Sega was taking off like crazy.  Video games--
Speaker 1: Sega at the time--my son was--in '85 [1985] he was what seven or something.  Sega was the game of choice.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Nintendo [Nintendo of America, Inc.]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the rest of those games, you know, were good, but Sega was the game.
Speaker 2: Sega was the game and it was--
Speaker 1: It was the one that worked the best, didn't have the glitches, now it's off the market.
Speaker 2: It was also the speed of play that made it good because everybody else's wasn't as fast.  So-- so it was really a partnership between Sega video games [Sega Corporation; Sega Games Co., Ltd.], Time Warner Cable and HBO and so Stan came out of HBO and put this partnership together to be able to have access to the games, access to the cable industry and then sort of HBO's sort of heritage.  We started this joint venture and there--it required some technologies so like you had your cable box; you had to have an extra box to get the video game technology.  So that was sort of an industry issue to get this technology because when it took off, they couldn't make the boxes fast enough.  It became like a demand issue.  Then it was also a selling issue because we had to go to at that time the cable industry was very fragmented, now it's Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.], AT&T [AT&T Inc.] and Comcast [Comcast Corporation] and everything but this was like the early days of Comcast.  So we had to sale to every individual cable company to get them to buy the technology and take on this new brand.  It was just so much fun, it was just a great challenge, it was a marketing challenge because we were bringing like this new thing to kids and solving parents' nightmare because at that point they were going to rent games, the games cost fifty dollars, and they didn't want to buy them.  So we were giving kids like twelve new games every month on TV in your house.  So it was like a great--the kids were like--we do focus groups and kids would be like they were hugging us.  It was like the best thing they could have, and parents too because we saved their life.  It was a convenience thing and we were going like crazy and then Stan Thomas got brain cancer and dropped dead in three months.
Speaker 1: So that s- that brought the project down.
Speaker 2: (Nods head) He was the brain trust, he was the entrepreneur and it was kind of--I mean every new business is sort of an uphill battle and you usually have a super star--a rock star that's driving it and he died.  And, and really a lot of the--I mean I used to call the cable people that we dealt with pole climbers because most of the people that ran the cable companies were pole climbers.  They were the ones who had been out hooking up the wires and they weren't totally that bright.  So it was always, you know, it was like here we go again, I'm talking of this idiot again and trying to convince him that he should invest in this business.  When Stan died it kind of fizzled out.  At the same time I was recruited by Coke [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] so it was sort of--
Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause Sega has disappeared from the market altogether.
Speaker 2: Yes, Sega has--if you think about it the technology of video games so this was 1995.
Speaker 1: So they were ahead of the curve then but--
Speaker 2: Totally ahead of the curve.  It was an ingenious idea back then which now we take for granted because you can get a video game anywhere.  But at that point, it was a video tape that you stuck in this machine that you had to buy and take home and pay fifty dollars.  You get sick of it after three months and you have to go buy a new one.  So we were giving twelve video games a month, it was the coolest thing ever, so.  But I got to learn--I learned a lot about technology.  I spent a lot of time with gaming people.  You know, in San Francisco [California] where these kids in grubby clothes had stayed up all night doing technology with their dogs in the office and it was like in--you know, it was great, it was fun.
Story_ID: 663341
Speaker 1: Do you have kids yourself at this point?
Speaker 2: So, in--my daughters were born in '85 [1985] and '92 [1992].  So I had Amanda [Amanda Brown] when I was at Nabisco [RJR Nabisco, Inc.] and I was the--I should have told this story back then but I was the only woman in the office that had kids--had a kid.  I hid it until I was six months pregnant.  I just kept putting safety pins in my skirt.  And, you know, I was pretty thin so I could sort of get away with it for a while until one day I threw up in my plate at the lunch table (laughter) and I had to finally tell them that I was pregnant.  It was a major deal, I was, I was a month away of getting promoted; they promised me that I would be promoted to brand manager and the VP of marketing took me out to lunch that day and said, "Ricki [HistoryMaker Ricki Fairley] you have done a disservice to this company.  We were banking on you, we were going to invest in you, we were going to promote you but now you got pregnant and I have no guarantee that you're going to come back.  So and if you tell this conversation to anyone, it's between me and you, I am not going to be able to promote you now and if you reveal this conversation, I will deny it."  So I went back after lunch--I'm, whatever, twenty-nine years old go back after lunch.  My boss was a woman.  The women in the company all wore suits with ties.  A couple of them were married, most of them were not married, never had kids, weren't even thinking about it.  The women before me were hard core.
Speaker 1: They wore men's suits and ties?
Speaker 2: They wore like (gesture)--they were hard core.  They were not about to even think about having a baby.  And my--so I had a woman boss, and she had a woman boss, and then we had a male boss on top of her who had five kids, whose wife stayed home.  And so, so I went to my boss and I told her what happened and she was like horrified so she went to her boss and her name was Valerie Friedman--she went to her boss and he went to bat for me, the guy with the five kids and he reported to the VP at the time and he went to bat for me and I got promoted like three days later, eight months pregnant.  But it was a fight and even then when I came back from maternity leave, they did everything possible to challenge me and they gave me an assignment where I had to travel every week to see if I would--if I could stick it out.  And literally my mom [Wilma King Holmes] at the time was--I would literally get on a plane in Newark [New Jersey], fly to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], throw the baby at my mom, check the baby's luggage--Amanda's luggage on the plane and then I'd run and get on another plane going where I was going and my mom would take the kid and the--get the luggage and take the kid.  And we did that for about six months until I proved myself that I was going to be able to work with a baby.  And, for the first six months of her life we did that and then I had a live in nanny after that.  They did everything possible to challenge whether I could have a kid and work too.  So, and I was determined so, then I had Hayley [Hayley Brown] at Reckitt and Colman [Reckitt and Colman plc; Reckitt Benckiser Group plc] right when I started the trade marketing department and it was a new day and I said, "You know what, the kid is attached to the boob, the boob has to go on the road, the kid goes with the boob."  I forced it on them and literally I would have the people working for me pushing this stroller and we would go on a business trip and one guy his name was Tim [ph.] and he's like, "I got the stroller today," because someone would carry my briefcase, somebody would take the baby but I took her everywhere.  I travelled with her until she was off the boob for a year and I travelled with Amanda when she was out of school, we would all go, everywhere.  So, you know, I was like--it was a different, you know, corporate environment and, and I tried to open the doors for other women to have babies because it was not heard of.
Speaker 1: So it's possible to do that, it's just the culture of the company that makes it difficult to--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes and in those days they didn't know it, their wives stayed home.  They went home and dinner was cooked and the babies were in bed and they were happy campers.  They didn't have a concept for a woman, "You know I've got to go get--my kid is sick, the school just called and I've got to go get my kid."  That was not a concept for them and I think the women around me we just okay, we're going to deal, and teach them how to deal.
Speaker 1: So they were out of touch.
Speaker 2: Yeah they just didn't know.  They were men--white men who never had to think about it, right.
Speaker 1: And their reaction--initial reaction was to stress you out.
Speaker 2: Yeah and so but I mean I had to have a live in nanny because I travelled and I had to make choices.  I had--I had a live in nanny that lived with me from when Amanda was about six months until she was five and then we had a nanny until we moved to Atlanta [Georgia] until I'd say she was about eleven and then I had a nanny--and when they, when they--Amanda turned sixteen and could drive because at that point it becomes a driving thing.  Amanda said, "Okay mom I'm done with nannies, I can drive now."  So I said okay and we gave up the nanny.  It was like a family decision, "All right well the nanny does these five jobs. Which one are you going to do, 'cause the jobs aren't going to go away."  So, but, my kids are still very close to our one nanny that we had the longest, Holly Ann [ph.].
Story_ID: 663342
Speaker 1: So back to--now I went to Coke [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia].  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --when Stan Thomas [Stanley B. Thomas, Jr.] died it was, it was just horrific.  He--I think he was maybe sixty-two, he was pretty young and it was really traumatic, he was very well loved in the cable industry and it was a big deal but Coke came knocking on my door.  They were looking for--they were in a major recruiting growth phase and so they actually came to New York [New York] and interviewed a bunch of people and I got tapped by one of my good head hunter friends that I'd known for years and ended going to Coke.
Speaker 2: Okay this is 1996?
Speaker 1: Ninety-six [1996], the year of the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics] in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: Right is a big year for Coke and a big year for Atlanta.  A lot of things--it wasn't just the Olympics, I'm trying to remember what else was there?  Was the convention there that year or it seemed like there were a lot of things going on there?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  The Olympics was really the big thing.  Like we literally moved into our house the day the Olympics started, I think.  But we, and the whole city had changed over because they had to rebuild everything to accommodate the Olympics.
Speaker 2: Was Sharon--I mean, who was the mayor there then?
Speaker 1: Shirley [Shirley Franklin].
Speaker 2: Sh- Shirley.
Speaker 1: She wasn't the mayor yet, Maynard [Maynard Jackson] was still the mayor.  Shirley became the mayor--no was Shirley the mayor--Shirley may have been--
Speaker 2: I think she was--
Speaker 1: Or no, I think she ran very quickly.  Maynard was the mayor when I got there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No Bill Campbell was the mayor when I got there.  Bill Campbell was the mayor when I got there.  Maynard--yeah, Maynard may have died by then--no Maynard died after Bill Campbell was the mayor.
Speaker 2: Right because he had another term and he came in behind--
Speaker 1: Yes Bill Campbell was the mayor, I have a story about that and Shirley became the mayor shortly after.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So when I went to Coke, I was actually hired to--as part of a reengineering product--project, and they had basically five different marketing departments in the company.  They had sort of the brand management team; they had a promotions department that handled national promotions like, that everybody in the country.  They had a department that handled local promotions because every bottler had their own local promotion.  They had a department that had accounts specific promotions so Giant [Giant Food] or Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] or ShopRite wanted to have a promotion they had their own thing.  So they basically brought me in to collapse all of these departments into one program development department and I had to start it, hire the people, figure out everything about--basically develop this new department, name it.  I named it marketing works, and it basically became the department through which every marketing program in the--Coca-Cola went through and it was partly their desire to get control over what some of the--what's happening in the local markets and the bottlers were doing in different markets sort of bastardized what was happening at corporate Coke.  But also just bring some order to their madness.  It was total chaos in how they got some of the stuff done.
Speaker 2: For an example I mean how would a local--?
Speaker 1: So I could be a bottler in Podunk, Iowa and say, "You know what I want the Coke package to be green," and they would make a green can.  That's probably an extreme but they were not--I own this company and this is my bottling company so if you think about it Coke makes syrup, sells the syrup.  So all they do is make syrup and do marketing.  They don't make anything, they sell that syrup to a bottling company that actually does the production of cans and bottles and packaging and cardboard and then that company sells it to Giant Foods or Jewel or Osco [Jewel Food Stores; Jewel-Osco] or Sam's [Sam's West, Inc.].  So they--once you sort of--and they had standards about what the packaging should look like or whatever but a lot of the bottlers at the time--they've now consolidated a lot but there were a lot of sort of entrepreneurs out there doing their thing.  Well I own the market in Iowa, I own the market in, you know, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; I want to do whatever I want.  Coke, you know just give me the syrup, I've got it.  So they were trying to put some controls over that system.  About 50 percent of the bottling operation was owned by Coca-Cola Enterprises which still considered themselves a separate company from Coca-Cola. They were the bottling company and even though part of the ownership was joint, they were considered a separate company.  The rest of them were free for all bottlers around the country.   So it was somewhat of a control vehicle.  So any bottler could say, "You know what, I'm going to give away Coke for free today; I'm going to give everybody a three dollar coupon," and they were doing it.  And so there was really just no kind of control over it.  So it was sort of my job to bring this all together and have one system of getting things approved so that there was not chaos in the system.
Story_ID: 663343
Speaker 1: All right, 1996, Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia].  And, you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So, I had the dream marketing job, it was a dream job.  I had--my marketing budget it was $450 million which is, you know, huge.  I mean think about Coke marketing, right.  And I started with fifty people working for me that I absorbed from the older department and the transition and I grew to 150 in about a year.  So I was hiring a lot of people and staffing up and so it was kind of a marketing job with an organizational emphasis because I really had to build a department and we also had to build a process for how to do the work and that was part of--we used a reengineering consultant and I had--I was surrounded by consultants to help me build this department that was going to really almost be an island within Coke [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia].  It defied everything that Coke did in terms of how we were organized, how we were managed and how we got work done.  It was totally different so it was a really a new thing for the company.  And I was a peon at Coke.  I mean I was a director, I probably--even though I had this huge job in the scheme of Coca-Cola I was still a little peon director.  But I still managed 150 people and this huge budget.  I think my department budget was about $10 million to just cover salaries and all the sort of administrative costs which was crazy.  So it's partly like being a marketer and also being a mother of 150 children because the people at Coke are very entitled.  You know, Coke is like the mecca of Atlanta [Georgia], it's the place to work and once you get a job there, you, you know, you think you're hot stuff.  You also at the same time bleed the syrup which they told me from day one, you will bleed the syrup.  It was like just an incredible work environment where it was extremely demanding.  If you go to Coke at eight o'clock on a Saturday morning, the parking lot is half full.  I mean it's just--you are consumed by the company (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) People working on the weekends then.
Speaker 2: Yes, you were--it was required to work and it was a 24/7 job but it was also the most fun marketing job you could possibly have because there was always money.  You could do whatever you wanted to.  Most brands you're like I have a budget of $2 million, $5 million, $10 million.  I think probably the biggest marketing budget I had managed probably had a hundred million dollars.  So to have, oh my gosh, all this money to spend and always think--being able to be creative and think of great ideas and be able to actually do them because you had the budget was a great thing.
Speaker 1: So you came up with a think tank, you called your think tank Idea Works.
Speaker 2: Idea Works.  So I named the department marketing works, which is pretty fun because it was what we did and then I had to develop the department within that.  You know we were always working on the (unclear) and at any given moment we had up to a thousand projects going on with all the local bottler, national programs.  But they wanted me to develop stuff for three years out.  So I created this little think tank called Idea Works where I had ten people that all they focused on was what was going to happen in three years and I had a mentor, I've had a mentor for years.  His name is Mike Vance [Michael F. Vance] and he actually founded the Creative Thinking Association of America.  His claim to fame was he grew up with Disney and he was one of the masterminds behind the creativity behind Walt Disney.  He was sort of his right hand person and I don't know if you know the--here's a little puzzle with like nine dots and you have to connect the dots without going out of the lines.  You haven't seen that puzzle, it's a pretty well known puzzle but he developed that puzzle. So he was totally about innovation.  He had a really good technique for innovating and was basically the technique that Disney I think still uses called displayed thinking.  So you could into a room and have a big board that had everything you were thinking about on that board.  So you could visualize your sort of creativity.  Does that make sense?  So in Idea Works, we had a room where everybody--there were no desks, there were no chairs it was all sort of the living space with these big boards and everybody was--you could see kind of where they were in their thinking by looking at this board.  So everything was visual.  And--
Speaker 1: What do you mean, everybody would write down what they were thinking about something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, writing, pictures, whatever, so--
Speaker 1: Whatever they're brainstorming, so you had a--w- was it focused on a problem, or issue or--
Speaker 2: Or opportunity, how can we sell more Coke, how can we sell more soft drinks, what's the next flavor, what's the next--
Speaker 1: So people would just write it down.
Speaker 2: Writing and pictures and like visualizing things.  So one of the things that came out of it, you know the long twelve pack box so we developed a contraption where you could actually put the box--the packaging where you put it in the refrigerator and the can would roll out; something stupid as that.
Speaker 1: So you all came up with that?
Speaker 2: That was one of the ideas, yeah.
Speaker 1: I've used it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 663344
Speaker 1: We actually--Dasani came out of that think tank.  At the time--so go back to thing that I said before, Coke [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] makes syrup and sells syrup to bottlers, right.  So water, there's no syrup, so how can you make money on water.  So they were like anti-water for a long time because they--there was no way for them to make money on it.  So, actually the bottler, CCE [Coca-Cola Enterprises] started selling water because the market was demanding water and they could see the trend of water being more popular and they sold a brand called Naya water.  And they were--all of sudden Naya just started making a boatload of money.  So Coke had to figure out how to get into the water business without a syrup.  So we actually developed the Dasani brand.  Because actually CCE came to them and said--Coke went to them and said, "You can't sell that because it's not a Coke brand and we don't support selling water."  They said, "We're making a lot of money; we're selling water, work it out.  You want us to sell water that you made then find one, make one."  So we made Dasani.  And we basically (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So how did this--so they just made the, the packages or something?  Or made the design?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know the packaging and this whole like kind of marketing formula, minerals with water, with all these--we made it sound beautiful and to sell something to the bottlers.
Speaker 2: So it was a formula and a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a formula.
Speaker 2: --pack- and a name.
Speaker 1: Yes, so they could make money on it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know we interviewed--last year we interviewed Ossie Davis' brother [HistoryMaker William Davis] in San Antonio, Texas.  He had something to do with grinding water or something to--
Speaker 1: Oh really?
Speaker 2: --which is used--I think it was Dasani that had something--his, it was an invention of another person that, he's a chemist and he developed this process of pulverizing water, high pressure to make it wetter.
Speaker 1: Oh really, okay.  Interesting. Interesting, I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know if that's Dasani, is that water?
Speaker 1: I don't know, I don't remember him being involved in it.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And we found some--it was really a crock to figure out how to make money.  So Dasani was one of things but--but yes this think tank was great.  It was sort of totally anti the Coke culture because it was kind of secret and we'd only let certain people in the room.  And we--but it was a great thing because they were you know thinking about new products and new ways to market the brand.
Story_ID: 663345
Speaker 1: Now when we think about Coke [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia], I think about secrets because that--the formula (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh the formula is a secret.
Speaker 1: --is supposed to be in a safe or something--
Speaker 2: Exactly, it is in a safe.
Speaker 1: --and nobody knows, nobody will divulge, and--
Speaker 2: Right no one will like let it come out.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We launched a couple of brands, Surge which is no longer on the market.  One of the--probably the biggest things I did at Coke and the most fun was we developed the Coke Card.  So we wanted to--we were thinking, brainstorming one day and said okay everybody's done every promotion possible and summer obviously was the big season so we always tried to come up with something fun and funky in the summertime that would really make the volume fly.  So they said you know what, what is something that no one has ever given away with a can.  Back then it was like there were always promotions on the bottles of every soda.  You could like buy like one in seven odds, you could win a prize.  So we said you know what no one's ever given away money, like why don't we give away money, like what else would people want, what do people want?  They want money.  So I said that's the best thing we could give away is free money.  And so we started thinking about it and how we're going to do this.  We actually tested this technology where we could actually put a dollar bill or some multiple of a dollar, fold it up under the cap.  Because most of the promotions were delivered under--you open the cap and it said you win a free trinket, you win a free Coke, whatever so we had to figure out how to do that and so we--we started working on this technology where we could put--actually put a dollar under the cap.  And so they were very, very cautious about research so we did this huge research study of testing this bottle and I think it was like two hundreds of a tenth of percentage of the time the bottle would actually--the cap- the dollar would fall out.  It was like this minute number but a truck driver in the middle of the night buys a Coke in a 7-Eleven, drinks that thing and chokes, Coke is done.  They would be sued for life.  So the--the odds were so small but because there was even the possibility of a chance, they canned the idea.  So now it was like March and we had no good promotion for Memorial Day and we're like so how do we take this idea of giving away free money with our technology in two months and make it happen.  So I had met this guy who worked for Visa [Visa Inc.] at a conference and so I called him and I said, "Can we like give away free money on a Visa card, like can we--can you help us, can you help us figure this out?"  "Work with Coke for a big promotion? Yeah we'll figure it out."  So in thirty days we figured out how to--we developed the Coke Card and so basically there were two things that could happen.  So we literally were giving away Visa cards with money on them, it's the beginning of like ATM cards, kind of.  Visa cards with money, we were putting them in the packages in the cardboard in the box packages and then we were--we were developing, we gave away Coke Cards for free.  Your Coke card--you could actually take to an ATM [automated teller machine] and get cash.
Speaker 1: Now how--but, did some cards not have cash?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was odd, it was like a promotion.  So it was like sweepstakes, it was odd.  So on some of them you could get money and some of them you couldn't.  Regardless, you could take that card in to a retailer and get something for free.  So if you didn't get money, you could get a free Coke but you had to buy something to get it.  So we wanted to tie a purchase to it so it was sort of my idea, okay take your card, take it--and then we worked with all our local people, all of our bottlers.  So in every--in fifty, in probably 250 cities there was a different version of the card with a sleeve on it of all the local partners that would give something away for free but it required a purchase.  So you would have to walk in the (unclear) store, show your card, buy a Coke and then you would get a free comic book, a free burger at Burger King, free fries at McDonald's or whatever and then some people--I mean then you could take your card and stick it in an ATM machine and it may or may not give you cash based on the odds.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was a huge promotion, huge success.  It was like people were going crazy to get the cards to the point where we actually had one plant where the plant had to shut down because the people--the people in the plant stole the cards, and--
Speaker 1: I was thinking about that, how there is going to be somebody thinking how can I get these cards (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How can I get these cards because it was crazy?  Because the money loaded on these cards, and it was like--money wasn't really loaded, you had to take it to the ATM and do it, but.  But they were amazed that we were able to pull it off because we literally pulled it off in thirty days because we had to go to market.  So it was really fun but it was like, it was like, probably I think we had 165 different iterations of the Coke Card and what it meant in each market.  So it was sort of my claim to fame at Coke.
Speaker 1: So was it only done once?
Speaker 2: We tried to do it the next year and it never was as big as the first year because I think at some point, we, just--it was out of con- people had just gotten scared that something was going to happen with the cards, you know.  And Visa loved it because their branding was all over.  We branded the Coke Cards with their brand and stuff too.  So we tried to do it that next year and it just never was the same.  You know, they could never really replicate the first year's success.  It took a lot of work and energy on the parts of all the local people to execute but, but it was a lot of fun while it was happening, we had great commercials.
Story_ID: 663346
Speaker 1: Now you were involved with the E- the Essence Music Festival too, right?  During this time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so, Essence actually--they, they were probably maybe in their--well their going to celebrate their twentieth year this year and this was probably like '97 [1997], '98 [1998] maybe when I worked on it. [HistoryMaker] Ingrid Saunders Jones who you may know, she was the head of the foundation [The Coca-Cola Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia] for many years.  She really wanted to do something with Essence and use it as a way to entertain and sort of have a presence there and entertain.  But her budget was the foundation budget; well I had the marketing budget.  So we partnered and said how can we develop a relationship with Essence and--using my marketing dollars in combination with her foundation dollars to try to get more money.  And so she actually came to me and we started talking about it and I said, "Well you know, we buy Essence," and the price tag was a million dollars.  So we needed a million dollars to buy a sponsorship to the Festival.  Pepsi [PepsiCo] had fallen out, Pepsi had previously been the sponsor and so they sort of were looking for a partnership with a, with a big beverage--a big brand.  I said, "Well you know we're already spending six hundred thousand dollars on print ads in Essence.  We buy, you know, six ads a year," whatever whatever, and I'm trying to figure out how I can leverage that.  Like why should I pay a million dollars when I'm already spending six hundred thousand dollars?  So I called head of sales for Essence at the time, her name was Barbara Britton and I said, "Barbara so we really want to buy the festival but we don't have a million dollars and I'm already paying you guys six hundred so can I just pay you four hundred more and get the festival?"  She was like, "No way, no way are we selling it for a million dollars, Pepsi paid eight hundred for it or whatever, no way, we're not doing it."  I'm like, "Okay, see you, bye."  So--and Ingrid is like, "Are you crazy? It's never going to work."  So, so a day goes by and the phone rings, it's Barbara Britton, "All right, I hate you but we'll do it," because they were late to get a sponsor, they needed the money.  So we got it for four hundred thousand dollars instead of a million and they've been partners ever since.
Speaker 1: Yeah now I know the ads that were--ads that were targeted that the black community--towards the black community created by Burrell [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] back in the days, when it--
Speaker 2: Yes, Burrell was the agency.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Burrell was the agency, and McGhee [HistoryMaker McGhee Williams Osse] and Fay [HistoryMaker Fay Ferguson].  McGhee still is the head of Burrell, she's awesome.  She is a super, super lady.  I don't know if you guys have interviewed her but you should, she's awesome.  She has great stories from Procter [Procter and Gamble Company] and all the brands she has worked on.  She was my account person at the time on Coke [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] and she's phenomenal, brilliant woman.  But we did Coke and so the other idea I had--so now we've bought this sponsorship but how do we bring Coke to life in--in this arena and back then it was way smaller in the convention center [New Orleans Convention Center; New Orleans Ernest N. Morial Convention Center, New Orleans, Louisiana] but I invented the red hot seats and I think they did that for many years where basically we bought the front row of the theater and bought like, I don't know, like twenty tickets for the front row and then at the beginning of the concerts we would basically call people out of the rafters like call their ticket number and say, "You just won the red hot seat."  So people who were sitting up in the rafters got to sit in the first row.  It just--it became Coke-ized and now it's like, it's painted red.  They have a whole section and back stage.  I don't know if you've been lately but Coke owns it now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --but that was the very beginning, I did the first deal.
Story_ID: 663347
Speaker 1: I also did the first deal with Coke [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] getting on Tom Joyner radio.  And Tom had just started his show, it had been on for maybe a year or two and I talked to my media and I said, "We really need to be on the 'Tom Joyner Morning Show'."  "Tom who?"  "He's a black deejay, I think he's growing, he's in a bunch of markets and I think it would be really good for the brand."  So I talked to my media department and they come back the next day and they say, "Well we checked it out and Tom does every deal himself.  Here's his phone number, you have to call him," and they said, "Call him after seven o'clock, he'll be home."  I called Tom and said, "Hi my name is [HistoryMaker] Ricki Fairley and I work at Coke and we want to be on your show."  He said, "Okay I'm going to be in Atlanta [Georgia] on Saturday, meet me at the Buckhead Diner [Atlanta, Georgia] at two o'clock," and I met him with his son, Oscar [Oscar Joyner] and we did a deal to get Coke on the 'Tom Joyner Morning Show' and we actually came up with the Christmas wish.  That was one of our brainstorm ideas at the table that day.  So Coke is still on Tom Joyner.
Speaker 2: Yeah it's interesting when you mention that they didn't know who Tom Joyner was, we were talking to [HistoryMaker] Kojo Nnamdi yesterday and he was talking about the segregation of radio.  Black people listen to certain stations and white people listen to certain stations.
Speaker 1: That's the way it is.
Speaker 2: And they just don't know, I mean people didn't know who he was at WAMU [WAMU Radio, Washington, D.C.] when he started because they never listened to--
Speaker 1: Right, they never li- they would never listen.  It's like radio and church are probably the most segregated things still in America, right.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But--
Speaker 2: So--that's intere- so Tom Joyner is somebody that every black person knows pretty much, is unknown in the white community.
Speaker 1: Same thing happened when Steve Harvey started, I have a story about him too but Tom was in, he's my good buddy because I got him Coke business like many years ago right (laughter).
Speaker 2: Who are some of the people that were--that worked with you at Idea Works, I guess?
Speaker 1: We used to--we used so many different agencies and people but it was really our core team of Coke people that did most of the brainstorming.  It was an internal team, except for--with the exception of Mike Vance [Michael F. Vance].  I was talking about Mike Vance so he basically gave us a tool for how to think about innovation and he was like an uncut, sort of good consultant for us.
Speaker 2: Okay and he'd been with Disney [Walt Disney], you said?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 663348
Speaker 1: Now you were with Coke [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia] until 2000--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --until the turn of the century.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And so--what, now you went to something called Chupa Chip?
Speaker 2: Chupa Chups.
Speaker 1: Chupa Chups.
Speaker 2: Chupa Chups is actually--I actually left Coke because it was just the most--it was the best and the worst job I'd ever had.  It was such great marketing but I got to the point where I was just managing people whining about their office space and I stopped marketing.  'Cause it was like--I became like an administrator job.  I couldn't do the fun stuff anymore and I got so bored with this.  So I decided to kind of do my own thing and I went to visit a buddy of mine, he used to work at Coke who is now the president of Chupa Chups U.S.A.  It's a Spanish lollipop out of Barcelona [Spain] and they were coming to the states to launch and I kind of went to work for him as a consultant and I never went home; like I ended up staying there.  But ended up being the VP of marketing there for a couple of years and it was bringing this really cool lollipop--it's the best lollipop you have ever tasted, so good, to the U.S.  It kind of had a cult following like celebrities at the time but we were trying to bring it to mass market.  It was just a really, really fun brand.
Speaker 1: Okay, I--I hadn't heard of it until I read this, and I, but--Chupa Chups (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually one of my favorite commercials, it's actually on my website that I made at, well I made at Chupa Chups.  My current website I only have like the ads that I like the best, that I've ever made in my career and one them is it shows this woman, blonde woman, holding a cat eating a lollipop, walks into a veterinarian office of all men sitting around this little office holding dogs.  So she's walking in, she's beautiful, she's hot and she's like just working this lollipop and these men are all like just mesmerized by this woman and her cat.  So they're all sort of--implies that they're being sexually aroused (laughter) and the commercial is called oral pleasure and that's a tagline.  So the, the nurse comes in and says next and none of the guys can really get up with their dogs so she gets up with her cat and her lollipop and goes into the vet's office and so--and the tagline comes up oral pleasure.  It was a great commercial; we sold a lot of lollipops.  That was my fun story of Chupa Chups.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Chupa Chups you were with them for, for--?
Speaker 2: A couple of years and then the company--it was a family owned business, the dad [Enric Bernat] decided to retire and pull out of the states.  It's actually a worldwide company.  They are in twenty-six countries.  Chupa Chups is like a household word, it's like Tootsie Roll would be here.  We could never really penetrate the U.S. market because of distribution in the U.S.  I mean it cost twenty thousand dollars to get a slot in the grocery store here and they just weren't willing to make the investment and the dad decided to retire, sort of pulled out.  But it's a great brand, I still have all my friends that I talk to still and I still get lollipops.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I will give you another cool example of marketing there too.  So we had like a lot of flavors and so we had this cult following that we wanted to sort of nurture and plant the seeds in the world and this is before text messaging, before instant messaging and so we literally packed these really cool boxes of thirty lollipops and we would send a box to the coolest of the really cool people.  We had this list of like three hundred people, tastemakers, stylists and maybe not the celebrity but the hairstylist to the celebrity and they were just really cool people and we would send them a box every month of one flavor, thirty lollipops for them to try.  But every month we would take somebody off the list.  So we created this demand of like, "Oh my gosh, I didn't get my Chupa Chups today; I was supposed to get a box yesterday, I always get it on the first of the month, what happened?"  And they would call the office and I'm like, "Oh I don't know maybe you got taken off the list. I'll check it out for you, I'll do my best to see if I can get you back on the list next month."  We created this incredible demand with these people that thought they were cool.
Speaker 1: So the--this--so the Chupa Chups become the talk of the salon or wherever.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was really fun.  We had created the--and then we'd would start planting seeds on the website like did you know that raspberry Chupa Chups are an aphrodisiac, did you know that, you know, orange Chupa Chups make your hair grow longer.  It just became like a buzz, it would have been great if we had social media then because it would have been--you know, we would have tweeted it and they would have gone crazy.  But it's the beginning of, like, you know--
Speaker 1: Now, during this period (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) websites.
Speaker 1: You also worked with Smint and, was that--do you remember that?
Speaker 2: No I don't know, what--what--
Speaker 1: Smint is--
Speaker 2: Oh Smint. Smint was one of our brands.  It was Smint, a mint, a mint brand same kind of thing, yeah, it was from same company but it was--we did the same kind of tactics, it was a breath mint.
Speaker 1: Okay and something called Crazy Dips?
Speaker 2: Crazy Dips, Crazy--Pop Rocks, like you put in your mouth and it would explode in your mouth, a bunch of candy brands.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So again back to my sort of candy following, I always had a candy brand.  But I got to spend a lot of time in Barcelona, actually around the world.  I went to Australia a couple of times because I had a presence all over the world.
Speaker 1: Well they just haven't caught on here, but they're big enough still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: They're sort of a cult item here in the states.
Speaker 2: A little bit, you find it in like specialty stores or like little bodegas in New York [New York] you'll find it, in Spanish stores.  It's very popular in South America and so you'll still find it but they really just didn't do--weren't willing to invest in mass distribution in the states because of the cost.
Story_ID: 663349
Speaker 1: In 2003 you became partner and strategist for PowerPact [PowerPact, LLC].
Speaker 2: PowerPact, it was a, was a promotion agency and it was a new company.  They kind of brought me in, I think, because of my entrepreneurial spirit.  We had a virtual office, we had a headquarters in Richmond [Virginia] but we had probably thirty people that worked all over the country and we did a bunch of different promotions.  But I worked on--my account that I worked on was Mueller's pasta, primarily and it was actually the beginning--the whole scene about the Atkins diet, if you remember the Atkins diet, no carbs.  We were developing a no carb pasta which didn't really taste very good but people were buying it because they believe that in the Atkins methodology that if you don't eat carbs, you'll lose thirty pounds in a month.  So, it was an interesting project but it kind of failed because it didn't taste good.  At the end of the day when people eat food, whether they are on a diet or not, the taste matters.
Story_ID: 663350
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Left there and went to IMAGES USA and actually when I was at PowerPact [PowerPact, LLC] multicultural marketing was--that arena was really heating up a lot and people were starting to really focus on African American advertising and Hispanic advertising was booming and so I tried to get PowerPact to sort of go down that alley and they just didn't want to--they just didn't get it.  So I found my partners who I actually knew from--they used to call me at Coke [The Coca-Cola Company] and they sort of invited me to join their partnership and--so I could really focus on multicultural and I went to IMAGES and I stayed there for about, I guess, eight years.  We worked on a bunch of accounts, Wachovia [Wachovia Corporation] at the time which was eventually bought by Wells Fargo [Wells Fargo and Company].  I worked on Sara Lee brands and my favorite story from there was really a Steve Harvey story similar to my experience with Tom Joyner.  I worked on Hillshire Farm's smoked sausage.  They came to us--Sara Lee [Sara Lee Corporation] came to us and said, "You know we've never marketed to African Americans but we think they like sausage and we did some research and they really like it so we think we should be talking to them."  I'm like, "Really, black people and sausage, what a concept," (laughter), "so we can help you with that."  So, so they brought us in to help us physically develop a multicultural practice and we did.  At the time Steve was booming on the radio and they had this award winning advertising campaign called Go Meat, and they're these quirky commercials and they are saying, "Go meat," and there are these stupid little chants of people doing silly things but they were trying to make meat the hero.  And so they said, "Well can we adapt this to black people?"  And I said, "You know meat is never the hero in the black house, the mama is the hero.  You've got to make mama the hero and meat is kind of her means to an end."  And so we developed a campaign making mama the hero.  We had these really great radio ads and I said Steve Harvey is hot right now.  He's booming, he's growing, he was only in about thirty markets at the time and his media was really cheap, it was half the price of Tom Joyner.  And Tom Joyner is a vegetarian so couldn't go on Tom Joyner's ['Tom Joyner Morning Show'].  So I said, "Let's do radio, we know it going to reach black women.  We'll make mama the hero, make these really funky commercials," and, and we made these great commercials, put them on Steve and they just took off.  And we basically tripled the volume among African Americans in a year.
Story_ID: 663351
Speaker 1: So we grew with Steve [Steve Harvey].  The, the brand took off and did really, really well and, and, and we saw like really exponential growth every year. We continued it for, for about five years, a long time.  I'm actually speaking there; I'm there Black History Month speaker this month in February for Hillshire.
Speaker 2: Hillshire Farms [sic. Hillshire Farm].
Speaker 1: So it's a great brand and we did prove yes, black people do like sausage.  We actually grew their turkey sausage business with Steve because Steve decided he didn't want to eat pork and that business had taken off.  Now they have chicken sausage and turkey, that's where the growth is and that's because of Steve's voice.  And we also sponsored Steve's Hoodie Awards which we now call the Neighborhood Awards.  Are you familiar with that program?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: He has a program that he does every year where he rewards black businesses and black entrepreneurs and he sets it up on line where each community can vote on the best hair stylist, the best barbershop, the best carwash, the best soul food restaurant, the best church and they built these categories around that and gets brands to sponsor the awards.  It's like an Oscar [Academy Awards] like show.  He's had it in Las Vegas [Nevada] for the past ten years and now he's moving it to Atlanta [Georgia] this year.  It's a huge event but it gets like eighteen thousand people to come and rewards black business owners by making them like get the award from a star.  So he has like celebrities giving the awards to regular people to give back to the community, it's a great thing.
Speaker 2: Yes it is.
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It does sound like a great idea.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 663352
Speaker 1: Now you did something with AARP [AARP Inc.] too, that's (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So AARP has been my client for eight years and we really have grown their presence in the African American community.  I think when I first started working with the AARP we had less than a million African Americans members.  Probably about half a million African American members and now we have about 3 million and it's growing like crazy.  So they are--it's a wonderful brand.  I love working with them because they have a great social mission to help people, it's almost like the Wikipedia of aging.  If there's anything you want to know about anything when you are over fifty, you can go to their website and find it.  They have great resources for care giving, for financial wellness, for healthcare, for really anything you need to know about.  Medicare, Medicaid, social security, it's a great, great brand.  I love working with them and I--I'll tell you about my IMAGES [IMAGES USA] experience but I left IMAGES.  Two years ago I got breast cancer and I sort of quit my life and started a new one.  When you get breast cancer they give you kind of a nurse coach to kind of coach you through the process and so I think that year I was diagnosed in September; by October 1st I had already flown 100,000 miles and gotten Delta [Delta Airlines] platinum.  I was a crazy person; I was all over the place, and my nurse said, "You need to get the stress out of your life and figure it out."  So I said, "Well I'm not stressed, I'm just a multitasking crazy person.  I'm like a type A; I'm going to get it done."  She said, "No, no, no you need to figure it out what's stressing you out," and I said, "How would I know what's stressing me out because I don't believe in stress."  She said, "You have to--," she said, "How many times a day do you say or think the word asshole."  And I was like, "(Makes sound) A lot," (laughter) about my business partner and my husband of almost thirty years [Rodney Brown] so I quit them.  I divorced my husband and I quit my business partners.  I started my company [DOVE Marketing, Inc.] between my third and fourth rounds of chemo and the day after I quit them, AARP also quit them and came with me to my new company and I got the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] business, and that was--he was my first client.
Story_ID: 663353
Speaker 1: That sounds so simple, I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was pretty crazy.  And I, I left Atlanta [Georgia], sold my house in the suburbs and moved to the beach and I live on the Chesapeake Bay now.  Kind of moved back home to my roots in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and I started my own business [DOVE Marketing, Inc.].  I had been nurturing the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] business for a little bit.  I had been working on it and I got it.  It all sort of happened, God was working.
Speaker 1: So this is in two thousand--
Speaker 2: Twenty eleven [2011], two years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay so this was just before his second campaign.
Speaker 2: Yeah this the second--for the second campaign.  I did all the radio ads for the second campaign.  So if you heard a radio ad, I made it.
Speaker 1: What was the problem you had to solve, I guess, for his second campaign?
Speaker 2: So the research showed that--I did all the African American work--the strategy work.  The research showed that black people who voted in the first election were going to vote again but they couldn't articulate why.  They couldn't tell you what the president had done for them lately and they all were sort of thinking, well you know what did he really do for me, yeah I guess I'll vote for him because he seems like a good guy and he's done a pretty good job but I can't really pin point what he's done.  And we needed them to understand that because we also need to engage a lot of other voters who hadn't voted the first time, who were registered or not registered.  And we needed a bigger audience and so, so it was my idea that we had to tell stories and we had to tell real stories of real people and talk about his accomplishments.  So we picked the top issues on the table, jobs obviously employment and the economy, education, healthcare were the three hot buttons.  And we went and found real people to tell their real stories.  So the radio campaign was real stories of real people and literally I had to go--I read letters, I read emails.  We talked to field workers and we--'cause for every twenty people I talked to and read their story probably nineteen of them vetted out of the process because they hadn't paid their taxes or they had criminal records or something.  And the campaign was squeaky clean so everybody had to fit, you know, fit a profile of the legitimacy.  So we had to--then I would have to find the people, listen to their story which probably would take a couple of hours for them to tell me, I had a kid on the Pell Grant, I had a kid from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], a kid from--a woman who owned a business in Detroit [Michigan] that was affected by the car industry and they were all real stories of real people, where they could say, "If Obama wasn't the president, I wouldn't be in business." "If Obama wasn't the president, I wouldn't get an education." "If Obama wasn't the president, I wouldn't be alive," and they were that, that, you know, real.  So I would have to take--get the story, talk to the people and then I wasn't--we didn't want to pay for me to go to the person to be in the studio with them so I would take their story, write it in a sixty second script, give it back to them and have them record it in a different city than where I was in the studio.  Coach them through the process and produce a commercial.  In three days.  So it was crazy but it was incredible.  David Axelrod was my boss. Ultimately he made all the calls on what ads went out the door and what the scripts were and so--but it was an amazing experience and we won, they worked.
Speaker 1: Right, well give us an example of the ones that worked some of the ones that didn't work.
Speaker 2: Well they all worked because he won.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but we really had great success.  The stories were--my favorite one and I actually won an award from the Association of National Advertisers for this one was a kid named Ronnie [Ronnie Mosley].  I had been in Ohio because Ohio was where I did a lot of research because it was a swing state and they had so much going on both sides of the--of the campaign.  I was flying home from Ohio and I went to the Atlanta office just to talk to people because that's where I got my stories from and this group of kids from Morehouse was there, volunteering, answering phones that day.  I met this kid Ronnie who told me how basically he would not be able to go to school if he hadn't got the Pell Grant and so he told me his story and literally the next day I wrote the script and after that we were in the studio.  And he was the one example where he was actually in the studio with me because we were in Atlanta together; everybody was in a different city.  He insisted on recording--like we recorded the ad about twenty times because he didn't like how he heard himself which is pretty funny, he was really playing a role in it.  But his story was amazing and he basically talked about, "I want the American dream, I want the car, the house, the picket fence, the great job and I know if I didn't have this experience at Morehouse funded by a grant that Obama created, I would not have it."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And those were the stories that made a difference.  When people heard the stories not only could they bring it home to themselves and tell their own personal story but then share it with other people because it's more credible when I tell it to you and you--then you have your own story and you tell it to the next person, than hearing it through media--
Speaker 1: Right. --and that's what he wanted me to do.
Story_ID: 663354
Speaker 1: Was there some accomplishment in the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration that wasn't good for the campaign?
Speaker 2: I would only say good things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I would only think--Because I totally respect everything that he is doing and I think that what he's really dealing with is blatant racism.  Right?  You know, in every opposition it's not about a factor or a figure or an accomplishment it's about the fact that some people don't want him to succeed.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well I was thinking when you said that David Axelrod was like sorting this out basically, determining which ones would go out the door, which ones don't.  I was wondering which ones didn't go out the door?
Speaker 2: Oh, didn't go out the door, well you know what, they really--we really never got to that point.  By the time they got to him, they were validated.  Because we had to validate everybody and make it a real story so he was--if a story didn't go out the door it's because the person was vetted out of the process.  Because they didn't pay their taxes or they didn't--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay so the person's credentials disqualified them from being (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Yeah.  I talked to several entrepreneurs that had great stories but they hadn't paid their taxes.
Speaker 1: So you wouldn't want them on the Bill O'Reilly show ['The O'Reilly Factor'] or something.
Speaker 2: You got it. We couldn't risk any negativism about the stories.  They had to be real.  And actually one story was about a woman named Veronica [ph.] from North Carolina and she really believed--she had a heart condition and she really believed that Obamacare [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] had given her the ability to pay for her healthcare to get well and we went and vetted the story, we were literally about to go on the air in an hour we were going to ship the commercials and we got a call from some lawyer in the campaign saying, "Hold on," and they called her and said it turned out that her insurance had kicked in the day before the Obama impact.  So it really didn't come from Obama, it came from her insurance.  We had to change the whole the story and so instead of getting rid of the story, we just changed it, tweaked it so that we weren't telling a lie.  But that's how protective they were with the president.
Speaker 1: This also speaks to some of the confusion around what an administration can do and can't do and when it's done and when it isn't.  I think a lot of people don't--
Speaker 2: They don't have a clue.  The level of integrity and perfection that was demanded of us was nothing like I've ever seen with any company that I've ever worked for.  It was amazing and it was just pristine.
Speaker 1: So you basically worked with David Axelrod?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so David was our ultimate boss but there were a couple of people in between but he was--the buck stopped with him on what went out the door from advertising and messaging perspective.  He read every script and heard every piece of music and everything.  And, and it was almost a formula to it because every ad--we had to have the story, connect it to an Obama quote that supported education or jobs or whatever, and make it meaningful.  So we had to build the story but then also put his verse in the commercial talking about the topic. So it was--we were always like looking for the right words, the right quote.  I read so many speeches; I read every speech he probably ever did to find the right quote to go with every ad and I did that all when I was on chemo so it was pretty crazy.
Speaker 1: You said you had, you had cultivated trying--you know, this job--I mean getting this contract, I guess, to do this, you really wanted to do this.
Speaker 2: I did, I really did.  I made a lot of friends in the White House.  So my daughter, Amanda worked--she actually worked in Obama's [U.S.] Senate office when she was a junior at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and met him back then and I met him then.  I met him first--I was getting off the elevator, I was coming to take her to lunch and he was getting on the elevator, way before his entourage.  And he's like, "I know who you are; you are Amanda Brown's mom.  You're coming to take her to lunch."  How did you know that?  He was like very charismatic, mesmerizing man.  So that was the first time I met him and then she actually worked on the campaign after she graduated in '07 [2007], hit the campaign trail and ended up working in the West Wing.  She worked in the West Wing for three years.  So I have a lot of contacts through her network.  So my daughter helped me get this job.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, that's full circle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, pretty much.
Speaker 2: It was very cool.
Story_ID: 663355
Speaker 1: In 2012, now this is a pivotal thing, you establish Doved--DOVE Marketing [DOVE Marketing, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Yes, that was my company.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, I started DOVE between my third and fourth rounds of chemo.  I moved to the beach, I changed my life and I really just--my AARP [AARP Inc.] client came with me.  I got the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] business and I sort of took off.  I now work with clients that I love.  I work at home, I live at the beach, it's a great thing and I still work as hard as I always have but it's for myself and it's good.  The disciplines of marketing can be applied to any brand.  So I've tried to expand my horizon so that I don't just work on packaged goods but I try to do good things in the world.  So I have a lot of nonprofit clients and I serve on five boards and I try to make a difference--using my marketing talent to make a difference.
Speaker 1: Why the name DOVE Marketing?
Speaker 2: DOVE because dove stands for peace in your life, stands for peace.
Speaker 1: Okay I think I'm--I want to skip back to something so pivotal, I mean you described it so matter of factly.  Getting rid of the people that--
Speaker 2: Caused me stress.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was it that--I know it wasn't easy to do.
Speaker 2: It wasn't easy.  I was married for almost thirty years.  I was the breadwinner of the family and I realized that when you get breast cancer and I had stage three triple negative breast cancer, it was no joke and the kind of breast cancer I had was--twice as many black women get it as compared to white women and they don't really know why.  Every other kind of breast cancer has a preventive drug you can take to prevent it from coming back, triple negative doesn't and it was no joke.  So I had to figure out how to fix it and I learned very quickly that I could no longer take care of another grown person; that I could take care of myself and my daughter [Hayley Brown] who was at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] at the time, my younger daughter.  So I realized I physically could not take care of another person.  So it was a pretty easy decision from that perspective.  I had to say I got to take care of me.
Speaker 1: Now this is--the implication here is, you can hear this in a lot of stories, I think science is trying to prove this on some level that how we feel about ourselves really affects our health, even though--even though (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I really believe that.
Speaker 1: --all of us are going to die at some point though from something, but still.
Speaker 2: I do believe that stress caused my illness and even with my relationship with my business partner [at IMAGES USA], I was the rainmaker, I really brought the business in, and brought the clients in and I did all the work.  There were three of us, and one was the founder [Robert McNeil, Jr.], he basically didn't do anything, he didn't carry his weight.  And so I was getting all the new business, getting all the clients, managing the clients, servicing the clients; the other partner managed all the finances so together we kind of ran the company.  But I realized that I couldn't work for him anymore either.  I couldn't take care of him either.  So I had to figure out I had to take care of myself and I love what I do, I love what I do.  It's like a secret; I think marketing is like a secret how much fun it is.  People just don't know but it's really fun.  I love trying to figure out how to motivate behavior and I start every relationship with every client saying okay what's your Oz, where do you want to be.  The people over there in the corner marching with the green hat on and do you want to get there by Friday.  A lot of people just don't think that way.  So figure out where you want to be and then you craft the yellow brick road to get there.  That's what my strength is, it's some of the strategic thinking to help you get where you need to be.  So for AARP, I'd been working on their African American strategy for eight years.  I actually preceded my clients; I had worked there before they did even.  But my client came to me in June and said, "You know I think we should be doing social media, I think we should be doing Facebook and Twitter but I don't know anything about it, do you?"  "Well, I know a little bit but I'll figure it out."  So we started working on that and in June we had six hundred Facebook page likes.  I don't know if you know social media and we're going to hit 100,000 this weekend.  So I kind of took on a new challenge and figured it out, so.  It's a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 663356
Speaker 1: What is the future of black ad a- agencies now in terms of their--?
Speaker 2: So there's this new concept that people are talking about called total market marketing and that's like the new buzz word of the day and it's basically how do we get rid of black and Hispanic marketing and just talk to everybody.  People did that ten years--fifteen years ago, I called it the rainbow ad.  Let's make an ad with the black person, the Asian person, the Hispanic person and make them all, you know, wear red and look happy.  So it's kind of that but--and if you think about it, companies that have been in multicultural space for many years like McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation], like Coke [The Coca-Cola Company], they have been doing it for years.  They're getting away with it because they're actually putting their black commercials into the general market.  So you see the commercial with the little black kid with the headphones on, on 'Grey's Anatomy.'  So that's sort of the ultimate of, I think, total market approach.  But I think there is always going to be a need, I mean people sell brands--companies sell brands to the people that need the brand for whatever reason and they are affective when they talk to that person in a way that's relevant to them.  All the market research data shows that an ad is more affective in resulting in a purchase if the ad is culturally relevant and not if just the people in it are black and not if they're just speaking Spanish but if it's culturally relevant.  So there is something about that ad based on an insider and nuance that makes it relevant to their lives and that's what's going to make them buy a product.  I think that's going to always be the case and clearly there's always going to be a kind of a war between whether there is a need for multicultural marketing but at the end of the day I know that--and I was actually at AARP [AARP Inc.] yesterday talking to a bunch of people in the company and they're seeing this work that we're doing in the black community and they even raised, the reason why it's working is because the content is relevant.  Because I understand the target and I calculate strategically I think about it all the time, what I'm going to put in front of this audience to make them engage with the brand.  I think about whether, oh my gosh it's [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks' birthday today, is that going to be relevant to black people and engaging AARP, yes it is.  I post crazy things like I posted jacks, you know the little game jacks with the little--I've played as kids, probably your sister did if you have one.  I posted a jacks post, a million hits, twenty-four hours.  So you have to find a voice of relevance.  You have to find a content of relevance and then voice it in the right way to get people to engage with your brand.  Whether you are Hispanic, black, white, green, purple, twenty-four, forty-eight [years old].  If you don't find that point of connection based on relevant content, it's not going to work.  It's going to be a waste of money.  I mean, my favorite quote from David Ogilvy was, you know, "I know only half of my advertising works; I wish I knew which half" [sic.].
Speaker 1: We didn't get a chance to interview Vince Cullers on The HistoryMakers but I did know him, and--
Speaker 2: Did you, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I spent about a week in that agency [Vince Cullers Advertising, Inc.; Vince Cullers Group] doing artwork.
Speaker 2: Oh did you, okay.
Speaker 1: We had a chance to talk to him and I always got the impression that Cullers and Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] and a generation of black ad men, and women because Marian [HistoryMaker Marian Cullers] was (unclear) too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Carol Williams [HistoryMaker Carol H. Williams].
Speaker 1: Yeah and other people, Barbara Proctor [Barbara Gardner Proctor] that generation was selling more than just a product when they put an ad together.
Speaker 2: They did--they were.
Speaker 1: They were selling ideas and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were selling cultural relevance and they didn't call it that then because that's a new name, only a couple years old but that's what they were selling.  They were making it relevant even when Burrell [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] did the first Tide ad with Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] that was something that was relevant, had not been in the media before and black people gravitated toward it and made them buy Tide.
Speaker 1: Values too, I mean you know, in some of the ads really loaded with value, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah they are and if you think about it too now with social media people are looking to see where companies are investing their money.  So if I don't support a cause that's relevant to my audience or you're not in the community--if I don't see you, touch you, feel you, you can say you're all about supporting the black community but unless I see you at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] dinner, at ELC [Executive Leadership Council], at the Urban League [National Urban League], at Essence, I'm not going to connect.  So they have to have a real tangible connection in the community that's meaningful.  You can't just show up and buy a dinner, you have to be there and be real and people connect with that and that's why Ford [Ford Motor Company] has been really successful, State Farm is successful because they are really the biggest supporters of sort of the black events.  But they're in there doing the right thing also generating business while they are there.  When you go to a State Farm event, a week later you'll get an email saying do you want to be a representative, you know, so it's real--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and genuine.
Story_ID: 663357
Speaker 1: How big is your staff at DOVE [DOVE Marketing, Inc.], in terms of (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have, I have a staff of, of six people and we're still pretty small and we have a virtual office.  They're all in different cities; nobody lives in Annapolis [Maryland] with me.  I have like my full time account person and we all have kind of wacky titles, she's the expeditor, my photographer is the sharpshooter and he's in New York.  My account person is in Pennsylvania, my creative person is in North Carolina and we all work virtually and we all get it done.  All of my clients are people that I love and are businesses that I want to work on.  So I'm working right now for Verna Jones-Rodwell.  She's running for senate, Maryland state senate [Maryland Senate].  I'm doing her campaign work, I'm working on AARP [AARP Inc.], I'm working on the national legal aid defense fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] because I think there's a need there.  I'm working on one of my nonprofits that I'm on the board of called Move This World [Move This World, Inc.] and it's a nonprofit that promotes dance movements to allay bullying in schools.  So I'm trying to figure out to save the world in a little--from a marketing perspective because, you know, I could sell anything, I could sell more sugar but there's probably other things that I think that I want to spend my time on.
Story_ID: 663358
Speaker 1: So are you more of an activist now than you were when you were in school do you think?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I think so.  I think, you know, I was a capitalist for a long time and I think when you, when you get breast cancer you have an awakening and figure out okay how can I use this gift that I have to make people--things better.  One of things that I'm doing right now that I feel very passionate about is triple negative breast cancer.  I believe that black women, and a lot of doctors do, should get mammograms before they are forty.  I had it when I was fifty-five but it's affecting so many young black women that just haven't had a mammogram yet and they're dying because they get diagnosed at a very late stage.  So we actually created triple negative breast cancer day, it's March 3rd and I'm doing this huge PR [public relations] campaign to spread the word.  So I did an article on blackdoctor.org.  I have an article coming out in Essence in their April issue and I'm working with Tom Joyner and Steve Harvey to get interviews on their shows to spread the word about this disease.  So I'm sort of a (air quotes) champion--like I'm on their website as a champion for triple negative breast cancer.
Story_ID: 663359
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on all the things you've done to this point in your life, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could change it?
Speaker 2: Probably would have gotten diversed- divorced [from Rodney Brown] earlier.  Is that a bad thing? (Laughter) But you know what, I know that if I hadn't gotten sick, I probably wouldn't have gotten divorced because I believe in marriage, I believe it's a thing that you're supposed to stay committed to and being sick, I think, it was really God's gift to say, "You need to go figure out your life.  This is not what I put you here for."  And it made me think about what I'm supposed to be doing here.  So I think that's probably the only thing I would do differently.  I have two amazing daughters. You know one [Amanda Brown] just made the Forbes 30 Under 30 list.  She graduated from Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] in '07 [2007] and my baby daughter [Hayley Brown] will graduate from Dartmouth on June 8th, thank you God and has a job working for Teach for America in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California].  So I think her and my niece, my niece is also a teacher in China, she's doing Teach for China, they got the education bug from my parents and so I think that generation will take that on.
Story_ID: 663360
Speaker 1: Did your father [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley] finally catch on to what you were doing and--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah he did, oh yeah, and--and he reaped the benefits of it, he loved it.  So actually when I worked at McNeil [McNeil Consumer Products Company; McNeil Consumer Healthcare], we had all these crazy sales events, it was like a crazy--that was when people just had a lot of money to spend in business and we would go on these sales trips where we'd go and we would have like three days of meetings in Phoenix [Arizona] and then three days on the company, do whatever you want.  We would like take boating rides and whatever.  We went to Hawaii, we went to Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina], we went to great places and my dad was always my date, I took him with me, he was my date.  Even when I was married [to Rodney Brown], he was still my date.  So he like, you know, got the benefit of learn- seeing Corporate America in action on the fun stuff.  But he did support it and, you know, totally.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He loved it.
Story_ID: 663361
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh that's a good one.  Financial stability, financial security, I mean so many people don't have jobs or are having trouble getting jobs.  Being an entrepreneur and having worked in Corporate America for many, many years, I hit the glass ceiling three times pretty much.  I think entrepreneurism is really important and I think people should have the ability and also the guts to do it at an early age.  I hope that my daughters learn from other people but I hope that they have the guts and the financial ability to be able to start their own--do their own thing and live their dream and I think we should do whatever we can to support people being able to live their dream and facilitate that.  I think it starts with education, starts with education.  I have to say that one of the commercials I made, I met this wonderful young kid who went to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and he had a great story about how he mentored youth and he was on a passion to help youth get out of trouble and bring--get them to college.  He could not finish his sentence grammatically correct and literally I had to cut--we had to edit every word to make a sixty second commercial with correct grammar.  This kid had graduated from high school, was a senior in college at an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] and couldn't speak correctly.  Now is Ebonics okay, I don't know, that's a whole other debate but he had such good values and good intentions but will he be accepted in the world because he can't speak properly?  What kind of impact will he be able to make on kids without that tool.  So I think he was cheated in his education to get that far without being forced to learn how to speak properly.  And maybe, you know, I definitely am an Ivey League snob, I--you know, my friends accuse me of that all the time, I'll take it.  But I think that education unless we take it seriously and try to get our kids prepared for the world, they're not going to be able to succeed and start businesses and be entrepreneurs and succeed in business.  I see the business world and I see a racism and sexism that still exists.  You see it with Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] every day; I don't know if that will ever change and I think even as America becomes more (air quotes) of color and multicultural consumers are in huge numbers, the economic power is still going to stay for a long time with white men and it's going to be hard to break through that ceiling.  So you have to figure out how to prepare yourself to carve your niche out to be able to succeed in that world, 'cause I don't think it's going to change.  When I first got into the business world, I said, "Oh wow when Sharon [Sharon Fairley]," my sister, "comes along four years later; it's going to be better for her.  She's not going to have to hide that she's pregnant."  Well guess what, it didn't change.  I see Amanda [Amanda Brown] now at twenty-eight dealing with the same issues I dealt with when I was twenty-eight.  From a different perspective but it's still there.  The power is where it is and it's based on money, it's based on economic strength.  So even though we have numbers and they are getting better but it's still, who rules the world.  I looked at a picture that I posted on Facebook of the State of the Union address and you look at Biden's [Joe Biden] expression and Boehner's [John Boehner] expression and it says it all in that picture sitting behind Obama.
Speaker 1: What--what were they looking--what did they look like?
Speaker 2: Biden was a happy camper, clapping; Boehner was like what the--sick of this.  You don't want to use a curse word but that's what he was saying.  You could see the smoke coming out of his ears and at the end of the day, they're holding up a lot of stuff, you know.  I applaud Obama for changing the minimum wage to the extent that he can, but I--and, and, and being creative enough to think of ways to work around the system because it's there.  So I think we're just--I mean I know I have two girls and, you know, they're--I think they're brilliant and bodacious and that's what it's going to take to rule the world.
Story_ID: 663362
Speaker 1: Are there any organizations of--I mean of black business people that are really pushing entrepreneurialism in a, I mean, in a--that you are a part of?
Speaker 2: I, you know what, I really support Black Enterprise, I mean I think that Butch [HistoryMaker Earl "Butch" Graves, Jr.] is really living the legacy of his father [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.] and I think he does a lot still for black businesses and a lot for women and I'm actually speaking at their women of power conference [Women of Power Summit] in a month.  So I totally support what they're doing and you know he's in a dying business.  The print, journalism business is not a happy place.  So it's a tough market out there for them to get advertisers and I think they have to be innovative of how they get their message across whether it's online, on a mobile app or whatever.  But I think he's carrying on that legacy that his dad started as a Pepsi bottler way back in the day.  I actually think Rainbow PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] is trying, even Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] in his own way.  He has a really good organization behind him and the Wall Street Project.  I'm involved in the marketing project and he's going to hit the car industry really hard and he's doing the same thing with ad agencies.  But I think those are two that sort of come to mind.  And I think the chambers--the black chamber [US Black Chambers, Inc.] is doing a really good job in terms of trying to bring, you know, bring skills to entrepreneurs to help them grow their businesses.  Ron Busby [Ron Busby, Sr.] is a really good guy and then also the ELC [Executive Leadership Council], I'm not really a part of the ELC but I think they do--have a similar mission and then I think also politics is--you know, works.  I think that some of the black mayors like Kasim Reed are trying to do the same thing in Atlanta [Georgia] and the mayor of Baltimore [Stephanie Rawlings-Blake].  I think as soon we get people in positions and I think a mayor--a mayoral position is a really key job for building entrepreneurs within a city more than a senator, more than a congressman.  I think being a mayor you really have accountability to the business owners in that city and I think Kasim's done a good job trying to promote that in Atlanta.  So the more black mayors we can get; the better.
Speaker 1: Okay. I'm glad I asked that question, so, you know, it's a good, you know, it's a good answer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you, okay.
Story_ID: 663363
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't touched upon that we need to discuss before I ask--well, I--there is another--well--the last two questions.  I guess--We can combine them, we usually ask them separately but when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what would you consider to be your professional legacy and then how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I don't want to pinpoint everything, I think even--I would even say my professional legacy is my daughters [Amanda Brown and Hayley Brown] because even though I always worked in the world and I made a lot of accomplishments in the work world, my biggest accomplishment is producing these wonderful women and I hope that they will change the world and I know that they will. I worked really hard on them.  But I think that's the legacy that I want to leave and I hope that they will touch the world, and I think in their own way they are starting to do that already at their young ages.  I think that the one thing that I want to be known for is that I never say no.  No is never the answer and I learned this from my dad [HistoryMaker Richard Fairley].  It's always how.  So if someone gives me a challenge that I don't think--I'll never say no, I'll try to figure it out.  If I want something, I don't want anyone to say no to me, I'm going to figure it out, I'm going to figure out how to skin the cat, I'm going to figure out--that's how my dad described it.  But I'm never going to say no and I'm never going to accept no, I'm always going to figure it out for the better--for the better good, whatever it is.  So when it was breast cancer, I'm like okay bring it on, what do we need to do, how do we figure it out and now how can I raise money to support it so somebody else doesn't get it.  If it's a marketing challenge, how do we do social media for AARP [AARP Inc.], I don't know; I'll figure it out.  But no is never the answer, it's always how.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, well thank you very much.
