Story_ID: 261101
Speaker 1: Mr. Fletcher, we're gonna begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I am the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Today's date is Friday, January 14th, 2005 and this interview is taking place in Washington, D.C.  Now, if you would please, for the record, tell us your full name and spell it.
Speaker 2: My full formal name is [HistoryMaker] William Gerald Fletcher, Jr.  Which part do you want me to spell?
Speaker 1: Gerald.
Speaker 2: G-E-R-A-L-D.
Speaker 1: And everything else is spelled the common way, correct?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And now would you please tell us your occupation.
Speaker 2: I'm the president of TransAfrica Forum.
Speaker 1: Your--the date and location of your birth.
Speaker 2: June 21st, 1954, New York, New York.
Story_ID: 261102
Speaker 1: Now, the next couple of questions are like People magazine-ish type questions, just to help us get familiar with the process and also to help us learn a little bit more about you so for these questions I ask you that you just give me short answers for these.  Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well my favorite type of food is seafood.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue and black.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: California.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying.  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, "Never forget the class struggle" [Mao Zedong].
Story_ID: 261103
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother, starting with your mother's name and where your mother was born and where she grew up as a girl.
Speaker 2: My mother's name, full name is Joan Carter Fletcher, her maiden name was Carter.  She was born in Arlington, Massachusetts and, I believe in Arlington, but she grew up, her early years, I think her first ten or so years were in Arlington and with her grandmother [Emma Kelly] and grandfather, their family, because her parents [Fiona Braithwaite and Merrill Carter] were living and working in New York [New York] and it was complicated.  And so then I think when she became a teenager or was ten, eleven, something like that, she moved to New York.
Speaker 1: And did your mother ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a girl growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did she tell you?
Speaker 2: My mother really liked her childhood.  She, she was an only child, an expression I hate, but--
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because it, it creates different images in people's minds.  It sometimes sounds like a lonely child and sometimes it conveys other things for those of us who had been unable to have more than one child.  So I don't like the expression.  I wish that there was another one I could think of but she, she felt very loved.  My great-grandparents, her grandparents, had a large family.  My great-grandfather was a major pre-Harlem Renaissance African American writer.  His name was William Stanley Braithwaite and he, he traveled a lot.  My great-grandmother basically ran the family, you know, and so my mother grew up there in Arlington and had a lot of fun.  My great-grandmother would regularly tell me that my mother was a very good kid when she was growing up and I think my mother was spoiled a little bit but my mother doesn't act spoiled.
Story_ID: 261104
Speaker 1: So, did she [Fletcher's mother, Joan Carter Fletcher] ever talk about what life was like for her or how she made the transition to, when she moved to New York [New York]?  Did she ever discuss that at all?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  It was, I think it was, it was somewhat of a difficult transition because she was basically now back with her parents [Fiona Braithwaite and Merrill Carter] and then New York and Arlington [Massachusetts] are very different places but all things said, once she got to New York, she met a number of people who, she's still friends with.  I mean her best friends now, she has known since the 1940s.  I mean, they've been, that entire period and, and she became a real New Yorker and when I mean a real New Yorker, I mean a real New--like Brooklyn Dodgers fan will never permit me, regardless of where I live, to ever root for the Los Angeles Dodgers.  I mean one of those people that, I didn't appreciate the depth of that passion until I saw that Ken Burns series on baseball ['Baseball'] and understood why New Yorkers felt betrayed when the Brooklyn Dodgers left and my mother's just like that and so she, she became a real New Yorker.
Speaker 1: And where is Arlington?
Speaker 2: It's a suburb immediately north of, it's like two cities above Boston [Massachusetts] and it's a, it's a very white place which was one of the things that was very odd about my great-grandparents [Emma Kelly and William Stanley Braithwaite] living there, I mean, they were, they were very light-skinned African Americans but they were nevertheless African Americans and I don't know that there were any other African American families anywhere nearby.
Speaker 1: So did your mother have white friends, she'd play with white children or was it mainly family?  Well, did the--
Speaker 2: That's an interesting question.
Speaker 1: --other family members live nearby?
Speaker 2: For a while, and then people started moving to New York.  There was kind of a, almost like a migration of the Braithwaites to New York and my great-grandparents moved and settled in '47 [1947].  They were living at a very famous building, 409 Edgecombe Avenue, very famous because it's in the part of Harlem [New York, New York] that people call Sugar Hill [Harlem, New York, New York] and it's, you know, people like [W.E.B.] Du Bois lived there and, I mean, and all these folks lived there, and so the Braithwaites just kind of migrated to Harlem and it's interesting, I, but when you ask about white friends, I don't remember my mother talking about that and I don't know why.  I'll have to ask her.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother is, my parents are wonderful human beings and I'm blessed to have them.  My mother is charming, she is smart, has beautiful penmanship, she is very affectionate.  As she's gotten older, she's, she gets a little bit too nervous about things but she's, she's someone who, she's very thoughtful, she's a very good listener, actually, both of my parents are very good listeners.  She's been a very--she's been a great mother.
Story_ID: 261105
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about your father, father's name and where he was born and where he grew up.
Speaker 2: He's William G. Fletcher, Sr. and he is the baby of his family, born in Reading, Pennsylvania.  His parents, the lineage on the Fletcher side reputedly goes back to Tecumseh, the Shawnee Indian [Native American] leader, of the early part of the 19th century, who attempted to unite the tribes against the encroaching United States and, and I say that because when I was knee high to a duck, I knew that, right, it was, it's one of those things in a family that we all know, we're all extremely proud of.  His father was a barber in Washington, D.C.  I think that actually, his father's name was Percy Robinson Fletcher and he was from D.C., I believe, and he and his wife, Blanche Weaver Fletcher, settled in Reading.  They lived in, ironically the white side of Reading, ironically because my grandfather was a race man.
Speaker 1: What's a race man?
Speaker 2: A race man is an expression that we don't use anymore but it was an expression, it was very common in the first part of the 20th century to describe an African American who was very race conscious and who would be very pro-black.  My grandfather wasn't the Garveyite but he was a race man and as a result he suffered financially.  He, certain opportunities just weren't there and, and that too becomes very important for my father.  My father had great pride in his father.  My father is a very good listener.  He is shy but you wouldn't necessarily know it.  He was a salesman before he retired and an excellent one.  My mother [Joan Carter Fletcher] was a teacher and he's, my father's a good, was a good salesman, I think, because my father pays attention to what people need and then would fashion his arguments around that.  People turn to my father for all sorts of advice, something that he's passed down to me, and in both his case and my case, it's like we wonder, why are people asking us this?  But people go to my father regularly.  My father can fix or repair anything on this planet.  He could probably fix a starship.  He is incredibly talented and he doesn't give himself enough credit because he's not, he doesn't see himself as an intellectual although he's a real thinker.  He, he reads but he doesn't read in the same way my mother reads.  My mother is just insatiable and she passed that down to me.  My father's a very good man.
Story_ID: 261106
Speaker 1: And did your father [William Fletcher, Sr.] ever share any stories with you about what life was like in Reading [Pennsylvania] growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did he tell you about Reading during that time period?
Speaker 2: The difficulties for black people.  The, the, he lived near someone who was in what was called the German American Bund [German American Federation], which was this pro-Nazi organization that had been set up.  They were basically of, of German immigrants and people who were of German ancestry.  It was basically set up by [Adolf] Hitler and--
Speaker 1: And it was, it was in Reading?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, this, it was actually all over the United States but it was, but there was someone that lived either next door to my father or down, and had like a swastika on their house until World War II [WWII] and that was a critical image.  I had an interesting discussion with my father a few months ago about color.  My family is, on both sides of the family, were lighter skin but there's a range of colors and my father's side, what I did not realize, and this again shows the contradictory, contradictoriness of black America.  I have a grandfather [Percy Fletcher] who was light-skin, a race man, yet he and his wife [Blanche Weaver Fletcher] were very conscious of the skin color of the people that their children would date and consider marrying.
Speaker 1: Conscious in terms of--
Speaker 2: They were uncomfortable the darker they got and this apparently was especially true with my grandmother.  I don't know how true it was with my grandfather but it was, it was something that my father's deeply ashamed of and a few months ago I, my parents were here visiting, I said, dad, let's just go for a ride.  And so we're just like driving around southern Prince George's County [Maryland], and talking and that's when he told me some of this and he was very ashamed of that but, but the reality is that within black America, there's one, there's three things that we don't like to talk about or we attempt to, we talk about it more in gossip but we don't like to have serious discussions about it, skin color, class and homosexuality, and it's almost as if like, we would like to just say, let's skip, let it go away, right, but it can't, obviously, and the issue of skin color.  It's just amazing and that, that for my, for my grandparents was very important and I think it was very important, it had an impact on my father subsequently.
Story_ID: 261107
Speaker 1: You told us a little bit about your father's [William Fletcher, Sr.] lineage, how far back can you trace your ancestors on your mother's [Joan Carter Fletcher] side?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather, there, well, there's information that is accessible on William Stanley Braithwaite.  I mean, you know, it's like you can do background research and I think, I can't remember whether his parents [Emma Dewolfe Braithwaite and William Smith Braithwaite] came from Barbados or Guyana but that's one side of my mother's family.  My, my mother's father's [Merrill Carter] family was also from Boston [Massachusetts] and I can, I met them, I met my great-grandparents on her side, on, her father's side.  They were alive for probably, sometime within the first ten years of my life but beyond that I don't know.  I know that my, that that great-grandfather whose name was Carter, worked on the railroads.  His wife, whose name I can't remember but she was known as Sugar, was a beautiful golden brown woman who I believe had Iroquois [Native American] in her and my, that's about as far as we can get.
Story_ID: 261108
Speaker 1: Tell me, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, in, in a way, they all, there's a number of memories that all come together but there's certain, there's certain things that are more like critical images for me.  I mean, I have this memory which is not a critical image but it was a strange thing where I remember one night I was in my crib and I was standing up looking out the door and I saw this white thing on the floor moving across the floor and the next day I asked my father [William Fletcher, Sr.] what that was and he said it was, he said maybe it was him crawling but it was like, because he would crawl so he didn't wake me up.  I, I don't know but it's one of these images 'cause it looked, it, at the time it looked very spooky although it didn't scare me but the critical image for me was sometime around, between 1960 and 1962, I was at my great-grandparents [Emma Kelly and William Stanley Braithwaite] and we, you know, they would often have dinners, certainly around the holidays, and there was a discussion going on about the conflict in Laos and this was a point when the U.S. was trying to decide whether they were going to send troops in.  My great-grandfather was sitting on a stool in the kitchen and he looks at me and he says, "Well, Billy [HistoryMaker William Gerald Fletcher, Jr.], should we go into Laos?"  So, I would be at that point, six or seven years old.  I had no idea what Laos was, where it was or anything.  Standing right next to me was my father and I have no memory of his face but I have a memory of him there and his voice and he said to my great-grandfather, "Give him a little while and he'll have an answer for you" and that image is, that's like burned into me, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you have an answer for him at some point?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What, and what was your answer?
Speaker 2: The, well, I had an answer.  My great-grandfather by that point had died but my answer was that the U.S. should stay the hell out of Laos but my great-grandfather passed away in '62 [1962].  He bought me my first comic book, which is also part of my early memory, and I even, I think I even still have it.
Speaker 1: What was the comic book, do you remember?
Speaker 2: The illustrated history of the [U.S.] Coast Guard and, you know, when I was a kid, like many other boys, I was obsessed with war and--
Speaker 1: Like playing war?
Speaker 2: Playing war but also studying war and it's actually through studying wars that I got the knowledge of history that I have that is very, I have a fairly in-depth his--understanding of history and, and so, you know, I'd read all these things about the [U.S.] military and, and there was a point in my life when, as a kid, I really thought in terms of going into the military, going into the [U.S.] Air Force, maybe the special forces, and then that changed.
Story_ID: 261109
Speaker 1: Can you give us your siblings' names and their birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: It's just, it's me and my sister and I'm the oldest.  My sister is Kim Carter Fletcher Bryce, her married name is Bryce, but she's Dr. Fletcher and she is four years younger than me, April 3rd, 1958.  She is very humble, a very good doctor, apparently.  She is, she and my father [William Fletcher, Sr.] share a lot in terms of personality.  They, they both have a tendency to make certain kinds of decisions and then find a justification afterwards.  She lives in Connecticut and has, she's married and has two kids.
Story_ID: 261110
Speaker 1: Can you kind of describe your block that you grew up on in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Well the first seven years of my life I lived in Harlem [New York, New York], East 135th Street, in a development called the Riverton [Houses, New York, New York].  It's right, it's right on the Harlem River and it was a, I believe it had been built by Metropolitan Life [Insurance Company (MetLife)] and interestingly enough you had the Riverton and you had Stuyvesant Town and Stuyvesant Town is on the East Side [Manhattan, New York, New York], like East 14th Street, and needless to say, Stuyvesant Town is white, Riverton is black, same buildings.  I mean, I'd go into Stuyvesant Town to this day and it's like a flashback.  It was a development of black working class and professionals.  [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor, for example, the musician, lived in the Riverton, he and his family.  There were, there were a number of folks that are fairly, well, you know, named people who lived there, and, and then just like regular working class people.  It was, it was good.  I mean, I enjoyed it.  I had friends there who I felt were friends which becomes very important as a contrast from when I got to the Bronx [New York, New York], and, yeah, you know, I just, I just seemed to have good friends in the Riverton.
Speaker 1: Until you moved to the Bronx when you were seven?
Speaker 2: Moved to the Bronx when I was seven.  The, very east side of the Bronx, Olmstead Avenue.  We sold the house to George Benson, believe it or not.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, he, he gave me his first album and who'd-a-thunk-it, as my father [William Fletcher, Sr.] would say, you know, but this place, it was very different.  It was, it was an area, that part of the Bronx was, had a lot of lots, a lot of vacant lots, and it was a transitional area in many ways.  It was attached homes, so it was private homes, and, and I think in looking back on it that there was a, because it was a new area, there was a sense of, what's the word, insecurity, that many people had.  There was on my block immense competition among the guys.  You were ranked when you got there based on how well you fought.  So within a matter of weeks of moving in, every boy was in a fight and you were then ranked and, I'm not exaggerating.  I mean, it was, it was very clear on the block who were the best fighters and who were the worse.
Speaker 1: So, where, where did you fall in the ranking?
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't the good fighter.
Speaker 1: So, and what would happen like with your rankings?  I mean, what did it mean or what did it represent?
Speaker 2: It was sort of like a pecking order.  It was a, it was a very, you know, you get the sense as to what goes on in the animal world, right.  It's not anything that's said, it's, it's a pecking order, though, in terms of who was looked to as the leader.  Who, whose word means anything, who speaks for the block and the other thing was that, with one exception on my block, I never knew who my friends really were.  It was almost like [George] Orwell's '1984' where there's a constant shifting of alliances.  So, one day, me and my, my neighbor, Gary [ph.], could be getting along great and the next day, quite literally, he could be joining with other people to make fun of me and--
Speaker 1: Did you do the same thing?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, and with one, one exception, but that was when I got to middle school and I was being stupid, but, no, because friendships were always very important to me and one day a new part of the block was built and people were moving in and this guy moved in named John.  Should I mention last names or how do you want me to do it?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Named John Kernan [ph.] and John Kernan was the only person on the block who I knew every day was my friend and he still is.
Story_ID: 261111
Speaker 1: I think we were talking about your friend, John [Kernan (ph.)].
Speaker 2: John, right.
Speaker 1: So, tell us a little bit about him like how, how were you all over, how were you, how were you all able to overcome just whatever was happening in the neighborhood [in the Bronx, New York, New York] so that you could remain friends for as long as you did?
Speaker 2: John is from Antigua and he is--John is loyal, and that's really what it comes down to that, and he was, he was, he's older than I am by a few years, but he's, he was more mature, I think, than many people on the block.
Speaker 1: What kind of fighter was he?
Speaker 2: You know that's an interesting question.  I don't remember but John could figure out ways to avoid fights.  He was also a little taller and he just seemed to get away with it.  People liked him.
Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit more about the whole fighting thing.
Speaker 2: Fighting.
Speaker 1: So, was it just like a, almost every day, you know, that you were in a fight and could you like actually change your group as you became a better fighter?  How did it work?
Speaker 2: It was, no, there wasn't fighting every day.  The, but, there would often be kids picking on one another, making fun of one another for different things and, and that would happen with me, you know, and, and sometimes I just didn't even want to go outside and my father [William Fletcher, Sr.] tells me to this day how much it, it pained him sometimes 'cause he would just say to me that he thought I needed to go outside but, you know, sometimes I just did not want to be somewhere, be around these kids.
Speaker 1: Well, why?  Were you small in stature?  Just, what, what was it?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know fundamentally what it was with, but, with each person there would be different things.  In my case, these guys liked to make fun of my head.  They said my head was large but I think fundamentally what it was was that we didn't know who we were and so we as young black boys were defining ourselves negatively, essentially, you know, and, and it was, and it was really too bad.  As, as I got older, the, the name calling and all that started to die out and certainly by the time I became a teenager I was changing in terms of who I was as an individual and how I was viewed.  So, when I was in elementary school--
Story_ID: 261112
Speaker 1: Hang on one second, let's back up a little bit--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and we'll, we'll move into elementary school, but tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of your childhood and remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Um, well I mean, obviously, every time I'm in New York [New York] I think back on, on what it was to be there.
Speaker 1: But is there something that--
Speaker 2: But, sights, sound--
Speaker 1: --remind you of New York like maybe, like traffic noise, that kind of thing or, and what smells remind you of growing up and what sounds?
Speaker 2: Lemon meringue pie.  My great-grandmother [Emma Kelly] made the best lemon meringue pie I've ever had, to this day.  Thanksgiving.  I think every Thanksgiving I think back on the Thanksgiving dinners that we would have when I was growing up, particularly when we would go to the Braithwaite household.
Speaker 1: Were they very festive occasions?  Lots of family, food?
Speaker 2: Lots of people, yeah, yeah.  Lots of food, lots of good food, always a lot of, a lot of stuff going on, a lot of talking.  My, my family, the Braithwaite clan, talked about issues and, and I just have memories of that but there's nothing else really that I think falls in the category of a sight, or sound or a smell that makes me think about growing up.
Story_ID: 261113
Speaker 1: So now let's move on to elementary school.  Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to two different ones.  When I was in Harlem [New York, New York], I went to this, I can't remember whether it's P.S. 199, no it was [P.S.] 192 [Jacob H. Schiff School, Manhattan, New York, New York];, it was on East 135th Street [sic. West 138th Street] near Lenox Avenue and I started there and was there kindergarten and first grade and the first month of second grade or two months.  Then I went to P.S. 138 [Samuel Randall School] in the Bronx [New York, New York] and I was there from '61 [1961] to '66 [1966], excuse me, and it was a, a very complicated experience.  What I was getting ready to say earlier about elementary school, then I'll go back to this, is we were very sexually conscious, very early as kids and, I mean, I started cursing when I was in second grade and the sexual references were very present very early on.
Speaker 1: Did you know what they meant though?
Speaker 2: Pretty quickly I found out and one of the things that was, and so, and as a, and related to that was that boyfriends and girlfriends, I mean, this started extremely early and who was looked at as eligible and who wasn't and when I was in elementary school for the most part, with the exception of one girl named Valerie Porter [ph.], girls didn't find me attractive and, you know, the beautiful girls always liked other guys and when I became a teenager that changed.  I'm not sure I've ever gotten over the change but it definitely changed.
Speaker 1: So what was it about you that Valerie Porter liked?
Speaker 2: To this day, I don't know.  Valerie was a year older than me but she was in the same grade.  She was taller than me.  She was very attractive, actually.  She had developed physically, early, and I don't know what she liked about me but she liked me and we were together for a while and we broke up and I'm talking about when I'm in fifth grade and my father [William Fletcher, Sr.] was like so freaked out about the fact that I had a girlfriend.  He made me break up with her and she was like really upset about it.
Speaker 1: Was, was she like a girlfriend in the true sense of a girlfriend?  Did you like actually talk to her and did you guys hold hands and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --kiss and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: A little kissing.
Speaker 1: In fifth grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, yeah, and, and hanging out together and, and everybody knew, Bill [HistoryMaker William Gerald Fletcher, Jr.] and Valerie were boyfriend, girlfriend.
Speaker 1: How did you feel?  You know, you said that you, you weren't considered attractive by a lot of the other girls but you had Valerie?  I mean, did you want to be like the guy that--
Speaker 2: Of course.  Oh, I wanted, I wanted to be, I wanted to be the one that all the girls liked, sure, and--
Speaker 1: Did it make you a little insecure or--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, and you know it's like, the things that "would make a guy attractive" being good in sports and stuff like that, you know, I was okay in different things--
Story_ID: 261114
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did you like to do when you were in elementary school?  How did you spend your spare time?
Speaker 2: Well I always liked to read but I also, on the block, we would, we would play all kinds of sports and every season, you know, it would just, you know, you'd have the baseball, you'd have touch football, we had stickball.  Do you know what stickball is?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We would, I was thinking the other day, every so often I have this memory of how creative we were.  I mean, there was a guy down the block named Stevie Lewis [ph.] and Stevie came from a very difficult family but Stevie was a master carpenter.  I mean, actually that's what he would have been.  I would bet that Stevie's dead or in jail now but Stevie could build all kinds of things and he would build bird coops and, I mean, just, just, I mean, and so people would do that.  We would, I remember we, someone found a tennis racket in the lot and so we started playing baseball with a tennis racket.  Now, what's funny about that is that you have to be a damn good pitcher to strike someone out who's using a tennis racket, right?  And, I remember pitching and striking people out but also remember pitching and the ball getting knocked way, way, away.  We would, we would play all kinds of games.  We'd play war games, we'd play tag, Ring-a-Levio, hot peas and butter.
Speaker 1: What's hot peas and butter?
Speaker 2: It's a typical New York [New York] game and I say typical because it's brutal.  Hot peas and butter is where you hide a belt and it's like a base, everybody's at the base, and they turn their back away from the individual who has the belt and the individual who has the belt hides the belt and then says, hot peas and butter, come and get your supper, and then the guys at the base turn around and they go looking for the belt and the person who hid it says whether people are getting warmer or cooler and then whoever gets the belt can whip the hell out of anybody who's not at the base and, yeah, we would play games, yeah.  So, my time, you know, those first seven, the second seven years in the Bronx [New York, New York], I mean were very active--
Story_ID: 261115
Speaker 1: And what type of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a good student but in second, but particularly third grade [at P.S. 138; Samuel Randall School, Bronx, New York, New York], I developed a math phobia and I had a teacher named Ms. Rocchio [ph.] who I'll never forget and in fact Ms. Rocchio, I've had some good teachers and I've had some horrible teachers.  Ms. Rocchio was beyond a horrible teacher.  Ms. Rocchio, I believe, I'm convinced was a racist but also she was very Catholic and so even though there was not supposed to be prayer in school, she would have us praying.  She scared the daylights out of me and the school system was, it was a lot of tracking, you know, and she put me, when I got promoted to fourth grade, she put me in the third track.  Now, there were four tracks.  What we refer to at the time was the smartest, second smartest and then there was, at the bottom, there's the dumbest and then the third, right.  And the bottom was like those that, you know, had like emotional problems or, you know what I mean?  Oh, God, it's horrible. It's both funny and horrible at the same time.  And so the third was like for mediocre, right?  So, I went into that and had it not been for my teacher, whose name was Mrs. Kleiman [ph.], I probably would have been just simply tracked forever in that area.
Speaker 1: What did Mrs. Kleiman do?  She recog--did she recognize--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you were in the wrong track?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: And was this around the time when New York [New York] also started testing students to see if they were gifted and talented?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.  I mean, we took all kinds of tests like that and I'm pretty sure.  This was, this would have been '65 [1965], I think, and Mrs. Kleiman instilled self-confidence in me and I got promoted then into fifth grade into the second track, Mrs. Fox's [ph.] class.  She wasn't such a great teacher but then in sixth grade I went into the top, Mr. McDonald [ph.], and from that point on, I stayed in top tracks, whether it was in middle school [I.S. 131; The Albert Einstein School, Bronx, New York, New York] or high school.
Speaker 1: Was it important to you to be in the top track?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  I mean, you know, in my family, academics, always important.  My great-grandfather [William Stanley Braithwaite] would always say, you're going to go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I actually ended up going to Harvard but I don't think it's because my great-grandfather said it, but the, but the point is that academic performance was critical.  My father [William Fletcher, Sr.] was, he would joke about it.  You know, it's like if I came home with an A, he'd want to know why I didn't get an A plus, you know, and I joke with my daughter [Yasmin Fletcher] the same way but academics were very important.  Reading, very important.
Story_ID: 261116
Speaker 1: And during the elementary school years, what kinds of dreams and aspirations did you have?  Or did you, did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I thought about being a soldier.  I thought about, as I got older in elementary school, started thinking about engineering and journalism, actually, and then when I got to junior high [I.S. 131; The Albert Einstein School, Bronx, New York, New York], or intermediate schools, we called it then, that's when I underwent a, a very fundamental transformation.
Speaker 1: And what was that transformation?
Speaker 2: I became a radical.
Speaker 1: In junior high?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I, I had always been interested in world affairs and, and this all, all of, this transformation into becoming a radical, also ended up in an interesting way, transforming my relationship with my block but--
Speaker 1: Like how were you becoming radical?  What kinds of things were you doing and reading and--
Speaker 2: I started reading Muhammad Speaks [Muslim Journal], the paper of the Nation of Islam and I read a lot of books about all kinds of stuff but I, I had a neighbor two doors down who regularly read Muhammad Speaks and he would give me his paper or he would sell me a paper and I didn't go in for the theology of the Nation of Islam, I didn't, this whole, the white devil thing, it just, it just seemed a bit bizarre, but, but I was fascinated by the stories in the, in Muhammad Speaks, news stories, and then in 1967 I, I read 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley] and I always say it changed my life.  I, my parents [Joan Carter Fletcher and William Fletcher, Sr.] had it in paperback and I don't know whether it was during the 1967 teacher strike and I was out of school, I'm not sure, but I read it when I was thirteen.
Speaker 1: And did it, how did it change your life?  Did you want to be like Malcolm [X]?  How did it change your life?
Speaker 2: It, it led me to feel that I needed to dedicate my life to the liberation of African Americans, to the fight for social justice, and that our struggle here is linked with other struggles.
Speaker 1: Throughout--around the world?
Speaker 2: Right, and it was, it was just, so basically what happened was, and then there was the emergence of the Black Panther Party and I started following that and I got very interested in the Panthers and on my block, for the last year that I was there, I basically became known as the radical--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --the black power advocate.
Speaker 1: --when did you become interested in the Black Panther Party?
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967].  There was a New York Times Sunday magazine [The New York Times Magazine] article about the Black Panther Party and about them going into the state house in Sacramento [California] with shotguns.  I said, damn, this is some serious people, and, and they seemed to be following a, what's the word, the lineage of Malcolm X.
Story_ID: 261117
Speaker 1: Did you wanna join the Black Panther Party?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes I did.
Speaker 1: Did you?
Speaker 2: I didn't.
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: Because my father [William Fletcher, Sr.] didn't want me to and I respected my father.
Speaker 1: Why didn't he want you to?
Speaker 2: Because my father is a child of the [Great] Depression and the [Joseph] McCarthy era and my father was deeply afraid that I would be blacklisted, that, I mean, my father would say, in the United States they don't necessarily shoot political opponents, they starve them to death, and he was very afraid that my, that any opportunities that I might have would be foreclosed by doing something like joining the Panthers.  So, I did everything but join the Panthers.  I sold the Panther paper [The Black Panther].  I wore Panther buttons.  I went to Panther political education classes.  I, which is why probably if you do a FOIA [Freedom of Information Act] on me, you'd probably get information that goes back to when I was a teenager.  I helped to form student groups when I was in high school that were aligned with the Panthers.  I articulated the line of the Panthers.  I defended the Panthers.  I did everything but join the Panthers.
Speaker 1: How, how was it any different, what, how would it have been different had you been an actual card-carrying member?  How would it have been different?
Speaker 2: It would have been different in that I would have had organizational responsibilities in the Panther Party, which I did not have, and it would have been different in that I would have been on certain lists and, and so I respected my father.  My father feels terribly guilty about this, regularly.  I mean, in 1970, the Panthers had a major rally in New Haven [Connecticut], it was the free Bobby Seale, and me and a, a friend were going to go and my father said, you're not going, so I was sixteen.  It's interesting because I think now, if I had a sixteen year old son, what I would do.
Speaker 1: What do you think you would do?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know.  I really don't know.  I have a sixteen year old, I have a daughter [Yasmin Fletcher] who's almost sixteen and I know how protective of her I am, although we give her a lot of space, but it's, at, at that point, the idea of a sixteen year old taking off and going to New Haven, I mean it wasn't like a preposterous idea.  My father wasn't worried about it at the level of, you know, just Billy [HistoryMaker William Gerald Fletcher, Jr.], as they called me at that time, going to New Haven, it was Billy going to a Panther rally in New Haven and maybe Billy will get arrested or killed, right.  So I didn't go, my friend went.
Story_ID: 261118
Speaker 1: And you said that it kind of changed your reputation in the neighborhood.  How did it change?  Did you, became known as the radical?  Did it, did you start receiving a certain level of respect or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I mean, a number of things were happening in this, in that last year that I was in the Bronx [New York, New York], '67 [1967], '68 [1968].  Girls started to pay attention to me and on the block, fighting became less an issue and people, it was, it was almost like a realignment of sorts that was taking place where different people, the whole hierarchy just started to change.  Some people moved, new people were coming in and so my being outspoken as a radical, or as a developing radical, was one of these things that was noteworthy.  I mean, it's like people notice that.
Speaker 1: And was it a comfortable place for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It kind of reinforced that this is what I needed to do.  Not, not simply because girls started liking me but it was like I realized that there was a space which I could actually make a contribution and I may not be the best baseball player, you know, I may not have the best looks or whatever, but here was somewhere I could make a contribution and I took that into high school.
Story_ID: 261119
Speaker 1: And where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Well I started off at Stuyvesant High School [New York, New York] on East 15th Street at the time.  Stuyvesant has now moved.  It was an exam school in New York [New York] and--
Speaker 1: What do you mean by exam school?
Speaker 2: There were several schools that were top public schools that you had to take an exam.
Speaker 1: And was it an, Stuyvesant, was it an all-boys school?
Speaker 2: All-boys school.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I had a cousin, Logan Delaney [ph.], who had gone there.  My father [William Fletcher, Sr.] thought that I should go to Stuyvesant.
Speaker 1: And you had to test to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --enter.  And so, how long did you go to Stuyvesant?
Speaker 2: Well, technically I was there from September '68 [1968] through November '68 [1968] but the problem was that was during the 1968 teachers strike so most of that time I wasn't in school and during that time, in October of '68 [1968], we moved to Mount Vernon [New York] and my parents felt like the block was becoming too crowded.  My father also had just gotten a new job as a liquor salesman.  He'd been working for another company but now he got a different job and he was, he felt like he was ready, you know, to buy a new house.  So, they bought this place in Mount Vernon.  The house they bought was like two blocks from Mount Vernon High School [Mount Vernon, New York] and it was in a nice area, the north side of Mount Vernon and the, but, my parents, especially my father, wanted me to continue going to Stuyvesant.  Now, if you don't know anything about the geography of New York, it won't make a lot of sense to you but Mount Vernon is right above the Bronx [New York, New York], Stuyvesant is like near the bottom of Manhattan [New York, New York].  So, every day, once the teachers strike was settled, for about two weeks, I had to take a subway from 241st Street, in the Bronx, I had to get driven to the subway, and then take the subway from 241st Street to 14th Street.  And so--
Speaker 1: How long of a ride was that?
Speaker 2: Going, it was about ninety minutes, coming back it was in the range of two to three hours because coming back there weren't the expresses coming north at a certain point and then once I got to 241st Street, I had to take two buses to get home.
Story_ID: 261120
Speaker 1: So what kinds of activities were you involved in in high school?  School-related activities?
Speaker 2: Chasing girls.
Speaker 1: School related activities (laughter).
Speaker 2: Chasing girls.  High school, I had a great time in high school.  I just, I loved my high school.  I loved my high school experience.  Mount Vernon [New York] only had one high school.  By the point that I got there, it previously had two and they had been segregated.  So it was now one and it was a relatively new high school at the point that I went there.  It, my high school activities, I studied.  I was a very good student and I was a very compulsive student.  I wasn't a nerd but I was very, getting those grades and studying, right, and particularly when it came to math.  I did well in math but math did not come easy for me as opposed to my sister [Kim Fletcher Bryce].  My sister just barely needed to study and it was just, when it came to math, she was just excellent but I struggled with it and, and well, I'll talk about that later, but the, I was very active in student politi--radical student politics and I briefly--
Speaker 1: How did your radicalism play in Mount Vernon?
Speaker 2: Well, Mount Vernon has a huge African American population and it was, well, it was funny.  People were impressed in Mount Vernon that I was from the city, right.  So, that was one thing but the radicalism, the radicalism was considered very credible and, and there was a whole set of radicals.  The, when I was there, I entered Mount Vernon High [School, Mount Vernon, New York] November '68 [1968], January '69 [1969], there was a takeover of the high school by black students and I did not participate in it.  I, well, I participated the first day but I didn't stay in the school overnight.
Speaker 1: Why did they take over the school?  What were they protesting?
Speaker 2: Demanding a whole set of things, including [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s birthday as a holiday and, you know, various kinds of very legitimate reforms that were being raised at that time.  I don't remember all of them.  I just remember the King thing.  The, but I did not participate on an ongoing way.  I was scared.  I was new to the school and new to Mount Vernon and I would, I had in the back of my mind what my father [William Fletcher, Sr.] had said about closing off options.  So, but, as time went on, I became part of the radical community in the school, the black radical community, and so that resulted in tenth grade in my helping to form, was it tenth grade?  No, eleventh grade.  I think it was, yeah, eleventh grade, in tenth grade there was nothing very well organized but in eleventh grade we organized a Black Student Alliance and, and then twelfth grade, Umoja.
Speaker 1: In twelfth grade--
Speaker 2: No, Uhuru, that's what it was called, Uhuru.
Speaker 1: And what--
Speaker 2: That was, that was another student organization.
Speaker 1: What kind of an organization was it?
Speaker 2: Well, both, both of the organizations, I guess you could say they were [Black] Panther [Party]-like, not Panther-light, but Panther-like, and in the Black Student Alliance we had a, we set up a structure that pretty much mirrored the Panther structure and in Uhuru it was, it was a somewhat different structure with a somewhat different vision but the, but anyway, so that was one activity--
Story_ID: 261121
Speaker 1: I also, in ninth grade, spring of ninth grade, I went out for outdoor track because when I was in junior high school [I.S. 131; The Albert Einstein School, Bronx, New York, New York], I had run in a few couple of track meets and I was a pretty good sprinter, not a long distance person, never have been, and one Saturday morning, when we went for practice, the coach of the wrestling team asked us, as we were waiting to get ready to go out and run, asked us to help him move some weights from one room into another.  And so I got this big fifty pound weight and it was like a disc, right, and I was shifting it around and I was trying to carry it an easy way and it just simply rolled out of my arms onto my right foot and that was it for the track season.  I didn't break anything, it was called a crush.  It hurt like hell and I didn't, you know, so I couldn't run.
Speaker 2: And what year did you graduate from [Mount Vernon] High School [Mount Vernon, New York]?
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972].
Story_ID: 261122
Speaker 1: And when you were in high school [Mount Vernon High School, Mount Vernon, New York], like, you know, those last couple of years, what were your thoughts about college?  Where were you thinking you wanted to go to college?
Speaker 2: Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Why Duke?
Speaker 2: I was interested in the South and--
Speaker 1: But being a radical, you, you weren't interested in any HBC[U]s [historically black colleges and universities]?
Speaker 2: No, no, not particularly.  I was, I was interested in, by the time I was in high school, late high school, I was thinking about being a lawyer and I wanted to be like William Kunstler who was the attorney that defended a lot of Panthers [Black Panther Party] and I, my father [William Fletcher, Sr.] was, was pretty vehemently against my going to an HBCU.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: A couple of different reasons.  One is simply stereotypical, just certain, he had been to one.  He went to Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte, North Carolina] and did very well by it, but he, he felt like he wanted me to go to, what in his mind was the best of the best.
Speaker 1: And how, how did you make the decision to go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well, basically what happened was, having decided I really, I wanted to be a lawyer, right, and then started looking at different schools and looking at their programs and there was something at the time and I don't remember specifically what it was about Duke that I was interested, but I looked, you know, I applied to Duke, Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Harvard.  I was at, I got a letter asking me to apply to Harvard and my father said to me, I'm not going to tell you where you go to school, but I am going to tell you you have to apply.  So, I applied.  So, Duke, Harvard, Yale, BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan], I think those are the, I applied.
Speaker 1: And why did you choose Harvard?
Speaker 2: Well, to answer that I have to tell you that Harvard, believe it or not, was not my first choice and it wasn't my second choice.  I didn't really want to go to Harvard because in part I thought Harvard was, as it is, an elite white institution and I had this cousin [Logan Delaney (ph.)], the same cousin that went to Stuyvesant [High School, New York, New York], went to Harvard and ideologically, he and I, even then, were moving in very different directions.  And so Harvard to me represented the direction that he was moving, but I got accepted.  So when I got accepted, I had to deal with the realities of this could really help me, it could help position me to do what I want to do.  It was in a big city.  I had to be in a big city or I had to be in a place like Michigan State, which is effectively a city.  I, I was not going to go to a small school.  So, in April of '72 [1972], I went up to Harvard to, to take a look at the school and I happened to be there at the same time that black students had taken over Massachusetts Hall to protest Harvard's investments in Gulf Oil [Corporation].
Speaker 1: You let go, I can fit in here.
Speaker 2: Right, and, Gulf was involved in supporting Portugal, Portuguese control of Angola.  Randall Robinson was the head of those students.  That's the irony of history.  So, when I went up there and I found, I said, "Wow, so there's real radicals here."  So I came back excited and said, what the hell?  So, I went and I don't have any regrets about going but, but I think that it's very important that people demythologize Harvard.  You've got to understand what, what Harvard's strengths are and what its strengths are not.  The, what, what for me was wonderful about the Harvard experience was who I met, the people I met, including my wife [Candice Cason Fletcher], she was one year behind me, and the library system.  Harvard's library, the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], the Library of what was then called the Soviet Academy of Sciences [Russian Academy of Sciences], those were the three best in the world and if you knew how to use the library, it was an amazing resource but the classes were all, were not all that good.  The classes were basically taught by graduate students but Afro American studies, I majored in government but I ended up taking more Afro American studies classes.  They were really overall exceptionally good and very--I learned a great deal from them.
Story_ID: 261123
Speaker 1: So, you know, I got to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and thought I was going to be a lawyer and, and I proceeded along becoming more radical but also becoming more interested in the labor movement and--
Speaker 2: How, how did your interest in the labor movement begin?
Speaker 1: Well, I'd known about unions since I was very young.  I mean, in New York [New York], it was very, union is very present, and my family's very pro-union, although as I always say, not panacea-ish about it, my parents [Joan Carter Fletcher and William Fletcher, Sr.] would always say, my father would always say that there were two kinds of unions.  There was the unionism of Harry Bridges and the West Coast longshoremen [International Longshoremen's Association] and then there was the kind of backward unionism of the building trades and my father stood very squarely behind the kind of unionism that Bridges represented, which I had the opportunity of telling Bridges when I met him and interviewed him in 1985.  The, so I had known about unions and then through the Panthers [Black Panther Party], the Young Lords, I'd read about workers' struggles but when I got to Harvard, I became more influenced by Marxism.  I mean, when I was in junior high [I.S. 131; The Albert Einstein School, Bronx, New York, New York], I mean when I was in high school, I thought I was a socialist.  I didn't necessarily know what a socialist was but I pretty much was convinced that I was one and in Harvard I, I decided I was.  So I started learning these things but the, but the other factor was the chairman of the Afro-American studies department [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies], Ewart Guinier, and, and it was so funny--
Story_ID: 261124
Speaker 1: I love to tell the story that my grandmother, Fiona [Braithwaite] Carter, said to me, "When you go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], tell Ewart Guinier that you're Fiona Carter's grandson."  Now, you know, when you're eighteen, and your grandparents say that, you say, "Yeah, yeah, yeah."  So, I met him a couple of times, striking man, very nice looking, very smart, and so after a meeting, 'cause Guinier would go to student meetings, you know, meetings of student activists, so I went up to him and I said, "Professor Guinier, my name is Bill Fletcher [HistoryMaker William Gerald Fletcher, Jr.], people call me Qassem," and--
Speaker 2: People call you what?
Speaker 1: Qassem, Q-A-S-S-E-M.
Speaker 2: What does that mean?
Speaker 1: To divide justly.  It was the name of the Iraqi general who overthrew the monarchy in 1958 and what happened was, and I'll go back to the Guinier, I, I was organizing an event in Mount Vernon [New York], in the summer of '72 [1972], it was kind of a radical event, and I was calling the offices of the East Coast Black Panther Party in Harlem [New York, New York] and so as to not use my name, because once you use your name and the num--the line is tapped, they can legitimately tap your line, right.  I came up, I had to figure out another name to use and I just read this book and I don't remember what the book was, but in the book it talked about this Iraqi general who had overthrown the monarchy, Abd al-Karim Qasim.  It's spelled either, it's spelled three different ways, Q-A-S-S-E-M or K-A-S-S-E-M or Q-A-S-I-M, but anyway, I just used the name Qassem when I called the Panthers, right.  And when I got to Harvard I decided it was time to remake myself.  And so I became Akmal Ali Qassem and what, because of my roommate in sophomore year, he called me Q and, and that just like caught like wildfire.  So from that point on everybody called me Q, right, or, which was fine with me, or, jokingly, Papa Q, and I used that name while I was in college.
Speaker 2: So, thank you, so back to the story about Professor Guinier.
Speaker 1: So I go up to Guinier, so I go up and I introduce myself and I said, "So I'm Fiona Carter's grandson," and he looked at me and he broke into this grin like a Cheshire cat and he said, "You're Fiona Carter's grandson?"  I said, "Yes sir."  "Ah," and I'll tell you from that point on he was like my grandfather, and I've never had a living grandfather.  So, I was curious about this, right.  So, I, my grandmother, she was really cool.  She was not so good with young kids but once you became a teenager and an adult, my grandmother was really cool and I miss her a lot.  So I said to her, I said, "Grandmother, so what's up with this, right?"  So she said, "Well, I've known Guinier for a long time and there was a point when your grandfather [Merrill Carter] and I separated."  Now, my mother [Joan Carter Fletcher] didn't even know this.  She didn't know, and she said, and, so she was dating and she started dating Guinier, and then she said, she said, "Now, the men that I've dated they've always been very intelligent, you didn't have to draw them pictures and when your grandfather and I decided to get back together, Guinier was very gracious and he just bowed out of the picture," but they remained friends and they died within a month of one another, actually.  Guinier really became like my grandfather.  He was always there.  He was a source of inspiration, a wonderful teacher.  He promoted debate within the classes and he promoted labor.
Speaker 2: Let's pause for one quick second.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What's that noise?
Speaker 2: So you were talking about your relationship with Guinier?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so Guinier, Guinier himself came out of the labor movement.  He, in the '40s [1940s] had been part of a union, the United Public Workers [of America].  It was one of the unions that was expelled from the CIO [Congress of Industrial Organizations; American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)] when the, the Red Scare, the red-baiting was taking place and he was the secretary or treasurer, so he was a top-ranking labor leader and a black man.
Story_ID: 261125
Speaker 1: In what year did you earn your degree from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: In government?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: B.A.?
Speaker 2: They call it an A.B. at Harvard (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: They have to be different.
Speaker 1: And so when you left Harvard, what were you thinking you were going to do professionally?
Speaker 2: Get involved in the labor movement.
Speaker 1: So you knew that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you, you went to Massachusetts?  I mean, you were in Massachusetts, you went to Quincy [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I went to the Quincy shipyard [Fore River shipyard, Quincy, Massachusetts].  There were a lot of us at the time, younger radicals, and some not so young, that decided that we needed to get involved in the labor movement, try to transform it, and I was part of that wave and I also, inspired by [Ewart] Guinier, felt that since the majority of African Americans are working class that unions could be an important mechanism for our own advancement but also they could be mechanisms that could be used to strengthen our struggle.  So, I decided I needed to get involved.
Speaker 1: And what were you doing in Quincy?
Speaker 2: I was a welder.
Speaker 1: Was it odd to people that you, you know, had this degree from Harvard and--
Speaker 2: They didn't know.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I, I created a, a, let's say, semi-accurate job history and, and, 'cause they would never have hired me, and that, that obviously became a problem because you have to stick with the story, right--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and you can't, not everybody can know everything about you, but usually what would happen is with, with most people, once you got past the initial getting to know one another, the background was less important.
Speaker 1: So did you kind of feel like you were working undercover a little?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, I was.
Speaker 1: And what did your parents think of it?
Speaker 2: My mother [Joan Carter Fletcher] felt that the boy's at least graduated.  My father [William Fletcher, Sr.] was furious.  He was, he was beside himself.  He, he felt, my father felt until, I don't know, maybe ten years ago, some of that, I should have gone to law school, maybe a little bit longer, maybe a little bit before that, but he was, he was really, he was furious.  He felt like, why did I send you to Harvard?  You're a welder in a shipyard and, and my, my response was essentially this, that Harvard provided me a certain opportunity to learn and to learn certain things that I can utilize in a number of different ways and it doesn't have to be through an established career and second, that who I am is someone who is involved in the struggle for social justice.  And so, that is critical to me, more critical than a career and my father couldn't accept that.  So, he was upset, other members of the family thought I was whacky, not everyone, some members were basically supportive, but, you know, for the most part, they couldn't figure out what this kid was doing.
Speaker 1: And so you worked as a welder for three years?
Speaker 2: Three and a half years.
Speaker 1: And were you learning a lot about the labor movement--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --during that time?
Speaker 2: I learned a lot about, I always like to say that I completed my education in the Quincy shipyard because, you see, Harvard trains the ruling class and it promotes arrogance.  You go to Harvard and you are great.  You know you're great.  Everybody tells you you're great.  Everyone is inferior to you and you leave there even with the best of intentions with a very inflated sense of yourself.  And so then I go into the Quincy shipyard, working in weather that could be as cold as fifteen degrees and I'd be outside, as hot as one hundred, with sparks flying all over me, standing way above the ground, in the second most dangerous industry in the country, and I had to depend on other people and I had to learn from people who had never been to college in many cases, who were brilliant at what they did and it's very humbling.
Speaker 1: What did your wife [Candice Cason Fletcher] think of all this?
Speaker 2: She supported it.
Speaker 1: She did?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 261126
Speaker 1: Candice and I got together, her name is Candice Cason and Candice is a year, was a year behind me in school and when she came, when she came to Radcliffe [College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I saw her and I thought this woman is really gorgeous and she'd never be interested in the likes of me because she has so much class and just, and I'm, I'm just like, I don't dress very well, I'm, I'm a radi--you know, one of these young radicals, you know.  I didn't, I don't mean I didn't dress very well, I didn't put attention on that, you know.  So her, my junior year [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], her sophomore year, we were both seeing other people.  Now a number of people said to us, the two of you should check each other out.  I said, "Oh" and she said the same thing.  So, we then tried kind of getting, you know, trying to talk to each other and for whatever reason there was no spark and, which was good.  Then, my senior year, she had broken up with a guy she was seeing, my senior year, I came up to her at a freshman orientation, my sister [Kim Fletcher Bryce] had just come in as a freshman, and she was talking to somebody and I walked up behind her and I slightly poked her and I said, "How was Paris [France]?" 'cause she had, I had, she had told me she was going to France for the summer, right, to study, and she turned around and had this wonderful grin on her face that she, she often has, and we just started talking, and talking and talking and talking, and we became friends and I was seeing somebody who at that point was living in [Washington] D.C., and so I wasn't looking to start another relationship and I didn't anticipate anything was going to happen but I found I really liked this woman and we would go out, we would drive to Dunkin Donuts and just talk and talk and talk and she loved to take rides and I fell in love with her.
Speaker 2: And, and so, and she was supportive of--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --what you were trying to accomplish?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she became, she, her politics moved in a similar direction as mine and, and so--
Speaker 2: What did her parents think?
Speaker 1: Of me?
Speaker 2: You, the welder?
Speaker 1: Her parents thought that this was odd but her parents always treated me very well, very well.
Story_ID: 260191
Speaker 1: After you left the ship build (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Quincy shipyards [Fore River shipyard, Quincy, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: [General Dynamics] Quincy Shipbuilding [division], you went onto Boston Jobs Coalition [Boston, Massachusetts] and as an organizer?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what were you, what were you organizing?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened is that when I was at the shipyard, I had an accident in 1978.  I fell twenty feet, was almost killed, and I was out of work for about three months with a mild concussion, that's all that, a mild concussion and I cut my head and I, I had to make a decision about whether I was going to return 'cause you can imagine it was a very scary thing.  I decided I was going to return.  It was kind of to me, it was like, you know, you fall off a horse, right, you got to get back on.  And, but I was trying to decide what did I want to do and I realized that there was a lot of other things that I was interested in doing and this job put certain kinds of constraints on me and I became interested in the whole issue of desegregating the building trades.  The building trades were very segregated in Boston [Massachusetts].  And so in 1980, I was approached about being an organizer for this group called the Boston Jobs Coalition which was demanding jobs for Boston residents for minorities and for women and I, I decided to go for it.  It was a very unsatisfactory job experience.  Part of it, part of the problem was that I was never trained to be a community organizer and yet there were expectations about what I could do and I also had a boss that I had a lot of issues with.  So I was there for a year and then it was clear I needed to leave.
Speaker 1: And so from there you went to Greater Boston Legal Services [Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Legal Services.  I took a few months off when I was trying to decide, well, what should I do now?  Should I go back to shipyard or, you know, some other place or what and I had approached the people that were representing some black workers that had brought a lawsuit against Local 79 Iron Workers Union for discrimination and they had won and I volunteered some, you know, I said I would help and the lead attorney, a guy named Bob Burdick [Robert G. Burdick], took a liking to me and said, well, let's, we need to hire you as a paralegal so that you can work on this case.  So, in '82 [1982], I started there and I basically became an employment paralegal working not only on that case but I started representing people in unemployment compensation cases, the initial stages in discrimination cases and things like that, working with attorneys.
Story_ID: 260192
Speaker 1: And you were there [Greater Boston Legal Services, Boston, Massachusetts] for four years and then you came to Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: What happened was I was there until '86 [1986] and in, in March of '86 [1986], inexplicably my wife [Candice Cason Fletcher] who was six months pregnant gave birth prematurely to our first born and, whose name was Bianca and Bianca lived for three days and, and then had a brain hemorrhage and so we, we pulled the plug and when you go through something like that, it, it changes you in some very fundamental ways and one thing it's, it's, I was telling a friend that before Bianca, I was a very happy person, so this was all the happiness.  After Bianca, I lost some of that happiness and it's never coming back.  Doesn't mean that I walk around morose but there's a piece of me that disappeared on March 21st, 1986 and it's never coming back--
Story_ID: 260193
Speaker 1: And the other thing that happened to both me and my wife [Candice Cason Fletcher] is that you emotionally--you get really unsettled and so both of us ended up in the same year jumping into crazy jobs.  She took over an organization called Women Incorporated which was an organization for women substance abusers and their children and it turned out the organization was near bankrupt and she rebuilt the organization.  I became an organizer for District 65 of the United Auto Workers [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America (UAW)] and I was in charge of the organizing of childcare centers and human service agencies and it was crazy, the demands on me.  I mean, I had all these small places, I had all these contracts to negotiate and we did that.  I, you know, I then, in '89 [1989], the new leadership of the National Postal Mail Handlers Union saw me speak at a labor notes conference and one of the people connected to them, a guy named Jeff Perry [Jeffrey B. Perry], from New York, talked to the leadership some and the leadership decided that they wanted someone who would be something like a chief of staff to help them in both contract negotiations but also rebuilding the organization.  So they approached me and they approached someone else name Gene Bruskin, a friend of mine in Boston [Massachusetts] and ultimately they offered me a job.  Now coming down here was a very, very big decision and it wouldn't have happened had it not been for my wife because she said a few things.  She was ready in her job to move on but she also felt in terms of me, she said, Bill [HistoryMaker William Gerald Fletcher, Jr.], I don't want a situation where a few years from now you say, damn it, I should have gone for that, said this is a rare opportunity, I'm ready to move, we had just had a kid, our daughter Yasmin [Fletcher], and so she was still young and so she said, let's move.  So we did and I moved down, we moved down here [Washington, D.C.], I started the job and it became a very bizarre experience because the president of the union, a young dynamic African American had some real issues, let's say, and he was really screwing up and, and other people in the leadership and on the staff weren't addressing these problems.  You know, he would be disappearing and all these things and I ultimately got fired.  I got fired for asking too many questions and I was fired four days short of one year on the job.
Story_ID: 260194
Speaker 1: I was fired [from the National Postal Mail Handlers Union] two hours after I found out that my father-in-law had died and, but fortunately I had suspected something like this was gonna happen.  So I started to talk to people at the Service Employees International Union [SEIU], they approached me about coming in the education department, there was negotiation going on, and in, I think it was April of '91 [1991], I started as assistant director in the education department and I worked in SEIU from '91 [1991] to '96 [1996].  Most people think that I worked, I've, that I had been with SEIU for ten or fifteen years.  There, really, it's kind of, kind of the way I got into it and it was the best job experience of my life and I held probably a record of positions there.  I was assistant to, assistant education director from '91 [1991] to '92 [1992], from May '92 [1992] to July '94 [1994], I was education director, from July '94 [1994] 'til October or November '95 [1995], I was a field service director, from October '95 [1995] through May '96 [1996], I was public division director, and then my final appointment there was assistant to the president for the East and the South.  So I can proudly say I wasn't bounced around, I got promoted but I decided in '96 [1996], it was a very difficult decision, I had to leave.  Andy Stern, Andrew Stern, was elected president.  I had been a real supporter of his and it was a chaotic moment but there was a role conflict that I found myself in with the, one of the organizing directors and Andy wouldn't resolve it and I started to feel less and less clear about what my role was, about my responsibilities and, you know, I always say, Mr. and Mrs. Fletcher [Fletcher's parents, Joan Carter Fletcher and William Fletcher, Sr.] didn't raise me to be a handkerchief head nor to sit by the door and, and so I didn't know what to do.  So, the new leadership in the AFL-CIO [American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations], which had actually, the president had come from SEIU, John Sweeney--
Speaker 2: Is this John Sweeney?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and his chief of staff, Bob Welch.  Bob Welch asked me to be the education director for the AFL-CIO.  At first I said no.  I was going to stick with Andy but then there was a couple of incidents that happened that led me to feel that I needed to move on and so with a great deal of sorrow, more sorrow than I've ever felt in leaving any job, I left SEIU and went to the AFL-CIO and I was education director from September '96 [1996] until June '99 [1999] and then I was assistant to the president from June '99 [1999] until May of 2001.
Story_ID: 260195
Speaker 1: And how did you and John Sweeney get along and work together?  It just seemed like the, different personalities.
Speaker 2: Very.  I have a great deal of respect for John Sweeney but John Sweeney's not a radical.  He's a very creative person but he's not a radical but he was willing to have around him radicals.  My interactions with John Sweeney were all, almost always very pleasant.  My day-to-day work was with the chief of staff, though, Bob Welch and I like to say that they gave me a long leash when I was there.  I, I had a lot of room to say, write, speak things--
Speaker 1: Were you listened to?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I, I developed a, people develop, I mean there's a lot of respect for me in the organization [American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)].  However, when I became assistant to the president, there was, once again, a role on clarity and about three, four months into the job, I realized there was a problem.  In fact, at the ninth, October 1999 convention, I felt very unsettled because I felt like this is weird.  I'm assistant to the president and there's really no role for me in this convention and I was talking to a friend and I woke up one morning and oh, actually it was at night and I said to myself, I'm working too much and too hard to not have more authority.  So, after the convention I went to Bob Welch, chief of staff, and I said, just what I said to you and I said, and therefore I want to propose some changes in my job and I laid out what those changes were.  To make a long story short, he, I, I actually ended up making a number of proposals, none of which were accepted and I never got a response.  This created a lot of tension but the other thing that happened was that I developed a very good friend at the AFL-CIO named Nadra Floyd and she was first in the field of mobilization department and then she went into the organizing department as a deputy director and around late '99 [1999], the position of organizing director opened up and I encouraged her to apply and Nadra was one of the best friends I've ever had in life and was very respected African American woman.  She didn't get the job and this jerk got the job and I was really angry about the way this was handled but it got worse because she continued as deputy director of the organizing department and the new organizing director consistently disrespected her, ultimately leading to driving her out and there was a specific incident that happened.  Nadra had fought cancer, '97 [1997], and then again a second time in '98 [1998] and in that time I never saw her cry.  And one day she came to my office in tears because of something that this jerk had done, humiliated her, and I said, "Well, have you talked to Bob?"  And Bob was in Las Vegas [Nevada] and she, she tried reaching out to Bob, Bob never responded to her and I was just furious about the way this was being handled.  To make a long story short, they never did anything to the organizing director.  Nadra, coincidentally, got another job and, as an organizing director at a major union [Civil Service Employees Association (CSEA)] and, and she died in November of 2001 but she, when this happened, I realized I needed to leave.  Also, some of the politics had changed and I just, I felt like I just wasn't being utilized very well.  I made all these offers and--
Speaker 1: And so you did leave?
Speaker 2: I left, I left in stages.  I, I was redeployed to the George Meany Center [for Labor Studies], National Labor College which is up in Silver Spring [Maryland] and I was there for about six months and then I applied for this job.
Speaker 1: So, and this job is presidency (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) TransAfrica Forum, right.
Speaker 1: TransAfrica Forum.
Story_ID: 260196
Speaker 1: How did that, you know, your background had been in, in the labor movement, and so what did you think that you could bring?  What did you think you could offer to TransAfrica Forum which is not a labor organization, it's a lobbying, lobbying organization?
Speaker 2: It's, it's an educational organization.
Speaker 1: Right, I'm sorry, yes.
Speaker 2: That's all right.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: That's all right.  I've always been interested in international affairs and I reconnected with Randall [Robinson] in January of '99 [1999] when there was a TransAfrica delegation that went to Cuba.
Speaker 1: Randall Robinson.
Speaker 2: Randall Robinson, the founding president, and we hit it off, very, very well.  I met [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover who was, who is now my board chair that Walter Mosley (unclear), Johnnetta Cole, and what I felt, well let me put it like this, I heard that Randall was retiring in May, Memorial Day weekend of 2001, and I actually encouraged someone else to apply and this friend of mine, Nadra Floyd says to me, she looked over at me and she said, "And why are you not applying?" and I actually didn't have an answer.  She says, "You need to apply."  I said, "Yeah, yeah, yeah."  And then I went home, I had mentioned it to my wife [Candice Cason Fletcher], she didn't say anything, the next day she says, I think you need to apply.  And then it became like a wave.  It was like everybody was saying I needed to apply.  So, I said, okay, I'd apply.  I never accept--I never expected to be hired.  Never in a million years.
Speaker 1: Did you know a lot about Africa?
Speaker 2: I knew, I'm not an Africa expert, wasn't then, am not now.  I knew more than most but I wasn't an Africa expert.
Story_ID: 260197
Speaker 1: Did you think that the person who got this job and replaced Randall Robinson needed to be an Africa expert?
Speaker 2: That's what, that was my assumption but what I thought that I would bring, although I didn't know whether they would want it, is an emphasis on activism, an emphasis on building connections with working people, things like that, and, and I felt like I wanted to run something.  So, what happened is I went for an interview with [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree, who's on our board from Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and then I was told that [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover wanted to meet with me and he was, he was now the board chair.  And, in fact, when--
Speaker 1: Was he the board chair prior to you being hired?
Speaker 2: He came on, he was, he decided to become board chair, was chosen in August of 2001 and in fact, I was up in Albany [New York] at, doing some work and also visiting Nadra [Floyd], who was living up there at the time, and when I found out that he was board chair, and I called him and congratulated him.  He called me back and, and I told him I was applying and then he told me, then I was told that Danny wanted to meet with me for what I assumed was going to be my second interview.  So, November 7th, 2001, at 10:55 in the morning, I get a phone call, Nadra's dead.  They found her dead.  I had known, I, I had a premonition.  I had called her that morning at 7:30, the phone was just ringing, paged her, never returned the phone call.  Called her office and Leh--Lehman [ph.] office to track her down, I said I'm worried and she had died of a massive heart attack during the night and I was, I was just devastated, you know, and, I mean, it's like, I have a certain small number of people that are my partners in crime, you know.  My wife [Candice Cason Fletcher] is one, Nadra was another, there's a couple of other people, and I didn't know what to do.  I was going to call off the meeting with Danny and I was crying.  I was just, I was just, and, but I said, well, Nadra would have wanted me to go, go to the meeting.  So I go.  So I come into the, into the room, the TransAfrica Forum at that point was in this building on the other side of Dupont Circle [Washington, D.C.] and I come in and Danny's, comes out, and I'm crying and I said, man, my, one of my best friends just died.  And so Danny and I sat down and we started talking.  His sister at the time was suffering from cancer.  She subsequently died, but we're talking about life and death and, and then he shifts gears and offers me the job and I said, "Huh?" I said, "I thought this was an interview."  And he starts laughing.  He says, "No, we're offering you the job."  So, I said, "Danny, does the board know who I am?"  Now, just so that question is understood, I don't mean that in a self-important way.  What I mean is, what I meant at the time was, did they know my politics?  Did they realize that I'm a very public leftist and he said, "Yes."  Well, I have subsequently found out that wasn't quite the case but I, I thought about it and a couple of weeks later, basically decided to take the job.
Story_ID: 260198
Speaker 1: Tell us what TransAfrica Forum is.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's not a lobbying group?
Speaker 2: No, but it's, it was spun off by a lobbying group and what many people don't realize, and I didn't realize this until January '99 [1999], is that there's two organizations.  There's TransAfrica Incorporated.  That was the parent organization formed in the 1970s and that was a lobbying group and it had chapters.  In the early '80s [1980s], TransAfrica Forum was formed as a 501(c)(3), non-profit tax-exempt organization, tax-deductible contributions, and its job is essentially education advocacy.  You know, within IRS [Internal Revenue Service] guidelines, you can do a little bit of lobbying, just a little bit, and over the years TransAfrica, Inc. declined, TransAfrica Forum increased in its profile but the, so anyway, but if you, if you say, what is TransAfrica, it's, we're basically talking about an organization that was the main force in reigniting the anti-apartheid movement in the United States in the '80s [1980s] and, and that really was the high point of the organization because after that, under the leadership of Randall [Robinson], they courageously took up other issues like the military regime in Nigeria, the military regime that overthrew [Jean-Bertrand] Aristide in Haiti in '91 [1991] but neither of those issues nor the blockade against Cuba ever emerged as the same kind of mass issue which I think was a very serious strategic problem for the organization and one that did not get resolved.
Speaker 1: And, and education in terms of issues in Africa?
Speaker 2: Africa, the Caribbean and Latin America.  We're not just Africa.
Story_ID: 260199
Speaker 1: Now, what do you, how do you respond to the criticism that, you know, there are so many issues affecting African Americans right here at home that perhaps some of that energy, dollars, et cetera should be, an emphasis should be placed on the issues affecting African Americans here in the United States?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's like I tell people, my friend Nadra [Floyd], on September 11th [2001; 9/11], she was two blocks away from the World Trade Center [New York, New York] and she was in a hotel and she heard the first plane go in and she and other people exited the hotel to see what was going on.  She saw the second plane go in.  She saw the building burning.  She saw the people jumping out of the building.  She saw the whole thing collapse.  And I spoke to a trauma counselor who had talked to her, who said that he was convinced that part of the cause of her death was 9/11, the trauma of 9/11.  Her heart had already been weak because of the treatment around the cancer.  Her story is in some ways a metaphor for this country.  Foreign affairs are not some distant thing that you can pretend don't exist, aren't relevant.  On September 11th, it was all brought home in living color and the United States has never been the same since and will not be and we have to realize that there are interconnections between what happens here and what happens overseas and the decisions that are made such as to invade Iraq, to assassinate leaders, these have ramifications, we can't take a pass on them.  So it's not like you can say, well, these things are more important.  I mean, if you, as a human being are suffering from cancer and diabetes, you can't say, well, I'll just treat the cancer, right.  I mean, you've got to treat both of these things.  That's the same for us and, and I was interviewed the other day and I, I said, look, I realize when you're up to your ass in alligators, it's hard to remember you're there to drain the swamp.  That's true and that's how black America feels.  We are up to our ass in alligators.  There is, this system is constantly snapping at us and you, you think sometimes, well let's just try to resolve these here.  The problem, and this is a problem that was recognized by Malcolm [X], by [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], is that, it's not like there's a stage theory to it.  You gotta work these things out together.
Story_ID: 261079
Speaker 1: So, in, I want to talk a little bit now, just for a few minutes about Africa and the U.S. response and since you've been at the helm of TransAfrica Forum, how do you think the [President George Walker] Bush administration has responded to some of the challenges in Africa?
Speaker 2: They haven't.  I mean, the Bush administration, let's keep in mind, when it, when it came into power in 2001, they made it clear, quite publicly, that Africa was of little strategic importance.  Africa's importance to this administration only emerges after September 11, 2001 [9/11] and then in connection with oil.  So, the attention that was paid to Africa generally has been paid to those countries that are oil-producing.  There is very little interests in Africa.  When, when President Bush made his famous $15 billion commitment, we have to keep in mind the moment that he made that, he made it in the same speech when he was preparing his country to break international law and invade Iraq.  And so, this was supposed to be the compassionate side to his conservatism but instead what we found was there was no money allocated for 2003 that people had to fight to actually get the administration to fulfill its promises, the $15 billion is not just for Africa, it's a global contribution.  The, the United States, instead of supporting the UN [United Nations] Global Fund, as its main, as the main recipient for assistance, gave some to the UN Global Fund, underfunded it, but set up its own mechanism to disperse money which is, which is hilarious when you think about how this administration was supposed to be conservative, cut down on bureaucracy and all that.  This is an administration whose interests are antithetical to those of the African world.
Story_ID: 261080
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for Africa because it is, the continent is plagued by some serious problems, HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], famine--
Speaker 2: Civil wars.
Speaker 1: --civil war, so what are some of your hopes and concerns for the continent?
Speaker 2: That the continent unites, it must unite.
Speaker 1: Do you think that, that could happen?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think that what could happen is, and it will take time, but is along the lines of the European Union [EU].  I think that over time we can build a united Africa.  I don't know what it's going to look like but it's the only way Africa is going to survive the 21st century.  Africa, Africa is treated as a basket case by the global north, by the West, and we are still suffering as a result of the slave trade and colonialism which is a fact that gets very little attention in the media.  You know, it's, you know, Africa's problems are treated as being largely self-induced and, and has no historical context.  You know, the fact that the only borders that were created by Africans are between Eritrea and Ethiopia, all the others are the results of the colonial divisions and they are completely bizarre, and then you have situations like Rwanda.  The, in the, in the film 'Hotel Rwanda,' which is a must see for anybody, there's a, there's a scene that sums up the history in about a minute where a U.S. reporter, I think it's Joaquin Phoenix, says, what's the difference between Hutus and Tutsis, and he says to this woman, there are these two gorgeous women sitting at this bar, he says, what are you?  She says, I'm a Tutsi and she says, what is she?  And she says she's a Hutu and he turns around and says, what's the difference, right?  And it turns out that the difference is a result of the, of what Belgium did, where Belgium, when they colonized the area, took one people and divided them into two groups.  They took the more light-skinned people, taller with straighter noses and declared that they were Tutsis and the other people were Hutus and they played them like a violin and they ruled through the Tutsis.  So when we're, when we're looking at the genocide, and this is obviously not to excuse the genocide at all, but when you look at that, you've got to understand the context.  You can't look at it as just simply, as Rodney King said, why can't we all get along, right?  It's not that simple and there is culpability on the part of the West that needs to be addressed.  The Democratic Republic of the Congo, the U.S. conspired with Belgium to overthrow and murder Patrice Lumumba in 1961.  In 1965, then Joseph Mobutu [Mobutu Sese Seko] takes over in a coup and between '65 [1965] and '97 [1997], is the dictator over what is then called Zaire and his regime has been called kleptocratic.  He became one of the richest people on this planet by stealing from his own people.  The United States knew this.  The United States supported him.  The United States provided him with weaponry.  So when the, when the DRC, as it's now known, the Democratic Republic of the Congo falls apart, we would say, the United States has culpability and it has a moral obligation as well as a political obligation and an economic obligation to address that.  So this is part of the message that we feel it's important to convey 'cause otherwise it doesn't make any sense, the situation, but Africa must unite and it can, it may happen in stages, it may be regional blocs that start working together, you know, like in Southern Africa, maybe South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, et cetera, work together, but they've got to figure out ways of developing economies that benefit their own people as opposed to serve the West.
Story_ID: 261081
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, what, what do you think the fourteen year old radical you would think of the you today?
Speaker 2: I think that the fourteen year old me would think, would be stunned that I'm running an organization [TransAfrica Forum], that I'm as well-known as I am, even though I'm not a celebrity, would be surprised that I didn't go on to become a lawyer, would maybe think that I am too comfortable, materially, and that, that I, yeah, that I should have fewer material comforts and, and I should be clear, I am not rich, right, but, but that's, I think that's probably what the fourteen year old would say.
Story_ID: 261082
Speaker 1: And when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: That I've been blessed with certain opportunities, that I've been able to land on my feet under very, often very difficult circumstances, that I've lived to fifty.  I don't think I expected to live this long.  I expected to be killed earlier.
Speaker 1: Because of your radicalism?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I still think--
Speaker 1: You expected to be killed--
Speaker 2: Killed.
Speaker 1: --not die earlier but to--
Speaker 2: No, killed.  I, I still, well, and then I went through a certain period where I didn't think too much about it but I think about it more now and I think it's probable, it's, it's probable.
Speaker 1: You still think that it's probable?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I do.  I mean, look, I could die of cancer or a heart attack or something else too but there are weird things going on in this country right now and the sorts of barbaric practices that have been carried out overseas for years and that historically have been used against African Americans are rising again.  Things like, this whole debate.  How can you have a debate about torture?  Indefinite imprisonment.  We have, we have facilities around this country no one knows where they're located where there are men and women imprisoned under this alleged war against terrorism.  So, yeah, I didn't expect to be here at the age of fifty.
Story_ID: 261083
Speaker 1: We haven't talked about your daughter, Yasmin [Fletcher].  Tell us about your daughter.
Speaker 2: I like to say that I not only love my daughter but I like her.  She is, she is beautiful, she is smart, she is a good friend to her friends and she's a good friend to me and her mother [Candice Cason Fletcher].  She's interesting.  She's not a radical but she is very progressive.
Speaker 1: Are you disappointed she's not a radical?
Speaker 2: Sometimes, but, but I, I feel like she'll find her own way, you know, and these are very different times.  I, I became a radical at a point when there was, it was tumultuous, right, and it's a very different time.  So I, I appreciate that but, yeah, on some level.
Story_ID: 261084
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?  What is it that you want people to say about [HistoryMaker] William [Gerald] Fletcher, Jr., William Gerald Fletcher, Jr. when he's no longer here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well people will call me Bill, which is how I'm known and how I want Bill Fletcher, Jr. to be remembered is as someone who had integrity and as they said about Malcolm X, would make it plain.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's really how I'd like to be remembered.
