Story_ID: 269772
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including your first name.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter), well, that certainly is a way to get started.  My, my f- name is Willie Frank Fountain, Jr., and it's W-I-L-L-I-E, F-R-A-N-K, F-O-U-N-T-A-I-N, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Seven, seventeen, forty-four [July 17, 1944].
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is one, thirty-one, oh-five [January 31, 2005].
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: Auburn Hills, Michigan.
Speaker 1: We're at the Chrysler headquarters, DaimlerChrysler [FCA US LLC].
Speaker 2: The, the, the DaimlerChrysler Corporation headquarters.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can I have your occupation, sir?
Speaker 2: I'm a senior vice president for external affairs and public policy.
Speaker 1: Would you describe yourself as a corporate executive?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 269773
Speaker 1: I ask five questions of everyone.  They're People magazine-ish, short answers.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is, I would say, probably fried chicken (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Don't too much of that, but I would say the, the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I'm sure that I do.  I can't think of what it is at the moment.
Speaker 1: Okay, no problem.
Story_ID: 269774
Speaker 1: What I'd like to do is just go back and ask you about your growing up and your family.
Speaker 2: And if you could--you're a junior, I take it.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, can you tell me about your father [Willie Fountain] and what you know about his growing up?
Speaker 1: Well, my father was one of eleven children that were, who were all born in Tunnel Springs, Alabama, in an area called the swamps.  It was bottomland in Monroe County, Alabama.  The town, as I said, Tunnel Springs.  And it was a, I think, a, an area where former slaves were, lived or were housed.  And, and that's where he grew up.  And he went to school to the fourth grade in a place called Antioch [Church School, Tunnel Springs, Alabama].  This is near a church, next to Antioch Baptist Church [Tunnel Springs, Alabama].  And it was a small three-room country school that I later had the opportunity to attend as well.  He moved to Pensacola, Florida, when he was a young man, and he got a job as a bellhop at the, at the major hotel in Pensacola and eventually met my mother [Jannie Hamilton Fountain] and married her.
Story_ID: 269775
Speaker 1: Did he [Fountain's father, Willie Fountain] know much about his family?  You know, I mean you were talking about the area, you know, in a place that was sort of housing slaves.  And I was just wondering how far he knew, you know, his family roots going back, you know, in that, in Tunnel Springs [Alabama].
Speaker 2: Well, his father [Anthony Fountain] was a, a member of a family of--I should know the number, but I don't know, can't quite remember the exact number.  But a number of, of brothers and sisters probably numbering around nine or ten, and they were the offsprings of one of three children that were born by my great-great-grandmother; Chainey [ph.] was her name, and she came from Africa.  She, we believe, came from Africa around 1839.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was the house slave of a Judge Fountain.  And she had three children, one son and two daughters.  And my grandfather's father was one of the sons.  And my, Judge Fountain, unlike most slave owners of that period, many years later, gave away one of his daughters by Chainey, my great-grandmother, by, to, in marriage.  And it was written in the Tunnel Spring newspaper [The Eagle].  So, and he had a particularly close relationship with those three kids because he, he helped the male of the two--of the three--amass five hundred acres of land, which could have only been possible with his help.  So that's--and grandmamma Chainey, she was one of nine children, seven of whom came from Africa with her.  There's a story goes that there were, the other two, two that did not come were too young at the time.  But folklore has it that she met them accidentally, and they were able to converse about their childhood and at least concluded that they were, were also from the same family, although it had been many, many, many years since she had left Africa.  Some of that has been researched by my niece who did some work about a half-dozen years ago and was able to trace a number of these documents in the county of Monroe, in, in Alabama [Monroe County, Alabama].
Story_ID: 269776
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father [Willie Fountain], sir?
Speaker 2: A fairly happy-go-lucky individual on the one hand, interacted with people very well, believed very strongly in family and family ties; and on the other, he was a pretty intense man who believed, certainly me being the oldest of seven, he had certain work values that he wanted to fully transfer to me, which were somewhat oppressive at times.  But he was a pretty smart man who was pretty good at mathematics, even though he had no formal training.  And he had aspirations for more in life in a, in a way, but he never quite could figure out how to, how to get it, which I think caused a certain amount of conflict in, in him, but was a pretty intense--interacted well with all kinds of people.  But I learned a lot of my, I'd say my most trustworthy and successful values from, from him in a very basic kind of way.
Speaker 1: And what were those?  What kind, what, what, what lessons or what values did you learn from him?
Speaker 2: Well, he believed that you--that you needed to work hard, but you also needed to work smart.  He believed that if you had to wait for a problem to happen to address it, then you had virtually failed.  When I would help him building things or work with him--we had a small farm--if he was repairing something or working or something and he needed a tool of some kind for his next step, if I hadn't anticipated what that next step was going to be and which tool he needed, then it was not a good thing for me, so I learned to anticipate.  And, and so to this, if something is fairly obvious or it's, or one of my team has not given things the proper thought, then it becomes obvious, and I'm not very happy with that.
Story_ID: 269777
Speaker 1: He [Fountain's father, Willie Fountain] also felt that you shouldn't let the sun catch you, daylight catch you in bed, that, that you needed to be--that was a sign of laziness.  And when daylight comes, especially on a farm, it means that you can begin to work.  The only reason you don't work earlier is that there's no daylight.  And I suspect if you were in a place where there were daylight around the clock, I'm not sure what the situation would have been.  But it would have been interesting, I'm sure.  And he felt that you needed to be thinking about problems and solving problems when either your competition or your opposition was, in fact, sleeping.  You needed to be awake addressing the situation because that gave you an advantage, or it put you in a better position than not doing that.  Those are just some of the, some of the, the--and he believed that you needed to, to earn your own keep.  If you were going to be fed, then you needed to contribute to production of that food because it was not a, a right; it was something that you needed to earn and work for.  Otherwise, you didn't quite deserve to be, to benefit from others.
Speaker 2: So your father was fairly strict, is what I hear.
Speaker 1: He was in the one hand.  On the other hand, if I wanted to go out when I became a teenager, if I wanted to go out and stay, stay out late, not that there were a lot of things to do in a town like--(unclear)--Tunnel Springs, Alabama, he never said anything to me.  But I was up the next morning at, at the crack of dawn like a--and he would watch me work all day.  And as long as I--he figured that if I continued to do that, that more power to me.  But if physical limitations began to suggest that, you know, I-- wasn't it wasn't a smart thing to, to do.  So, that, that was his method of teaching.
Story_ID: 269778
Speaker 1: And, you said he [Fountain's father, Willie Fountain] spent some time in Pensacola [Florida], but did he grow up on a farm himself?
Speaker 2: Yes, a small farm, but, but he did grow up on a, on a farm.  My grandfather [Anthony Fountain], my impression was not a large farm, but, but small farming.  And one of the characteristics of the day was that you, whether you had a large farm or not, larger farms needed, needed labor.  And whether it was picking cotton or plucking corn or, all of the cultivation of, of the crops in those days were, done manually.  So, so if you didn't work, if you didn't have your own farm, you usually worked for others.  And so, that was the only form of employment, for the most part.  It was something that you could do maybe nine months of the year--some type of work related to the farm.  But, at best, it was subsistence farming.  And, and even though my great-great-grandfather had amassed about five hundred acres, that land was divided in many parcels.  And not all of it was arable; not all of it was tillable.  And so, I'm not altogether clear just what my grandfather's size of it was.  I know that today there is ten acres left.  And I'm not sure if that was the, his original allocation and how that was based or, or if it was somehow he had more but then lost part of it.  The impression that I have is that my grandfather was not viewed as the most responsible of my great-grandfather's children.  And I wouldn't say that he was the black sheep of the family, but he was, he was at least one of the sons that was not viewed as the, the most productive or the most responsible.
Story_ID: 269779
Speaker 1: Now, let's go to your mother.  What was her name?  Your father's name was Willie, William [Fountain].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did he go by Willie?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Your, your, your mother, can you give her name, you know, maiden name, and what you know about her family and--
Speaker 2: Her name was, her name was, maiden name was Jannie Bell Hamilton.  And she was one of two kids by my grandmother, who was unmarried.  And, but there's a lot shorter history there than, than--. My grandmother, my mother's mother, lived with us for many years later, before she passed.  And she was one of at three or four sisters born by my, born by her mother, my great-grandmother.  And I recall seeing my great-grandmother when I was very, very small.  But, as I understand it, she was half Cherokee.  But the depth of knowledge of the background on that side of the family is not very deep.
Story_ID: 269780
Speaker 1: You said your mother [Jannie Hamilton Fountain] and father [Willie Fountain] met, You're not sure how they met, but--
Speaker 2: Well, they, they met in Pensacola [Florida].
Speaker 1: They met in--when he was a bellhop?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But was she from Florida or--
Speaker 2: Peterman, she was from a town called Peterman, Alabama, and Peterman is about five miles from Tunnel Springs [Alabama], south of Tunnel Springs.  But they did not know each other in Alabama.  They met when she also migrated to Pensacola, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How far is Pensacola from Tunnel Springs?  And then, some of the literature I read said that you were born in Brewton, Alabama, and I'm wondering, you know, Brewton, Tunnel--
Speaker 2: Right, Brewton is maybe thirty miles from Tunnel Springs.  The connection there is my, my mother's aunt lived in Brewton, and so she went to visit when she was pregnant with me.  And obviously, it must have been pretty close to the nine months or around the nine months, and she went to visit, and I was born while she was just visiting.  And in a small hospital there in Brewton and after she recovered from childbirth, she went back to Pensacola.  So that's why my birth certificate says Brewton.
Speaker 1: Now, you're the oldest of seven--
Speaker 2: But then we stayed--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we stayed-- we stayed, Julieanna [Richardson]--we, we lived in Pensacola, and I grew up until midway the third grade.  And then they moved to Tunnel Springs.
Speaker 1: Do you remember why they moved or what the reason was at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, my father, it was because of my father needed to move from Pensacola and, and needed to be near my, his uncle and my great-uncle, my grandmother's [Luella Fountain] brother. And people move out of Tunnel Springs, and most people, not a lot of people move back to Tunnel Springs.  But he moved to work for my uncle.
Speaker 1: Now, how far is Tunnel Springs from Pensacola?
Speaker 2: About eighty-five to ninety miles.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's not that far.
Story_ID: 269781
Speaker 1: You're the oldest of seven.  Can you give your siblings' names in, you know, birth order?
Speaker 2: Well, the brother next to me was, his name was Arthur [ph.], and he died at six months, cause is not quite clear, didn't have any particular disease that was apparent; it was kind of like [sudden] infant death syndrome.  I'm sure they hadn't thought of that back then, but--.  And the brother, had a brother, the next brother, Charles, is the brother closest to me, followed by Carrabelle [ph.], a, a sister, followed by Anthony, a brother, followed by Rosemary, a sister, followed by Cary, a brother, the youngest brother, and the baby of the family is Leona.
Speaker 1: So that's sort of evenly, almost--is it, how many boys and how many girls?  Almost--
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: Three, that's right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) Three and three, right.
Speaker 1: --right, okay.
Story_ID: 269782
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you what your earliest memory of growing up.  You would have been in Pensacola [Florida] at that point.  Do, do you have an earliest memory?
Speaker 2: Yes.  You know, you have kind of glimpses of-- not contiguous.  But we lived on a street called 8th Avenue in Pensacola, between Avery [Street] and Lakeview [Avenue].  And when I was five, my-- a lady across the street, [Mattie Beck] who would keep me from time to time, took me to school because she couldn't--this was before kindergarten was, was a popular concept.  But she, she agreed to keep me and, but her method of keeping me was to take me to school with her, and she worked.  She taught school at, at Ransom High School, which is a K [kindergarten] to 12 school in Cantonment, Florida, which was, I don't know, it seemed like it was a long drive every day.  And, and it's maybe twenty miles.  In fact, in those days there were two-lane highways, so it was a, a fairly long drive.  And I went to school with her for, and, and, and sat in the, was in the first grade, in effect, without official portfolio.  And she would bring me back every day, and, and so, in effect, I went to school a year before I was a legal age to do so.  And it was--our relationship and my relationship with the lady who took me to, to school every day and her mother and the whole family was as close as any relatives that I had, and continued the relationship.  She's still alive, the-- she's not well, living Pensacola.  And her husband is a, has a printing business, and she had-- later had two daughters.  But, as someone who had the greatest impact I think on my early life and therefore the rest of my life, I would say, outside of my immediate family, would be her.
Story_ID: 269699
Speaker 1: I want to go back to Mat-- Mattie Beck.  And you know, you had talked about her being, you know, significant.  And I just want you to elaborate on that.
Speaker 2: Well, the fact that she, well, my mother [Jannie Hamilton Fountain] befriended her, that family, or vice versa, the, I was introduced to formal education because she agreed to keep me.  And I think it was her idea that, you know, not only would they watch me, you know, while my mother was at work or because it would have been her mother watching me, she must have had the presence to say, well, it's just as easy for me to take him to school as to leave him, you know, with her mother.  And so, you know, the earlier you're introduced to education, the, the greater the impact.  And I think having had that experience earlier on when we moved to Alabama, I was then faced with schools that were not as well managed.  And so I think that that early part of my, my exposure was enough to propel me through the three-room country schools and, and those kinds of things and probably planted certain perspectives that endured and stayed with me through my whole education career because my view of the world was always different than many of my peers, and I never understood exactly why.  And when I did go to college, I was one, I was the first in my family to do so.  And it was not because I had another role model within the family; it was because I think she had become my role model way back then.
Story_ID: 269700
Speaker 1: Now do you remember what you thought of school when you first, you know, went and were exposed to a class 'cause you said you were, you know, basically, for all intents and purposes, auditing first grade (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, I, I think it was, I think it was a good experience, Julieanna [Richardson].  I think that for many years I kept the--I was in a play, and the play was called 'Butterflies are Free.'  And I had a little costume that was black and with yellow wings.  And I kept that for many years.  But when you go away, and you have younger sisters and brothers, things just kind of disappear.  But I remember being active and was basically treated like a regular student.  And so, I later went to Spencer Bibbs Elementary School [Pensacola, Florida], which is, was about two to three blocks away from where I lived.  And so I can recall that the first and second grades, as I went through those early years, it, it was fairly easy.  In most cases I was beyond the rest of my, my class, so it was, it was--and there's some evidence that, that in the early years--I know when we first moved to Alabama, I was in, in a class, third grade, and the teacher was ill or didn't come to class.  And I can recall taking charge of the class and leading an exercise in, in the math because math was either the first thing in the morning or something.  And, and so I did that.  I can't recall the name of the teacher, but one of my uncles, who lived in Cleveland [Ohio], later dated that teacher.  That's a little tidbit, but this was a, this was a one-room building off from the main part of the, the, it was called Rosenwald Junior High School [Tunnel Springs, Alabama], so it as K [kindergarten] to 9.  But, but I went to the school called Spencer Bibbs in Pensacola [Florida] and--for two and, and a half years.
Story_ID: 269701
Speaker 1: So you spent that year with Mattie Beck, and then you, you then afterwards, then you started first grade with, with--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --at Spencer Bibbs [Elementary School, Pensacola, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And at that point, now are you still having contact with Mattie Beck?
Speaker 2: Everyday.
Speaker 1: Every--was she teaching at--
Speaker 2: She was teaching.  She could teach--
Speaker 1: At Spencer Bibbs?
Speaker 2: No, she--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --continued, continued to teach, but she lived across the street.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: The family was just across the street, so I was over on a regular basis, daily.  I would go over and, and I would oil her hair and things like that.  And she had about three--she had a sister.  He sister lived in Little Rock, Arkansas.  And she-- her sister had a son; his name was June Harris [ph.], and we were about the same age.  We continued periodically to, I think we were together, I don't know if it was back in the '70s [1970s] or somewhere way back, which was the last time I saw him.  But we went out together that night, he and I to a club.  And one of, one of the, the brothers came looking for us 'cause they felt it was too late.  Now we were, we were well into our twenties or thirties, but still viewed as--so that's, you know,my recollection.
Story_ID: 269702
Speaker 1: I mean I'm get to the point about Pensacola [Florida], but-- so I have lots of uncles and aunts.  Had lots of uncles and aunts.  Many of them have died, passed--they still have--I went down before Christmas.  And I have four aunts, great aunts, on my father's [Willie Fountain] side and one uncle left.  And, and so they were all affected by the hurricane, Ivan, that went through back in September [2004].  So, we had contributed some money to the--we, I'm also head of our foundation [DaimlerChrysler Corporation Fund]--to Orlando [Florida] and Punta Gorda [Florida], one of the place, places where the first hurricane came through.  And so I decided that, got the bright idea that I would make a contribution to Pensacola.  And so one of my people did the research and contacted the mayor [John R. Fogg] and all of that.  So, when I went to Pensacola before the Christmas break, it had been arranged for me to meet with the mayor and the city manager and present a fifty thousand dollar check for their aid to the victims of the hurricane in Pensacola.  And so, on the day that I arrived for the press conference, there was already a front-page article in the Pensacola [News] Journal.  And then the following day there was another story in the business section that talked about my roots in Pensacola, which was a, kind of a--you know, when you grow up in a town and you become familiar with all of the buildings and the streets and, 'cause I, as I grew up in, in Alabama, I would, I would finish the farm work.  And we have a concept called laying by the crops.  And that's when you've done all of the, the cultivation, and now you wait for time to harvest. So between that point and the time to harvest, whether it was picking cotton or plucking corn, there was a period of maybe a month or so and I would go and stay with the relatives in Pensacola, and I would do, I would find work to do.  And it would be yard work often.  I would borrow a, a lawnmower from one of my relatives, and I would use that.  She would help me find lawns to cut where she worked along the bayou where there was fairly rich people lived.  And so I could find work to do almost full time, cutting and doing all of the work on, on, that, that needs to be done on that yard 'cause they were so big.  And so I would do that in the summer and earn money to pay for my school clothes and, and because working for my father didn't really pay.  He figured that that was an even exchange for the food and the shelter, so that's what I did.  And so I got to know Pensacola as I grew up.  And so it's, it's a place where we have family reunions also over the years.
Speaker 2: So it was sort of a, a nice homecoming too, yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was just something that I could do officially as part of my, my, my, my job and, but at the same time, there was a strong personal connection.
Story_ID: 269703
Speaker 1: I want you to take me back to your childhood, and I'd like you to talk about what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of growing up.  Sights, smells, sounds.
Speaker 2: Well, in terms of sights, I would say, because I spent time in the woods a lot alone, and I was either looking for firewood, or I was going to find a plot of land, going to a plot of land where we were, had on the cultivation.  And so the sights were fields of cotton, corn, sugar cane, watermelons; they were fields of crops or woods and that were very peaceful and tranquil.  And because there were three, those three and a half years between me and my next living brother, I was most often alone.  So, being in the woods, or forest, is something that, in terms of sights, that comes to mind; in terms of sounds, miss the sounds of, of animals, the sounds that you find in the forest or the sounds of, of cows, or horses, or hogs.  Those are the sounds that you, that resonate most, most prominently; and the smells, in terms of distinctive smells, were around the hog pens and the, and the, and the, the barns where animals are kept.  So, and the smells also, of course, because you work very hard in tilling the soil or tending the cultivating the crops, you, the smell of food is always a welcome smell.  In the--but often you, you carry a, a bucket or a bag of biscuits and sometimes meet or whatever when you go way out in the fields because you don't--you take a very short break, and you keep, you keep working.
Story_ID: 269704
Speaker 1: You don't stop and go home to eat.  You, you keep working, and you stop long enough to, to have something and, and, and, and drink some water, and, and you, you know, you keep--because plowing a mule or a horse, you know, is one furrow at, at, at a time.  And so if you're gonna cover some acreage, you need to put in ten, twelve hours to knock out two acres.  And so you can't, you know, ta- take a half hour, an hour to go to sit down for food.  It's not something that, we just didn't, I, I just didn't do, so.  And my father [Willie Fountain] had certain expectations of my productivity, so.  But, but sounds of, of--and if you were plowing, you know, corn or whatever you--you know, it's a fairly lonely, fairly solitary--it's you and the animal and, and nature.  And so, those were my, my deepest experiences.  And in the evening, as I grew up through school, even in the high school [Monroe County Training School; J.F. Shields High School, Beatrice, Alabama] my favorite evening pastime before I, I even did homework would be to listen to the radio.  We didn't have TV.  And my favorite show, if you will, was 'Edward R. Murrow and the News,' which was kind of a window to the world because he would talk about things that I would have to work to understand.  But there would be places beyond Tunnel Springs [Alabama] and beyond Alabama.  And early on in my, around the sixth grade [at Rosenwald Junior High School, Tunnel Springs, Alabama], I can recall beginning to master the, the understanding of geography, and what the U.S. looked like, and the concept of states and, and countries.  And, and the cover of my world geography book had a, a picture of excavating, excavations of either Babylonia or Mesopotamia or someplace like that.  And so it was fascinating to understand that there were old cultures of many years gone by.  And at the same time, there were people living in those areas today.  And so that kind of lit a passion that I had for wanting to know about the rest of the world.
Story_ID: 269705
Speaker 1: I just want to get this right.  You're-- so in Pensacola [Florida], you lived on a street.  And it was not, you, there was no farming associated with--
Speaker 2: No, there was a streetlight, and it was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --all of those things.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) no, I know but--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: I just want to get that--
Speaker 2: And that, that, there were no, no streetlights.  There were no, there were roads, dirt roads, for the most part.
Speaker 1: And that street in, in Pensacola, what was the name?  Do you remember the name of the street?
Speaker 2: It was 8th Avenue--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --between Avery [Street] and Lakeview [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember any of your other neighbors on that street, besides the, the Becks [ph.]?
Speaker 2: No, you know, I don't really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you moved to, back to Tunnel Springs [Alabama], was that a change for you or had, you'd been going back and forth, you know.
Speaker 2: No, that was a-- that was a major change.  I had visited my, my grandfather [Anthony Fountain] on occasion when I was growing up.  And I think I may have stayed with them for seven weeks at a time in the summer.  But except, except for an occasional visit to stay with my grandfather and grandmother [Luella Fountain], I, I had no real experience in--I always thought it was fun because I was the, I was the fourth, their fourth grandchild.  And there were three others by my oldest aunt, who were, they were older than I was, but they had, it was a gap.  And so I enjoyed a few years of being the--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the favorite, well, the, you know, only young grandchild.
Speaker 1: So when did your father [Willie Fountain] start expecting you to help with, you know, around the farm?  I mean was it--'cause you said you were in third grade when you moved to Tunnel Springs.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, we didn't move right away on a farm.  We moved to a house along a highway not too far from my grandfather.  And the chores at that time was not, not farming because I was relatively young and small.  But there were things like finding firewood for the, for the, for the fireplace and the stove.  So my father, in terms of work, that occurred very early.  And we moved--we stayed at that place for some time, and then we moved to a house right close to my, to my great-uncle who had a, a large farm and a large number of kids.  And so it was there that I began to, to take on even more chores, and it was also a period when we were, I had a new brother or sister like every twelve to eighteen months.  And so I not only had to help her in the house, but I had to do those external things as well.  We didn't have running water, so it meant that I, you know, I had to bring water from the, from the, I'm not sure we had a pump at that place.  But I had to get the--there was a spring, and I had to go and bring water from the spring.  I mean I, that's--(unclear)--that a, a, a good deal of work when you, you're doing it for all purposes, washing clothes, bathing, cooking.  So that's a major, a fairly major chore.
Speaker 1: So you had out, outdoor toilets too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 269706
Speaker 1: Yes, at, at the, at all of the places that we lived, and we lived at the first place, the second place there that I'm speaking of, and then we moved to a third place.  In all of those we had outdoor toilets.  Now, at the last place, eventually my father [Willie Fountain], we built a house next door.  And the way he built the house is that we, which was popular in those days, is that they would find an old, old house that would be virtually abandoned, if not abandoned, no one living there.  And you would tear down that house completely, piece by piece.  So, you'd take it apart, and then you would use the wood from that, that old house.  So my father brought all of this old stuff in, in a giant pile in one of the--whenever we ran out, of, I ran out of work, I had to pull nails and straighten them, so that meant that you would never, ever run out of work to do.  But we, with the help of my great-uncle, we, we built, we built a house that's still there today.  And we, in the last 10 or 15 years, 10 or 12 years we, we, maybe longer, we, we, we expanded it, bricked it, put air conditioning in it, and et cetera, et cetera.  But it's the, it's the house that I, that I had the greatest amount of experience at working with my father on building.  So, and then we had our first indoor toilet.  And, and we, I probably lived there for maybe three years.
Speaker 2: What age were you, sir?
Speaker 1: Before going to, to, away to, to college.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that was, you were in high school [Monroe County Training School; J.F. Shields High School, Beatrice, Alabama] at that point.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I would say it was in, in, in early, in high school certainly.  I think I was there all through high school and maybe, maybe my last year of junior high school.
Speaker 2: Okay, now junior high was the Rosenwald Junior High [School, Tunnel Springs, Alabama], right?
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 269745
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker W.] Frank Fountain.  I'm a senior vice president for external affairs and public policy for Auburn Hills [Michigan].  Today is the 24th of May, 2005, in Auburn Hills, Michigan, the world headquarters of the Chrysler Group--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --of DaimlerChrysler [FCA US LLC].
Story_ID: 269746
Speaker 1: You know, we had established talking about Mattie Beck and your father [Willie Fountain], and you know, Pensacola [Florida] and going there during--you know, how you even built a home with your father, you know, from scratch.  And you had to take all the nails out and straighten them flat.  And you were the, you're the oldest of seven, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so I'd like to just go back-- and how you like listening to radio and Ed- Edward [R.] Murrow.  And I'd like to take you, because what I didn't establish is where you had gone to junior high school and to high school.  And I'd like to sort of take you back to that period.
Speaker 2: Okay, I, I attended Rosenwald, Rosenwald Junior High School, and the--in Tunnel Springs, Alabama.  Rosenwald was K [kindergarten] to 9.  And so when my family moved from Pensacola to Tunnel Springs, I completed the-- it was in the middle of my third grade, and I completed the, the, the third, the second half of the third grade in Rosenwald in Tunnel Springs.  And I remained at Rosenwald until I finished the third grade, but then I went to--my family moved, still within the general area of Tunnel Springs, but near a school called Antioch [Church School, Tunnel Springs, Alabama].  And Antioch was near a church, you could say on the church grounds of Antioch Baptist Church [Tunnel Springs, Alabama].  And it was a school that, it was a three-room school that many--it was probably a hundred years old.  So that was the fourth and fifth grade, and that was a K-6 school.  And then my family moved again, and I entered, reentered, re-enrolled in, at Rosenwald Junior High and began my sixth grade.  And so I went sixth through nine and completed my, my junior high school education at Rosenwald Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Now what was--why was your family moving again so much?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the first moved would be considered maybe temporary quarters.  And the second move was for my father to be near his uncle--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --and who had a, a very large farm.  And so my father often worked with my uncle not just on the farm but mostly on--my, my uncle was also a, a carpenter.  And with my father being a painter, a painter and a carpenter working together went hand-in-hand, and so I think that that was the reason.  And then the, the, the next move had to do with the purchase of, of, of land and, and, and a house.  And so it's on that, that move that we, we still have the, that's where we built the home, and we still have the land in the family.
Story_ID: 269747
Speaker 1: You ended up back at Rosenwald [Junior High School, Tunnel Springs, Alabama].  Did you go to the ninth grade then?
Speaker 2: Um-hm--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from sixth to nine, sixth, seventh--
Speaker 1: Through to sixth to ninth.
Speaker 2: --eighth, and ninth.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that experience?  Was Mrs., was Mrs. [Mattie] Beck still in--
Speaker 2: No, she was in Pensacola [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, and I was now in a--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --whole new environment, which was quite a different environment.  And that's where I--those were challenging years for me academically because of the-- when I went to the fourth and the fifth grade, that was a pretty long walk to school, several miles to school in all kinds of weather while--to, to Antioch [Church School, Tunnel Springs, Alabama].  And, and while the school buses for that kind of distance in that area only transported white kids. And so we walked.  That was one dimension.  And it was also a period of time where my parents [Jannie Hamilton Fountain and Willie Fountain] were most productive.  And so I had a new sibling on a fairly frequent basis, which, being the oldest and having a gap of three and half--between my brother--years old, then I had not only internal choirs but also external chores.  And so all of that put pressure on my, my ability to--in the environment in which I had to, to do my school work.  It also, the, the fourth and fifth grades at Antioch was in a, this was a three-room school, K [kindergarten] to 6, so each class had two classes in it, taught by one teacher.  So, that was a, a pretty challenging period also.
Speaker 1: You're saying both the K-6 and the K-9, both Antioch and Rosen--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --Ro--
Speaker 2: --just, just Antioch was the one--
Speaker 1: Was challenging.
Speaker 2: --was the two--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --just had the three teachers for six classes.
Speaker 1: Now, what were you like at that point, you know, as, as a young person?  And what was--we know that you liked listening to radio, but how were, how was the young [HistoryMaker W.] Frank Fountain sort of forming?
Speaker 2: See, to say I liked listening to radio was not quite the right description.  I liked listening to the news at a very early age.  And so it's different than just listening to the radio.  What was I like?  Well, I guess like any young kid with, who had responsibilities.  And so, you know, it wasn't a childhood where you, of play and, and entertainment.  It was a childhood of mostly work.  I always enjoyed going to school.  Over that period of time, there were times when, you know, when you're farming you don't--you, there are times when you can't go to school when you have work to do.  And so there was some of that over that period.  And so it was a, it was a challenging period of time for me.
Story_ID: 269748
Speaker 1: Then the high school was what?  Then where did you go to--
Speaker 2: It was called Monroe County Training School [J.F. Shields High School, Beatrice, Alabama].  This was a kind of a typical name for a black high school in, at least in Alabama.  I'm not sure about other states in the South.  And I went--that was from the tenth grade through the twelfth grade.  And it was about five or six miles away from home, and there I traveled by bus to get there.  That's after completing the ninth grade at Rosenwald [Junior High School, Tunnel Springs, Alabama].  I think throughout the period I was a pretty decent student, notwithstanding the, the, the-- whatever I was experiencing personally.  Getting to high school, which is a whole different environment, was kind of a feeder school from many different small communities into Beatrice [Alabama].  And so what you, what I faced there was a kind of an elite group of students who, whose parents were teachers or professional people of some kind.  And so, so there were various factions.  And some factions were because, you know, the kids came from one part of the county versus another.  And so I became a student leader, and by my second year there, had become strong enough to be the, the junior class president, and that went fairly well.  I thought I would also run for junior class president.  And while junior--while senior class president--and so junior and senior class presidents year back to back, and also ran for student council and became student council president.  Part of that was to impress a particular, a particular young lady.  And the other part of it was to demonstrate to the elite that a country boy from my neck of the woods could, could, could exercise themselves in a way that led the student body.  And even though I was somewhat shy, I wrote my own political speeches, my own speeches, and somehow I was just motivated to do that.
Speaker 1: Now, you're saying that the student body had a lot of children of, of teachers.
Speaker 2: Not a, not a lot.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: But there was a, you know, there are cliques or factions within schools.
Speaker 1: Right.  And what do you--were, was anyone mentoring you at this point that you don't, you didn't--
Speaker 2: (Shaking head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't have a mentor during this period.
Speaker 1: So it was really your grades and I mean you sort of deciding you wanted to run?  You know, I mean you had to be--people, if you run for an office, you have to be elected.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well, that's, ab, absolutely--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --student, student coun- see, class president or student council president.  And you have to make a speech in front of the general assembly, and you have to campaign for it, in a sense.  But I, because I was, I had relationships with the elite, I'd also good relationships with most people.  And so, and I wasn't super close with any group.  At the same time, I had enough trust and respect that, you know, this is what I wanted to do.  And, and, and I wasn't a--you know, you, you had the image of a, a student politician being fairly flamboyant and, and super outgoing.  I was neither of those but yet able to do what I set out to do.
Story_ID: 269749
Speaker 1: The young lady that you liked, was she part of the elite, or was she just--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was part of the elite.  We, we--at that age, young ladies are interested in, in, in boys who are at least two or three levels ahead of them because they're theoretically ahead, ahead of the, you know, same, the boys their age.  And so there was this kind of phenomenon, although by the time we reached the senior class [at Monroe County Training School; J.F. Shields High School, Beatrice, Alabama], I did take her to the prom.  But again, in my, my operating style, I ended up with several young ladies at the same prom (laughter).  So it was quite a, it was quite a challenging evening.
Speaker 1: You end up with several dates to the prom?
Speaker 2: I didn't, yeah, I didn't, I didn't personally take them all.  But the bottom line was is that there were, there were three.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) [HistoryMaker W.] Frank Fountain, and you paint this picture of you being this quiet, shy, introverted guy (laughter)--(unclear).  So--
Speaker 2: And I, I don't, I, I managed to do it somehow.
Story_ID: 269750
Speaker 1: You ended up going to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], and I'm just wondering how that happened.
Speaker 2: Well, I decided fairly early on that I, I wanted to go to college.  And so it was a just a question of--I announced to my parents [Jannie Hamilton Fountain and Willie Fountain] that I was going to go to college.  And so I'm that their thoughts were well, (laughter) where, where are you going to, to get the money to go to college.  But that was not my thought.  My thought was: one, that I needed to first to decide that that was what I was going to do; and number two, I'd figure out how to do it.  And so that's essentially was my approach, and, and so I applied to Knoxville College in [Knoxville] Tennessee.  And I went to the principal of Rosenwald Junior High School [Tunnel Springs, Alabama] to ask him for some guidance.  And so he suggest--he had a son that had just enrolled, enrolled in Hampton the year before, so that was fairly fresh in his mind 'cause he had, I think he had seven or eight kids.  But he, he told me about Hampton.  I wrote and got the application.  He helped me fill it out.  He helped me fill out the financial aid part of it, and that's how I got into Hampton.  And I didn't know anything about anyone who had ever been to Hampton.  I knew it was further away than Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  I was familiar with Tuskegee, Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama], Tennessee [Agricultural and Industrial] State [University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], and, and Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama]; those were the, the schools that I was aware of, maybe Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama], but not much, 'cause I didn't, I hadn't met anyone to go to Talladega.  So I thought that would suit me just fine because Hampton was a distance away.  And, and I managed to get the financial aid, and I went to Hampton.
Speaker 1: Now this is what, 1961, '62 [1962]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962].
Story_ID: 269751
Speaker 1: Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton Virginia] offered a kind of a pre, pre, pre-enrollment, some summer sessions.  And so they were offered to the school, and the administration decided who, which kid got the, the opportunity.  And, and they gave it to this young lady [from Fountain's high school prom].  They knew that I had applied, so it would have been perfect for me to have, have spent the summer there prior, prior to enrolling.  But that wasn't the way things worked.  So, I think that she, I think that she ultimately married a minister and is living someplace in Virginia, someplace in Virginia; I'm not sure where.
Speaker 2: What was her name?
Speaker 1: Her name was Margery Love [ph.].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, so she, you both ended up at Hampton at the same--
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: She, she never went to--
Speaker 2: Oh, she nev--
Speaker 1: --she just went to that--
Speaker 2: To the summer pro- okay.
Speaker 1: Well, the reason I mentioned that was simply to point out that any opportunities that the administration receive, they went usually to the elite kids first.  That's just kind of the way it, it was.
Speaker 2: Even though you were not elite, but you were a child who, you know, who showed promise, there, there was still that preference?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And that's something that I was very keenly aware of.  And you know, it affects some kids in different ways.  Some kids withdraw or begin to feel, and blame themselves for whatever their circumstances were, but I never did.  I always felt that I knew exactly what was happening, and I resisted it in my own way--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and challenged them often, not in a, in a, the typical way, but in a way that they knew that I understood the environment, and they knew that I had issues with it.
Speaker 2: And was that your experience throughout the, you know, your, those three years of high school [Monroe County Training School; J.F. Shields High School, Beatrice, Alabama]?  Had that been your experience?  I mean, like, you almost had to--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --fight for everything you got?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: But it was not--you know, it was a period where you, you know, you just learn that that's the way life is, and you, you're ready to, to, to deal with it.  It isn't--
Speaker 2: So you were--let's just put this in perspective.  You were dealing in a black world, but you were experiencing classism, you know--
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 2: --in that world, that's right.
Speaker 1: That's a real, that's one of the, the, the untalked about things of the, in the black community, whether you were--you know, there was a skin color issue that was a, a real class structure.  And it, it was real.  And, and I think it continues, it continues to today in some ways.  It's not quite as, as prevalent as it once was or, or as, as clear.  But on college campuses if you, you, you look at the queen, the queen of the, the, the school, and she was always a, a very light-skinned African American.
Story_ID: 269752
Speaker 1: Now what sustained you during that period if you were not getting it at home, and the school, I mean this was all internal?  That's what I'm trying to understand.
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I had a, my mother [Jannie Hamilton Fountain] was a, a very supportive lady and, and would encourage me.  My father [Willie Fountain], often, his way of encouraging you was, was to, to dwell on the negative things.  And so, you know, if you were a certain kind of personality, that would be enough to kind of put you away, but it didn't affect me that way.  It made me more determined, as most environments do.  Through that, through most of my life, my--especially when I meet a, a real challenging situation, it makes me more determined and brings out the, well, you could say it brings out the best in me; it could bring out the worst in me.  But I felt determined to--I, I didn't, did not have an inferiority complex.  I felt that, you know, I was born to be in this world and that I could decide free of, had the freedom to decide what I wanted to do.  And it was always a question of simply figuring out how to do it, and while at the same time not accepting whatever the status quo looked like.  I grew to believe that if the status quo was something that I strongly disagreed with, then I should work to change it.  And so that, well, that's one of expression of my philosophy that, that has stayed with me throughout my, most of my life.
Story_ID: 269753
Speaker 1: You looked forward to going to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] I guess with great anticipation.  But did you understand what you were--well, is that true?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  I decided that I understood early on that, that there were, that there were educated people who seemed to have been able to get the better jobs or were the professional people.  And so, like teachers, and principals, and doctors, and lawyers, didn't know a lot of doctors and lawyers, but I knew--you know, in the South there were black, certain parts of the South there were black lawyers and black doctors, and so I felt that, you know, getting a de- going to college was kind of a no-brainer.  I mean it was something that I wanted to do, and then it was just a question of figuring out how to do it.  Now, strategically, I didn't know where that was all leading to, but I was figuring that out as I went along.
Story_ID: 269754
Speaker 1: What was the university like?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought it was a beautiful campus.  It was on the water and a--it was, there were lots of other kids like me who were, some had been sent there and told that that's what they needed to do, and others, others were there because we felt that that was something we also needed to do on our own.  It was, it was an adventure because it was a whole new environment and a new place.  Coming from a small town [Tunnel Springs, Alabama] and a small high school [Monroe County Training School; J.F. Shields High School, Beatrice, Alabama] where the curriculum and you know, the teaching was only, you know, at a certain level, I was now then in the big leagues where you had to sink or swim.  And so I had to--a lot of adjusting to do academically to, to get my academic--my study habits and just how to do this was challenging.  And I also had to work at the same time, part time, and socialize, and just figure out how do I maneuver myself through the academic maze.  But Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], fortunately for me at the time, was a small school of about two thousand students, maybe even eighteen hundred when I first went there, and grew to two thousand over the four years.  So, the dean [of men, Thomas E. Hawkins] knew, the dean of men knew almost all of the students, all of the--and so it was, in many ways, a kind of a, a family environment on the one hand.  On the other hand, you had to pay the bills and you had to pay them on time, so you knew you were in the outside world.
Story_ID: 265806
Speaker 1: You know, we have--especially about the black college environment, you know, in the early '60s [1960s], and I want to know about the faculty that was there, you know, who was president at the time.  But the environment is what I'd like to first touch upon.
Speaker 2: Well, this is '62 [1962] to '66 [1966], and so in the--it's now in the heart of the civil rights era, [Civil Rights] Movement, with marches and church burnings and all kinds of things going on.  They were, Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] had a segregated lunch counters and all of that, believe it or not.  And so there were, the only march I ever, during that era, participated in was a march to downtown and which is across the bridge already in town.  And there were also student protests against the administration to protest food, to protest the curfews and things like that, following [University of] Berkeley [Berkeley, California].  Berkeley broke out, and somehow the word got to Hampton, and we decided to do the same thing.  Jerome [H.] Holland was the president at the time.  He was an All-American--I don't know if he was the quarterback--but he was an All-American football player for Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York].  And he was the, I think viewed as a, not the preeminent academician but a great fundraiser for the school.  The, the dean of, the dean of the school was Hugh Gloster, who later became the president of, or a number two guy at Tuskegee [sic.] before going on to head, become the head of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I remember going into Hugh Gloster's office to address some financial issues or my financial application.  And so it was a mixture of black and white faculty.  Hampton, back then, was known as one of the, a fairly wealthy school, because by then we had separated from the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] to be able to have the freedom to do our fundraising.  The school was very strict on, and very disciplined on most things.  There was a demonstration in the administration building, same administration building that exists today.  We went in.  I followed and we all sat down against the wall, you know, the--I don't know where the president was, but you know, I, I thought I'd see what was going on.  And I'm sitting there, and I saw the guy, maybe the same person that's still there, the official photographer [Reuben Burrell], taking pictures of us sitting along the wall.  So my basic instinct was to turn my head and, and, and avoid the, the camera.  And I always feel that if I had not done that, I would not-- I would have been--they didn't expel anyone from school because of those demonstrations, but the students who were involved didn't come back.  You didn't see them ever again.  So, I believe that, that they took pictures, and they matched the pictures with the names.  And those people that they felt were active in this movement simply did not show up the next year.  So that's a private school, and you can do those things in a private school.
Story_ID: 265807
Speaker 1: I made friends.  I joined a fr- a social club.  I say a social club because the Greek clubs didn't come to campus until either the late '40s [1940s] or late '50s [1950s].  I mean it was, there were no Greek organizations.  The Greeks had not been around.  But then there were several social clubs that were unique to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], and so I pledged Fidi Amici. And the Fidis were at the time, became one of the most prominent of all fraternity-like organizations on campus.  But after going through that experience, I wouldn't, I wouldn't, I had never had any appetite to pledge anything else.  So I had that experience.  Academically, I, I, I, I, I majored in history and, and minored in political science.  And I pursued a teaching curriculum because I wanted to be able to teach because that was virtually all I knew about.  And, and, and, and I wanted to be--I didn't really want to teach, but I wanted to be prepared to teach if I needed to, and so I took that curriculum.  Academically, I didn't really hit stride until maybe my third year, where I'd began to get all Bs.  And actually, the first year or two I struggled mightily with English, and first remedial, remedial English and then English.  And the crowning point of, of my English career was taking a course from a guy named--English lit [literature]. I think--from a guy named J. Saunders Redding, who was a famous African American author, and was known as one of the toughest graders in, in, in the whole school and the college.  And, and so I managed to get a B from J. Saunders Redding, and I, I was born (laughter) into a whole new plateau.
Speaker 2: Was that in your junior year?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 265808
Speaker 1: And I did student teaching in my senior year [at Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] for two semesters, first a sixth grade class and then secondly, a tenth grade class.  The sixth grade class was history, and, and the sec- the tenth grade class was world geography.  And I thought I'd, I enjoyed that.  I thought I--in my tenth grade class, it was like bedlam and pandemonium from beginning to end because as a student teacher you sit in the back, and you observe the, the main teacher.  And she was a middle-aged lady, and she had zero control over the class.  And so once she turned it over to me, then the students didn't know what to think, but they thought that they would, they'd just try me out.  And so I managed to get total control of the class in a fairly short period of time.  And, and the, even the kids who were, couldn't come to class were, you know, was, was out a lot, you know, I would work with them and by calling their homes.  And, and for the real slow ones, you know, I remember giving one kid who didn't seem very engaged, you know, I explained to him that I wanted to--Mao Tse-tung's photograph was on the cover a Time magazine.  And I said you know, I want you to, to look at this, and then I want you to go away, and I want you to, to paint this guy's picture.  'Cause he would often sit in class drawing, so--and then I displayed his, his work along with everybody else's work.  But I'd do things like that.  And there were young ladies who were--I'm not sure how old you are in the tenth grade, but they were feeling their oats, and so they were doing their very best to, to charm me.  And so it was a, it was an interesting--not showing favoritism to them and managing them, not trying to not manage them special.  But a lot of the young ladies were faster than the men.  And so, the other art to teaching was to keep the quick learners and the, those kids who were more advanced, keep them challenged while bringing the slow kids along and doing that all in one class.  It was a, was a--and, and maintaining order at the same time.
Story_ID: 265809
Speaker 1: I think I would have enjoyed teaching, but I, that really wasn't what I wanted to do 'cause I- in high school [Monroe County Training School; J.F. Shields High School, Beatrice, Alabama], I read the autobiography of Ralph Bunche, and that led me into history and ultimately wanted to pursue a career as a [U.S.] Foreign Service officer.
Speaker 2: So you knew that?
Speaker 1: Hmm?
Speaker 2: At what time did you know you wanted to pursue a career as a Foreign Service officer?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: And what, what about that?  What about his, his story appealed to you?
Speaker 1: Well, he was a black guy.  He was an African American and he was a Negro, back then, and he was the, he had become the undersecretary of the United Nations [UN].  And he had won the Nobel Peace Prize for peace, Nobel Prize for peace and for settling the First Arab-Israeli War.  And it was the first autobiography I'd ever read.  And I was fascinated with his, with his experience because he was a black person other than a teacher, or doctor, or lawyer that I, that I, that I became aware of, I mean their whole life.  And, and so I, I read, I read his, his autobiography.  And the other book that made an impression was a book called My something [sic. 'Masters of Deceit'].  I can't--it, it was written by J. Edgar Hoover, and that helped to shape my thinking about the--I saw the world as the communists and the Western world, and that the communists were out to take over the world, and that, and they were evil.  And, and so, out of the Foreign Service, between the two, I concluded I wanted to be a Foreign Service officer.  One time I thought maybe I wanted to be a courier; I wanted to get into espionage, but then I thought that, you know, maybe the Foreign Service was the, the more civil thing to do, and that's why I majored in history.  I thought maybe I would go to law school one day because the state department [U.S. Department of State] was the government.  And I figured that, you know, you needed to get a law degree in order to do well in the government.  And that stayed with me through most of my college years, and then I discovered the Peace Corps. And actually one summer I ran into one of my--I moved off campus with, with--which was a big move in those days--with three of my friends, one from Richmond [Virginia], one from, who lived in Hampton [Virginia], grew up in Hampton, and another one from North Carolina.  Anyway, we rented the upstairs flat of this two-story house, and it was three bedrooms.  There were actually two and a half bedrooms.  And so we all coexisted fairly successfully.
Speaker 2: What year was that?
Speaker 1: That was in my, the middle of my junior year, so that would have been the beginning of '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Now, you know, there are several things I want to ask about.  I want to first start with Ralph Bunche, but there are some other things about just the environment of Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] before I get you graduated.  A lot of people don't even--I mean Ralph Bunche is one of these names, though they did have his celebration recently, but a lot of people don't know his name anymore.  He was very touted during the--I mean how had you become aware of him besides reading his autobiography?
Speaker 1: I, I really don't know what led me to his autobiography.  I don't know if it was a book that I just got out of the library--I think it was--in high school.  And I don't know if it was assigned reading, or I just stumbled upon it and decided to read it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I've subsequently learned, I mean I didn't remember it from the autobiography because it didn't mean much to me that he grew up on the east side of Detroit [Michigan].  And I began to see more literature on him.  Maybe it's through the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or, but not major.  There is a school in Detroit named after him.  And I think I've contributed money.  Our foundation [DaimlerChrysler Corporation Fund] has contributed money in his memory someplace mainly because of that.
Story_ID: 265810
Speaker 1: The other most important book that I-- that affected me early on was the, the sixth grade, sixth grade world geography.  And that book showed me that the world was much bigger than Tunnel Springs, Alabama, or Pensacola, Florida, or Alabama, and that there were people, that the world was big and that there were people of different colors and different cultures in the world.  And so it was like--and that the world was old, that the world had many civilizations.  And it kind of helped you put things in the, where you were in the context.  But I did other things when I was in high school [Monroe County Training School; J.F. Shields High School, Beatrice, Alabama] and junior high school [Rosenwald Junior High School, Tunnel Springs, Alabama].  Even a friend of mine, we, when the first Sputnik was launched into outer space, and I stole gun powder from home and shells, shotgun shells, and he did the same.  And we went to the encyclopedia and figured out how to put a rocket together, and so we built not a big rocket, but a small rocket.  We wanted to see if it would, how high it would go.  And we had all of the, I don't know if it was the eighth grade or ninth grade class come out and watch.  We, we must have done a, a dozen of 'em, had a dozen launches until we got things to go the right way.  So we decided to build a, build our own rocket.  So there are little things like that that--he went on to Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee Alabama].  He went on to private high school at Southern Normal [School, Brewton, Alabama], and then he went to Tuskegee around the time that I was going to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  And he died of a brain tumor or hemorrhage or some in college.  He was just that bright.  I mean he was so bright, a very bright kid.  But, and anyway, I--the, the, reading about [Ralph Bunche] settling the [First] Arab-Israeli War, which I didn't have a whole lot of contacts for that in a, in another part of the world in my geography lesson, and it's one of my favorite pastimes.  I began to put it all to, put, put things together.  I think another book I read, it's, this may have been a year in college--was 'The Ugly American' [Eugene Burdick and William Lederer]. I saw the movie 'The Ugly American' with Yul Brynner, or maybe that was 'My King and I' [sic. 'The King and I'].  No, that was 'My King and I.'  But the, but it, but, but I read the book, 'The Ugly American.'  And that was about Southeast Asia and how we behave.  And all of it just kind of kept coming together.  And so by the time I discovered the Peace Corps, I wanted to become a Peace Corps volunteer as preparatory to becoming a [U.S.] Foreign Service officer.  I thought it would make me a different Foreign Service officer if I had worked and lived with the people, and that I wasn't coming from an academic ivory tower, that it would be better foreign policy.  And I had issues with our foreign policy, as I became aware of it in my college courses, and decided that I thought our foreign policy could be better administered.  And so that led me to the Peace Corps.
Story_ID: 265811
Speaker 1: Who were the teachers that were influencing you there?  Did you find any mentors at Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]?  Not really?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This Greek organization that you said--I mean, I'm sorry, the, the--
Speaker 2: Fidi--
Speaker 1: Fi--
Speaker 2: Fidi Amici.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: F-I-D-I, Amici, A-M-I-C-I.
Speaker 1: And what is its origin?  I've never, I haven't heard of that one.
Speaker 2: Well, it's a, it's a Greek social club or social fraternity that's unique to Hampton.  It's no longer operating on Hampton's campus because of hazing or something like a number of Greek organizations and--but at the time--it, it goes back a ways--we had a, a bit of a reunion, at least of my--(unclear)--class last year.  And we went to North Carolina, Nags Head, and we, in the research we found a lot of older Fidis because there were lots of 'em the further back you went because there were no org- there was just a few.  And, and so, it was a fraternity, and we, we all pledged, and we all knew each other well, and did all of the kinds of things a fraternity would do.
Speaker 1: Can I ask, this is gonna sound like a naive question, but what, I mean when did that organization begin?  Do you--how--
Speaker 2: Fidis?
Speaker 1: Fidis, and why the lateness in the other fraternal, you know, organizations coming in.  I'm just trying to understand--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --its history.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I really don't know.  I think I probably did know at one time.  Fidis started way early in the school's history.  I don't know if it was in the '20s [1920s] or the '30s [1930s] or the, the teens.  And the Greek organizations are fairly young in the grand scheme of things.  The, the sororities and the, and most of them started in that period of, of, in the--
Speaker 1: In mid, mid (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) '40s [1940s] or '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm not sure what the genesis of them were, whether they were copying, you know, the majority fraternity.  I mean it was an alternative to--now you had a, enough--I'm not sure they all started on black campuses.  I think some of them may have started on--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on, on, on, on white campuses.
Story_ID: 265812
Speaker 1: Why did you say that experience was--you said something.  Was it, was it like a hazing type of experience, or what, what was--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was, it was every bit as, I mean it was a real tough initiation period.
Speaker 1: So what, like what was done to you?  What were some of the--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the paddling.  You run the line, and they--(unclear)--they had paddles, and they'd, they'd smack you. Or make you bend over and give you a number of, of--if you didn't do the right thing, if you didn't follow the instructions quite right, they'd blindfold you, and take you out and way away from campus [of Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] in a wooded area, and, and, and drop you off, put you out of the car and, and take off.  Sometimes if you were lucky, you weren't alone.  There were at least two of you together.  So then you had to figure out where you were or how to get back to campus, which it was in the middle of the night.  It was no small undertaking when you didn't have anything to work with.  You had no money; you hadn't, you didn't, there was, it was not a pleasant experience, and so what you, you had to not do was panic, I mean.  But when you got, when you signed up for the experience, you had to really mentally sign up for it.  And so, and that's what, that's why they, they're successful, because young, they're still young and not that you weren't independent of thought.  And I don't think I really felt that I needed it, but there were a number of my friends joining, and I thought that I would do the same thing.
Speaker 1: Would you, would you have done it over after you had done it?  Would you--
Speaker 2: No, because I'd--over the years, some of my, some of my friends joined other fraternities, I mean not only Fidi [Amici].  For, for example, one of my roommates, he, he pledged Kappa [Alpha Psi Fraternity].  Some of my other social club brothers pledged Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity].  They went in different ways.  But I never felt I needed to do that.  I mean I, I'd had that one experience, and that was enough.  Even after getting, becoming an adult, I mean since being in Detroit [Michigan], there have been either the Kappas, or the, the Ques [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], or the Alphas all saying look, you know, we'd like you to join our fraternity--and you know, not gonna be a lot of hazing or any of that stuff.  And I resisted because I, I just didn't need another group that I needed to, to consume my time.
Story_ID: 265813
Speaker 1: The other thing that I have a question about, what--you hear these stories about the '60s [1960s] and the black college campuses, and we think of it as a time of unrest.  But was the, the college administration, were they conservative [at Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, very much so.  They didn't--I'd say we had a conservative administration.  And I think the protesting, the march downtown, was something that the kids wanted to do, the student leaders wanted to do.  And, and it was a tough thing for the administration to, given what else was happening, to, to challenge you.  In terms of challenging the administration on how it was performing and services that it was providing was, you know, a pretty bold move on the part of the kids and, and for the administration to accept.  My recollection is, is that, the administration handled it with a certain amount of delicacy.  I mean the, the, you know, we weren't hosed, or we weren't chased.  But as I said, the, some of the kids who were leaders in that and just didn't, were not allowed to come back.  Today, I'd say that we're a fairly conservative administration.  I'm, I'm chair of the board.  And we've had some issues, and the administration is a pretty highly disciplined group, not only where it comes to the students but also the, the, the, the professors.  And I don't object to it because I think discipline is a good thing.  And I think out of that environment, well, at the same time, you need to allow a certain amount of academic freedom.  But that's not the most important thing.  The most important thing is that you are equipped to deal with your profession in life and also that you're taught values.  And without getting into religion, per se, I think it's, I see those things as equipping young people with this, the know-how to survive in, in a, in a very unforgiving world.
Story_ID: 265814
Speaker 1: Can you talk about anything else that helped form you during your Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] experience?
Speaker 2: No, I, I think it was a challenge from an academic standpoint, and yet I learned enough and to get through school.  I succeeded in not getting married, and I succeeded in not producing a kid, a child, which was, you know, all possibilities and where all things happening around me.  When I let it be known that I was going to join the American Peace Corps and that it paid forty-five bucks a month, then the young ladies who were, that I did spend some time with, all decided that they might best take their investment elsewhere.  Clearly, I wasn't quite making sense to them.  My parents [Jannie Hamilton Fountain and Willie Fountain] didn't, I mean they were happy to see me finish school, but they didn't really understand why I would go volunteer in another country.  So, and I certainly had my share of partying.  I, I managed to work almost full time in the cafeteria for seventy-five cents an hour almost for almost the full four years mainly washing dishes, so that wasn't a very glamorous job.  But I did that; I did my schoolwork.  And when you move off campus, the dean of men approached me and when we moved into the--I, "[HistoryMaker W. Frank] Fountain, I know you've, I know you moved off campus today," and he says, "I'm gonna keep my eye on you.  I just want you to know that.  You better take it really easy, buddy." (Laughter) So, and I thought oh, okay, Dean [Thomas E.] Hawkins.  And so, but the implication was, the assumption was back then is if you moved off campus, you were, it was just gonna be party time and nothing but party time.  But my, I think all of us graduated.  And one became, is a federal judge, is a judge in, in Richmond, Virginia.  And the other one is, became a lieutenant colonel in the [U.S.] Air Force or colonel or something, or in the [U.S.] Army.  And the other one is still alive and well, squandered his fortune on the high-tech stocks, playing, you know, daily, playing the market daily.  Anyway, having the Hampton experience is, or college experience, I think, certainly in a small setting like that, you, you know, it becomes a kind of an emotional thing for you.  That's why when I was asked to join the board I, you know, I couldn't say no, and that's why I'm involved today, so, and working to try to get my nieces and nephews to go to Hampton.
Story_ID: 265815
Speaker 1: Well, that's what I wanna ask you.  When you've talked to friends of yours who've gone, you know, who were during that period of time going to majority colleges or maybe state, you know, universities, how has their, how did their experience differ?  Or do you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I talked about it a little bit.  I, I know that the, a lot of my friends, you know, some with very bright kids, they really want them to go to a historically black college [HBCU], and many do, because they went to--they don't always try to push them to the schools that they went to.  They try to give them a choice, but they really do want them to go and have that experience.  And maybe, you know, kids, I think it's popular for them to figure that out on their own, except that in many cases, it's in the parents' financial best interest to send them to the, the local state school, 'cause it's much cheaper.  I guess Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] I think is twenty-five thousand dollars a year today.  And so it can be quite, quite expensive, but--private versus a public school--especially if a kid grew up in a suburban environment, to have that experience is, helps to root them into their, their heritage.  And it, it forces them to, or it provides an opportunity for them to get comfortable with their, their people.  And I think that that's, that's an important experience.  It doesn't mean that you don't, you know, I've never, it doesn't mean that you don't, you're not able to interact with the majority of the world.  Fortunately, I've never had, had that problem.  I think even kids coming into the corporate and business world, if they'd not spent, spent a lot of up close and personal time in a majority environment, they find it very difficult because they're in a minority.  And, but I don't know why, but I never--when I left Hampton and went to the Peace Corps I didn't, I didn't have that problem.
Story_ID: 265816
Speaker 1: So at the time you went into the Peace Corps, the Peace Corps was still relatively new, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It had been established in what year?
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961] or maybe--I think [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy made his speech in Ann Arbor [Michigan] at the University of Michigan.  Maybe it was in, maybe it was '60 [1960].  Maybe he was campaigning then.  I don't know.  Maybe he was--but it was the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: And who was in charge at that point when you went out?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Sargent Shriver.
Speaker 1: And what, what did it represent to you?  What--I mean you first heard about the Peace Corps in what year of college?  Was it--
Speaker 2: I guess I heard about it early in college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], but I didn't really focus on it until a friend of my roommate's had graduated a year earlier from Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and he was headed to India.  And we had a, kinda a marathon party after school was over, and I got to know him pretty well.  And, and then he was off to India, a guy named James Dawson.  His mother was the head of the early childhood education department at Hampton.  And I think that that's when I really began to focus on it, because now I've got one year to go, and I need to think about, you know, what I want to do.  And I interviewed for teaching positions in New York and Minnesota.  And I just thought that the Peace Corps thing fit neatly into my, my long-term aspiration, and the fact that it paid forty-five dollars a month was not an issue.  And, and I thought, you know, to go, well, to go to a foreign country and, and live for two years and the government, in effect, takes, you know, would be taking care of you, train you and take care of you, I thought was a, was a neat thing.  And so that's what I did, and I went through the Peace Corps training.  We started out with a hundred recruits, and about sixty-six of us survived the training.  Many were deselected for personality issues, so we had shrinks among the group, on the staff, who would interview you and talk to you from time to time.  And I had friends who were deselected because, because of their personality, personality.  So it was kind of an interesting environment.  And there were just a few African Americans in that group.
Speaker 1: Do you remember who the others were?
Speaker 2: By name?  It would take me awhile.
Story_ID: 265817
Speaker 1: Did you have any, like, places that you def- you wanted to go [as a Peace Corps volunteer]?  I mean did you end up with your, the assignment you wanted or--how--
Speaker 2: No, I wanted to go, to Thailand, and--
Speaker 1: And why Thailand?
Speaker 2: Well, in the '60s [1960s] and before I left Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], I could see that Ameri- the focus of American foreign policy was shifting towards South A- Southeast Asia.  At the time, Vietnam or the, the severity, the, the, the Vietnam was not a, was not a crisis at that point.  But, from what I knew, the Cold War, as a focal point, was shifting to Southeast Asia.  So as a student of, of foreign policy and foreign relations, I wanted to get close to that environment.  And we didn't--there was the Philippines, Thailand, and I don't think there were any other countries in that region that got you close to the, to the action.  So I wanted to get close to the--Thailand would have got me real close to the, to the action.  That was one reason.  The other reason is that, you know, I'd run across and return volunteers who had spent time in Thailand, and they talked about the beautiful women in Thailand.  So I thought, well, you know, that's kind of a bonus.  That, that would be, that would be another reason.  And quite frankly, fresh in my mind was having seen the movie, maybe the play of, maybe the book, 'The King and I.'  And I knew setting was, was there, and so from my standpoint that was a, a great reason to--also, the 'The Ugly American,' [Eugene Burdick and William Lederer] the book 'The Ugly American,' was, and the movie, the setting for it was in Southeast Asia.  So that's why, and I, I, I aimed--that was those, that was my first choice.  Somehow I ended up with India, but, you know, it was just South Asia, but different than being--and, and so the environment there is quite, quite different.
Story_ID: 265818
Speaker 1: How long does it take to, did it take then to get your assignment?  I mean you, you--
Speaker 2: Really it wasn't--I filled out an application like in, like January or February of '66 [1966].  And so within a couple of months I had an offer.  Maybe it was few months I had an offer, but I had an offer before I graduated, the invitation.  I, my recollection is it didn't take too long, maybe a couple of months.
Speaker 1: And it brought all of you together?
Speaker 2: At, later in the, in, in August, to the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri].  And we were living on campus at the University of Missouri, an old [U.S.] Army barracks.  And there we went for three months of training until early-December.  And then we were allowed to go back home for a short time and then head to New York [New York] to catch the, the flight to India.
Speaker 1: So how many of, of the sixty-six went to India?
Speaker 2: Sixty-six of a hundred--
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: --survived and went to India.
Speaker 1: So sixty-six of a hundred went to India?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: And of the sixty-six in the group--this was called India thirty-seven--forty-four of us survived the two years.
Speaker 1: Now, the area that you--(unclear)--you were in?
Speaker 2: West Bengal, which is the state in which Calcutta [Kolkata, West Bengal, India] is the largest city, and I was sixty miles northwest of Calcutta in the, in the district of Burdwan [Bardhaman, West Bengal, India], and near the town of Memari [West Bengal, India], and actually lived in the village of Bijragrum [ph.].
Speaker 1: So tell me what it was like.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a long story.  It was a village.  We had in-country training for a few, a couple, a few weeks north of Calcutta, kind of northeast of Calcutta on a Japanese rice research farm.  So once we finished that training, we, one Sunday, were all bused to our sites throughout the state.  And my, my partner and I were dropped off at the fork of the road near the town of Memari, about two miles away from our site.  So we had to get a rickshaw to take us from where we were dropped off.  We decided to eat something 'cause we had been traveling a good while.  So, eating at an Indian restaurant in a town like that, if you haven't, been gotten accustomed to it, was a unique experience.  And, and so we, we, we, and, and when we got off the bus, you know, the was a big march of people with flags, the red flag and a hammer and sickle. And it was the Communist Party.  So I thought, thi- this is a huge mistake (laughter), to be dropped off in the middle of a, of marching.  And I'm black, okay.  This guy is white.  And, and I'm thinking, I could probably pass for an Indian, but (laughter), this was--and, and the last thing we wanted them to know, that we were Americans.  In any case, it wasn't that big deal.  They didn't, they didn't bother us.  But we, we made our way to the village, and it was a, two rooms with a kind of a back porch, like, covered porch, with a little kitchen on one side and a bathroom on the other side, Indian-style of course, and a compound on the back with a wall.  And just beyond the wall were bamboo forests that was on the edge of an old ruin of some kind and the tin roof.  And we had two beds in the, the bedroom, and they were, they were, had mosquito nets.  And you know, you just had a little thin mat to sleep on and a pump, water pump in the backyard or just outside of the compound.  And, and it was near a, you know, a paved road was down the way, but you were truly in a village.  And so, there's no refrigeration; there's no running water, and so you had to figure out how to, how to survive and how to, you know, you had to shop every day for your food.  And eventually we got a cook, and the cook had to do the shopping and the food preparation.
Story_ID: 265819
Speaker 1: And my partner and I had to decide what it was we were gonna do every day.  And oh, after some months of that, our relationship be, became quite strained because his name was Bob Adams [ph.].  He, he had a, you know, one idea of what he thought we should do, and I had a different idea.  And so sometimes we would compromise, and sometimes we wouldn't.  And he was, he was a strong personality, and you know, while my personality may not be, not at first glance appear to be strong, you can make a big mistake if you assume that it's not a strong personality.  And so, eventually, he was removed from the--and reassigned, and then I spent the next year plus alone on the site.
Speaker 2: So what, what was your--are you saying that the Peace Corps allowed you to establish what you were going to accomplish with your village?
Speaker 1: Well, in many respects, we had a, we had a template of, you know, we were to teach farmers how to grow a highly yielding variety of rice that had just been researched and produced in the Philippines at the International Rice Research Farm [International Rice Research Institute] that the Ford Motor Com- Ford Foundation [New York, New York] funded, and it was called IR8, International Rice Research Eight [sic. International Rice Research Institute].  And it was to allow you to get three crops a year.  And the yield would, was considerably higher because they had engineered the, the, the, the stalk into a shorter stalk and sent the nutrients into the grain, a fat grain.  And so the grain was plentiful and bunches, and, but the stalk was short.  But it was, it could, if you had the right irrigation, you could grow three cr- three crops a year in the same soil.  So that's what we were supposed to teach farmers how to do, because Indira Gandhi had come to the country after a famine in India in the mid '60s [1960s] and asked for food and aid.  And he gave her wheat and the Peace Corps volunteers (laughter).
Speaker 2: You mean we, that's what we gave.  What--
Speaker 1: [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson gave In--
Speaker 2: Gave him.
Speaker 1: --Indira, Indira Gandhi that.  And, and so, we were trying to grow food, a high-yielding variety of food.
Story_ID: 265820
Speaker 1: Well you said his name was Bob James?
Speaker 2: Bob Adams [ph.] was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Adams, did he have, did he come from a background like you?  Had he had--
Speaker 2: No, he came from Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: So, how far were you from Tunnel Springs [Alabama] then?
Speaker 2: Well, I was India (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I'm talking about you had--how far were you from Tunnel Springs?  I mean how far was this experience from Tunnel Springs?  I'm not talking about--
Speaker 2: Oh, in India.
Speaker 1: --physical distance.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: I'm talking about--
Speaker 2: Well, in a sense, it was not that far.  It, my main mission [as a Peace Corps volunteer] was to teach farmers how to grow crops.  In Tunnel Springs I grew cotton, and corn, and sugar cane, and sweet potatoes, and I cultivated most things; and I personally cultivated most things.  I, I mean I, it wasn't, you know, my early--after a while you learn how to plant seed and how to take care of all of that.  So I was more comfortable in the experience and in the role that we were supposed to play more so than 90 percent of, of my--there were a few kids from farms, but they were from different kind, a different kind of farm.  Where you had big tractors and, and things like that.  Me, on the other hand, I plowed a mule, a horse, and was accustomed to farming small plots of land, which was the nature of the beast for rice paddies and things like that.  So, it was, in many respects, I was quite comfortable with the rural environment.  But it was, people spoke a different language, and it was quite a, you know, the, you know, you didn't have the infrastructure of support that you would have had.  So you were, you were a million miles away on the, on the other hand.  And yet you could go out at night, just as I did in Tunnel Springs, and you could see the Big Dipper and you could see the Evening Star, and you could see those things.  So, while you were far away, you really weren't.
Story_ID: 265821
Speaker 1: But I was operating in a different culture.  This is my first job out, after college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], and I was trying to get things done, whether it was negotiating with the Indian government for fertilizer or dealing with the bureaucratic maze.  I was a young black kid who was, or strange-looking kid that, that was trying to tell the elders what to do with their livelihood.  And so I, as a volunteer following the program, I probably was the most successful volunteer of the sixty-six [Peace Corps volunteers].  There was one other volunteer who succeeded in convincing farmers to grow rice according to the plan, but none, no one came near the yields that I got.  I got the yields that we were supposed to get.  And I did that I guess by establishing the relationship with the farmers in a way that, for whatever reason, they listened to me and, and, and agreed to risk growing this crop.  They didn't really like the, the, the crop because it, they used thatch.  The taller the thatch, the stem, they used that for thatching roofs.  So the short stuff was not (laughter) saying much there.  And the culture said that they like fine rice; you know, that's the, that's what they serve at weddings.  Me, I, I convinced them that they should sell the rice to the government because they had to sell a certain percentage of their per, per, produced to the government.  They couldn't sell it all on the black market, which is, which is outside of government-controlled pricing.  The gov- government theoretically controlled the pricing of all of the rice and food stuff.  But I said sell them that.  It's heavy.  You get the same price for heavy, thick rice as you get for fine rice.  Or, it turned out that the, the tribal people, who worked the fields liked it because they thought it stayed with them longer, so you use it to feed them, but grow some of my rice (laughter).  And so they did, and they were quite proud of the yield that they'd got.  'Cause I actually got out in the, in the field, and, and I could plow a bullock just as well as I could plow a, a horse, once you get the, the sounds, once you get the--you can tell 'em to go right, and left, and slow, and start, and all that stuff, and the turn, but there weren't many volunteers who could do that or would do that.  So, I, as a result of that, was one of two volunteers selected to stay behind after the group headed off on the train to New Delhi [Delhi, India] and then back to the U.S. at the end of the two years to select sites for the volunteers coming in, the, the succeeding group.  And my friend and I, we put together a plan that said that we claimed we could produ- reduce the attrition by half.  This government spent ten thousand dollars training volunteers.  So we thought, you know, what a waste if the volunteers don't serve the full term.  So we could cut that in half if you sent us to train volunteers in the training program, and come back to India with them for three months, and we could--and the Peace Corps bought it, at least they bought for a time.  And I did the training in California.  And while we were in training, they first said well, we'll only let one of you guys go back.  So we went to a bar and flipped a coin, and I lost.  And then a week or so later, they came back and says "Well, we're gonna cut the whole thing out."
Story_ID: 269783
Speaker 1: I was thinking how young, you know, dropped off, I mean when you think about it, that it's [Peace Corps] a government program.  I mean just--
Speaker 2: Twenty-two years old, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I mean, and there could be a lot of bad things that could happen--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: --you know, but you don't always, I mean you hear about them some in the news--
Speaker 2: Oh no, we, we did have, we had accidents.  We, we had, it was not uncommon to hear that a volunteer had, you know, got killed in an accident or in some way.  So it was not a--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, it was not a completely safe.  I mean, you know, I got into some scrapes on the train, you know, where there were no one around but me, and the train is stopping in these little villages, you know, taking a bus from the bottom of the Himalayas, going up to Kathmandu [Nepal].  I mean there were, there were, or getting crushed to death in Calcutta [Kolkata, West Bengal, India] getting on a train because there are so many people.  There're all kinds of, were all kinds of dangers walking through a field of, you know, of bamboo forests, where there were krait snakes, you know.  There were all these little tie, tiny venomous snakes, could wipe you out.
Speaker 1: Did you learn some about the government then?  Did you, or, or politically--
Speaker 2: In the Indian government?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And what did you learn, or what was the government like at that point?  What--
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: --were still talking, you know, late, mid to late--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was democracy, essentially.  West Bengal [India] was, was more radical than most states.  You know, West Bengal, Bengal had been divided when the British pulled out.  Part of the Bengal went to the Muslims and was part of Pakistan, and the other part was Part of India.  That's why they call it West Bengal.  Today it's the, it's Bangladesh because they, in fact, succeeded [sic. seceded] from Pakistan in one of the wars with India.  And so, the, but I had to work with the Indian government to get a lot of things done.  Well, there was the Congress Party [Indian National Congress], the dominant party, and then there was the Communist Party [of India] and a number of other parties within India.  And so, and India is essentially a democracy, still, the caste system still exists, although I think the current prime minister is a former--what I think, somebody corrected me that he was not an untouchable, but there have been untouchable ministers and, and people to reach senior levels.  There have been women who, who have reached--Indira Gandhi, right out of the, right out of the gate, after Prime Minister [Jawaharlal] Nehru, and she became prime minister a number of times and then her kids.  It's that kind of a society, but, but it's a people that if you, on any argument you could have a ton of people on one side and a ton of people on the other side.  They like to debate and, and argue, so.  But, I think that I had a closer relationship than, than my partner [Bob Adams (ph.)] did to the people because of my color, on the one hand.  On the other hand, I think that he received more outward deference than I did.
Story_ID: 269784
Speaker 1: What happened with the [U.S.] Foreign Service, and how did Wharton [School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] come about?
Speaker 2: Well, while it ended--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you, you, you're talking--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I, we were in a bar--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: But while I was in India, I, I, I got to know the, some of the cons, some of the, the, consulate people in, in New- in Calcutta [Kolkata, West Bengal, India] and some of the embassy people in, in, in New Delhi [Delhi, India].  And in my conversations with them about their careers, one of the questions that I asked them was to what extent did they aspire to be the, the ambassador to India?  And they s- that was the top job.  And I thought, well, you ought to be, if you're here, then and that's, that's--you need to try to become an ambassador.  So they said no don't.  The, we, we're career Foreign Service officers, so the president appoints the ambassadors.  And I said well, what's--get yourself appointed.  And they said well, isn't that simple.  You need to be a major contributor to the president's party, and they have to really like you in, in order to--you gotta give them, help support them with money, so it takes a lot of resources.  So I said well, how much money?  And they said well, you know, it depends.  So I thought, well, I really didn't want to get into a profession.  Whatever it was, if I couldn't aspire to the top, and I and I wasn't talking about becoming secretary of state, although I remembered that Ralph Bunche was undersecretary of state and--no, he was undersecretary [general] of the UN [United Nations].  But [President Harry S.] Truman made him an offer, offered to get, to appoint him assistant secretary of state, and he turned it down.  He wanted to stay at the UN.  So, I thought, I didn't want to get into a career where I couldn't progress.  So, later, so when I left the Peace Corps, on my exit from the Peace Corps I was still classified as 1A, and I could have been drafted.  And I decided that if I was likely to be drafted no matter what, that maybe I should just apply for a job in Vietnam.  And so I applied for a job with USAID [United States Agency for International Development] to be a rural pacification officer, usually a civilian paired with a, like a colonel, a military person.  And the two of you would be responsible for developing the district or the province or whatever while the [Vietnam] War was going on.  But you were supposed to be a part of economic development, teaching.  So, I thought that that was real cool because it was, it paid ten thousand [dollars] a year.  And if I was gonna go, I thought I ought to be--you know this was--I could learn something and get paid if I was shot at.  And, but, and so, I was accepted, received a favorable letter from the USAID, but I had to just go to some interviews once I got back.  And I did do that, and I met with a guy who had been an ex-colonel.  And he said that they were gonna send me--they wanted people to go to the Montagnard.  This is a tribal people in the northwest corner of, most corner of Vietnam, not too far from the Ho Chi Minh Trail.  And I says, "Well, you know, that's pretty close to the trail."  I said, "Am I gonna be armed?  Or, I mean what kind of security is there?"  He says "Well, we'll issue you a sidearm."  And I said "Well, I thought Americans, civilians, weren't supposed to carry weapons."  And he said "Well, yeah, that's true" (laughter).  So this was pretty, pretty loose.  And I said, "Well, what language am I going to learn?  Am I going to learn the tribal language?"  He said, "No, we'll teach you Vietnamese."  I said, "Well, Vietnamese, depending on where they're from, if they, they're from the city, I mean the people won't even, the Vietnamese people up in that part of the world won't understand what I'm saying," 'cause I knew my experience with learning Bengali.  And so I concluded that that was as far away from Vietnam--from Saigon [Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam]--as you could get without leaving Vietnam, and so I decided I didn't want to do that.
Story_ID: 269785
Speaker 1: And then I went to look for a job in [Washington] D.C., and I found a, a job.  It was a firm [TransCentury Corporation, Washington, D.C.], a kind of a headhunting firm founded by a guy named Dick Irish, who was a former Peace Corps director [sic.] someplace.  And he had opened up this business finding Peace Corps, returned Peace Corps volunteers jobs.  And so, eventually he got me a job with a, a firm of consulting economists.  They were looking for somebody to go to, they were looking for somebody to go to Mississippi to work the farm co-ops.  And so they thought because I was from Alabama I was (laughter) perfect for the job.  Besides, in my resume I talked about working with farm co-ops in India.  So I got the job but never went to Mississippi to work on that project, but I did ultimately go down in a year or so later to--the firm got a contribution to help Mayor Charles Evers of Fayette, Mississippi, one of the first black elected mayors of the, in the South, in a place called Fayette, Mississippi, not too far, just north of Natchez [Mississippi].  And so I went down there for a time, and developed a kind of a document that analyzed the, the natural assets of the place and, and helped the mayor re- try to recruit businesses to set up to move into the industrial park there, but in any case, did a lot of other things while I was with the firm.  And they had a small group of eclectic professionals working on lots of things, and I went into that group.  And the rest of them were seasoned economists.  And I did that for almost three years and then--
Speaker 2: So that's like from nineteen--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: ---that's from March of '69 [1969] to August of '71 [1971].  And so it was working on the Fayette, Mississippi project that I concluded that I should go--forget about a law degree and go and get a, what I discovered, something called the M.B.A., because I wanted more knowledge about business.  And so that, I figured I could make money in business maybe eventually have enough money to contribute to a party and then become an ambassador.
Story_ID: 269786
Speaker 1: So your interest is still in, in, in foreign affairs at this point.
Speaker 2: I still have an interest in foreign affairs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, but I'm saying at that point.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, very much so.
Speaker 1: At that point, you, you went--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --you still had very much, had an interest.  And that, and so, how--and this is an interesting period of time too that you're talking about going to business school because this is the, historically, this is the move of--you know, you were the sort of the first wave, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Of African Americans--
Speaker 2: Pretty close--
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, going to, to a, an Ivy League business school was, was not a--but I'd become convinced that there weren't--I didn't know many black people who knew much about business or were in business.
Speaker 1: You were convinced at that point (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean I, in my interactions with people, you know, the business that I knew in undergrad was, was accounting.  And, but business, I mean really big business was something that I had no concept of until I got into this project, and we began to talk about--well, I experienced some of it in the Peace Corps because it was a cottage industry, a cottage business, where they made table mats; they made handicrafts; they made special paper, exotic paper and those kinds of things.  And so, as part of my--in, instead of--I wasn't always teaching and pursing my agriculture.  I thought I'd help these people market their goods to other parts of th- the country.  And so I pulled in volunteers that I knew had majored in, in marketing and ought to have known something.  So I assembled a group to say okay, here's this co-op.  What, you know, how can we come up with a plan to get them to, the, to, to expand their markets?  So I was thinking big, maybe beyond the, beyond India.  Anyway, that was marketing.  And I also had a business experience when I was a teenager.  I turned fifteen and I went to live with my uncle in Cleveland [Ohio] for the summer.  And I was very skinny and looked younger than I was.  And you know, nobody wanted to hire me.  So he ran across this ad in the paper.  I don't know if you've ever heard of [J.R.] Watkins [Medical Company] products.  Well, it's, you know, there's vanilla, black pepper, something that is sold door-to-door in rural areas of the country.  And it's, it started, I don't know, in the early, the early 1900s.
Speaker 1: And this, food products?
Speaker 2: No, it's--
Speaker 1: Okay, you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, vanilla flavor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --black pepper, shamp--
Speaker 1: Spices--
Speaker 2: --spices, shampoo, some, it was all, it was a, in my opinion it was a forerunner to Amway.
Speaker 1: Was he black, Watkins?
Speaker 2: No, no, this was a, there, there was a, a, a, an office in Cleveland 'cause they were, we had them in Alabama, and, and they would come by; a car would come by.  And my mother [Jannie Hamilton Fountain] would buy pepper or vanilla or certain things from the, from these people.  And so it was a similar phenomenon in Cleveland where I went door-to-door.  And I hated it because I was a shy kid from Alabama, but I, by the time I left the summer, I had, the business was strong enough for my uncle to keep it, 'cause all he had to do was service my customers, and you could make pretty good money.  'Cause a bottle of vanilla would cost a da- a dollar, cost me fifty cents.  It retailed for a dollar.  So I bought my first suit in Cleveland at Bond's Clothing Store [Bond Clothing Company, Cleveland, Ohio].  So that was my first business experience.  I didn't know it at the time, but that was my first really business experience.  I didn't really understand the economics of, of the crops that I tilled yet, although --in Alabama, but there were some economics there.
Story_ID: 269787
Speaker 1: But anyway, I didn't know many people in business.  And I could see that if blacks were going to succeed in this country, that they needed to really get a handle on what business was all about and I mean big business.  And when we look, went looking for companies to locate in the industrial park, you know, you had to be talking their language and what they were looking for.  And so, a few other things happened, and I decided that it was gonna be business, not economics, not the people I was hanging out with, these consulting economists, not a law degree and then the state department [U.S. Department of State] or state department and law; that really what I ought to do is, is, is go and pursue this business thing, and that led me to [University of Pennsylvania] Wharton [School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: But how did you get led to Wharton is what--I mean you say you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I first decided I wanted an M- I wanted this business degree; I wanted to learn a, about it.  And then I began to inquire as to where could you get a good education in business, and so that led me to, I heard Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  There were some schools in [Washington] D.C., but it was my thinking that you needed to get, to go to the best school, the best schools, one of the best schools.  And I picked Whar- Wharton to focus on because the head [Dick Irish] of the firm, of the consulting firm [TransCentury Corporation, Washington, D.C.], was a Wharton--had taught at Wharton and was a Wharton grad, as well as having gotten his, his, I think he got his Ph.D.  But then he got a law degree as well, his Ph.D. in economics, but he had a law degree from Georgetown [University, Washington D.C.].  So I figured that if I needed to get into a school, that if I had any difficulty, that he could help me get in.  That was my thinking.  But I didn't need him.  I was, I, I had an offer.  I, I had been accepted in the school when he found out about it, and he didn't--he came down to my office and chewed me out for not telling him.  And then he went and wrote a letter of recommendation anyway.  So, I had put this--he was the third man in, in [Hubert] Humphrey's campaign.  He was the--there was Larry O'Brien, and then there as Bob Nathan, so he was a big Democratic Party guy.  So, if I had been interested in politics, you know, that would have been a relationship.  They expected me to come back to the firm after, after I graduated from Wharton.  But I thought I wanted to go and apply to this M.B.A.  They said you could go forth and run a Fortune 500 company, so that's what I was, that's what I was prepared to do.
Story_ID: 269788
Speaker 1: How many blacks were in your class [at Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I don't know, maybe thirty-five, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how did you adjust to the curriculum that was there?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Very painfully, because understand that I had a, a history in political science undergrad.  I had been out of school now for five years.  And to go back at that point was one, getting in, passing the ATGSB [Admission Test for Graduate Study in Business], and today it's called the GMAT, and, and scoring high enough to get in, and then--so, what they did was put me in something called remedial math.  And it was calculus; it was heavy duty calculus.  So, I learned enough of it--because most of the finance courses were taught with huge equations around the room.  I mean they'd do one chalk board, and then they'd continue on the other side, so you had to kind of keep--have some idea of what the heck was going on.  Somehow I, I made it through all of that.  But it was intense.  It was a question of endurance.  And you know, I had stats.  I had all kinds of, had a very strong quantitative base to it all.  But again, I, I managed to get through.
Speaker 1: So you, this is once again where you're coming from behind, and you, and you make it.  I mean that this, this was, this had been your college experience at Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], and you did the same thing here but in a majority school.
Story_ID: 269789
Speaker 1: So you, you say you want, you come out wanting to run a Fortune 500.  Is that--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm just saying that that's the nature of the curriculum and the courses.  And you, you're, you're taught that you're, you, you're getting an elite education, and therefore you're supposed to go do elite things.  And, and I rationalized my--well, I had a summer intern job at General Motors' treasurer's office in New York [New York] between years at Wharton [School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and that's how I got interested in the auto business.  And even though a lot of my friends, even back at the firms counseled me not to go into the auto business because it was cyclical, and it was beginning to be regulated, and it was going to be highly regulated they felt.  And, and so the combination of those things would not make for a good career environment.  And they were essentially correct (laughter).
Speaker 1: On one side, on the regulated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, and the cyclical side as well.  I mean we, it's a very cyclical business, and it's feast or famine.  And so, you know, I've survived it all, but it's been a, a challenging environment.  Maybe had I been at another company, it would have been a boring environment; I don't know.  But, you know, you have these forks in the road, and you--and I--GM [General Motors Corporation, Detroit, Michigan] made me an offer at the end of the summer, and I chose not to go back to GM.  I guess I was drawn towards the underdog.  Chrysler [Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan] was the slow guy among the big three.  So, and the other factor was that Chrysler had more, a higher percentage of its facilities north of the Mason-Dixon Line than GM or Ford [Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan], and which meant that they hired more black people 'cause they had lots of facilities in and around Detroit [Michigan]. Proportionately they had more black people than, in their employee base, than the other companies.  And I thought, well, you know, that's an environment that should suggest that there would be opportunities for an African American in management.  So that was kind of my rationale.
Story_ID: 269790
Speaker 1: Were you very aware of sort of the world around you at this point?  And the reason I'm asking this question is that this early '70s [1970s], you know, there's a lot of optimism occurring about be- blacks being able to move into the mainstream and into corporate America, you know.  And I think it was around that--I think actually Black Enterprise magazine got started, you know, in the early (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In, in 1970, '71 [1971]--
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: --[HistoryMaker] Earl [G.] Graves [Sr.].
Speaker 1: --that's, that's Earl, right, right.  So there's, but you know, you're the sort of, I don't want to say the first crop, but you know, a fresh, young hotshot, M.B.A.s, you know, descending upon the market, and, and right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But what, what's the pause?
Speaker 2: Well, I think there were--my first introduction to business was with a consulting firm [TransCentury Corporation, Washington, D.C.].  And, and consulting is a business, and you compete in the consulting business.  And I was probably one of very few blacks in any of the major consulting firms, at the time.  I didn't fully comprehend that, but that was the case.  The, but yes, Wharton [School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], there were a couple of classes ahead of mine that were similar in size.  And we all went forth.  And I would say if you would compare the success of the African Americans graduating in that period in business to those who came ten years later, there's a dramatic difference in terms of the opportunities that were open to them versus when they-- when we came through.  And if you were to compare the early '80s [1980s] to the early '90s [1990s], there would be another major increment.  If you would compare the early '90s [1990s] to the early 2000s, you would find some retrogression in, in the whole arena.  So, and the, and the, the majority of Wharton grads go to Wall Street.  They go to financial institutions, mostly in New York [New York].  The investment banks only hired a very, very few in the early '70s [1970s].  They hired lots more in the early '80s [1980s].  Now, grant you, most of them did and still do go into public finance; this is as opposed to corporate finance.  But in any case, I would say that a lot of my classmates did not do well in business, did not stay in business, and dropped out of the corporate banking world.
Speaker 1: And why was that?
Speaker 2: Because I think it was not a friend environment.  It was following the riots of the late '60s [1960s].  There was, you know the, maybe the CEOs, they thought, you know, we needed to loosen up our policy, and we needed to recruit some.  But just turning them a loose into the environment meant that they weren't likely to survive long-term because the competition in the, in the, in the business world and the corporate environment, as you try to navigate your way up the ladder, is, is very, very tough.
Story_ID: 265830
Speaker 1: You know, you were just starting to talk about very few, you said very few made it; very few stayed of the gr--.  So do you know percentages?
Speaker 2: I really don't.  I just kind of know it anecdotally.  I think that those that succeeded, succeeded very well.
Speaker 1: Are you talking about within Wharton [School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the Wharton cla--
Speaker 2: The Wharton class.
Speaker 1: So you give us some examples who they are?
Speaker 2: Examples of people--
Speaker 1: People, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --who did not succeed?
Speaker 1: No, people who did.
Speaker 2: Oh, people who did.  Well, there's a, a lady named Freda Payne [sic. Freda Bass], I think it is.  She's with Exxon.  I think she's, was with ExxonMobil, and I think she became treasurer or, treasurer is what I remember.  Maybe I got her--don't have her last name quite right, but she did very well.  And there are some that are, have investment banks, or have their own investment firm, not some, but I know one or two.  And I'm now thinking of people from that era, from you know, within a--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --range of years there.  A guy named Milton Irvin did well in invest, investment banking, but caught up in all of the mergers and combinations.  [HistoryMaker] Larry Bailey became a partner at a major, a couple of major accounting firms, and Larry is--Milton is one of the Wharton boards, and Larry is also on one of the Wharton boards.  We were part of the nucleus that raised the money for the endowed chair [Whitney M. Young, Jr. Memorial Chair] at Wharton in the name of Whitney Young, and I was leader of that effort.  So there are some success stories.  There are some other--I'm the only--I'm the first African [American] Wharton grad to serve on the board, Wharton Board of Overseers.  But there's a nucleus of us who are, you know, the, the real backbone or the leadership of the alumni, the black alumni, in support of the school.
Story_ID: 265831
Speaker 1: But I think that, you know, as, as blacks begin to control governmental units around the country, who also had a need to issue debt and raise capital in the capital markets, they look for black faces to show up when someone came calling.  And so that helped spur the demand in the investment banking business.  On the treasurer's side, I used to say, I bec- I was assistant treasurer for a few years as responsible for our relations with Wall Street, issuing deck, raising equity and that kind of thing.  And so, I would travel to the Morgan Stanleys [Morgan Stanley, New York, New York] and the, and the First Bostons [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York], and the Salomon Brothers [New York, New York], and a lot of the old names that no longer exist.
Speaker 2: Chase [Manhattan Corporation; JPMorgan Chase, New York, New York], right.  Chase was (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but investments banks, as well as banks.  And you know, it, it was tough to find a, a black face in the, in the crowd.  It just didn't exist.  And I always said to the, the blacks that I would try to recruit from Wharton [School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to come to the come company that, you know, Wall Street isn't the--unless there are some treasurers in the corporate world that are black, then the investment banks will, won't have you in the corporate finance area.  They used to go find interns and secretaries and bring them to dinner to humor me.  But the--so I think the, the--and now, of course, you can see that we have a half-dozen black CEOs of major companies.  And whether it's Ken Chenault at American Express or Stanley O'Neal at Merrill Lynch [& Co., Inc., New York, New York].  We had Frank Raines at Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association].  And we, we've got [HistoryMaker] Richard Parsons at Time Warner [Inc.].  Even today, the interim CEO of, of Boeing Aircraft Company [Boeing Company] is a brother who moved up from CFO. And I think you'll see, going forward, again, an exponential increase.  I'm a member of a group called the Executive Leadership Council.  And when I joined in 19- early 1988, there were, I don't know, thirty-five of us, and today it's a group of well north of 250, maybe three hundred.  And so, we just had a, a brother who became head of, the CEO of, of Darden, Darden Foods [sic. Darden Restaurants], which--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --owns a chain of restaurants.  And I remember him when he was relatively new.  He was the treasurer I think.  But I watched a number of our--Ann Fudge, who's, who runs the, you know, at a, ran Kraft [General] Foods [Kraft Foods Group, Inc.], but is with this Young & Rubicam [Brands; Y&R]. But, you're gonna see a lot of casualties because a CEO's lifespan is not (laughter), not secured and not that long.
Story_ID: 265832
Speaker 1: We are moving into businesses, and I think the biggest challenge now is for, for--we need more, we need more people who earn billions, I mean who are, become billionaires, and I mean control billions of dollars, not to consume that kind of money, but to, to be able to affect our public policy agendas.  We people who control enough resources and are willing to part with those resources to create charitable foundations, to address a lot of, of our problems; and we need, we need to be able to influence the outcome of elections in a serious way.  And at the end of the day, it's going to be money and organization that will allow that to happen.  I no longer have a great deal of--I'm optimistic about a number of the civil rights institutions getting certain things done, I think.  From a business prospective, we need, we need this kind of, of economic and financial power.
Speaker 2: And do you see that being done on the, the, within corporate America or outside?  Or could it--when you said we need bill- to control billions, I didn't know if you meant that that was being done from an entrepreneurial standpoint--
Speaker 1: I think, I think that it's most likely, it's, it's possible, most possible from an entrepreneurial standpoint.  I think that being in the right-- being a CEO of a major Fortune 50 company does mean that you can amass a lot of wealth.  You, you're not likely to become a billionaire, but you very well could become a centimillionaire, meaning worth a hundred million plus.  So, you know, before the Enrons [Enron Corporation] of the world, certainly that was, that was possible.  And today there's a big damper on executive compensation.  But, but no, I think you can make billions, and I think you can do quite well and not just as a, a corporate CEO.  But you need to, you need to be a part of--you know, leverage buyouts; you, you need to par- be a part of, of acquisitions, and all that can be done--and you need to participate in the wealth.  But, but smaller businesses is really where you're gonna make, make a lot of money.
Story_ID: 265833
Speaker 1: And you might not have had that, that viewpoint back in 1973 when you graduated [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Well, when I graduated, I, I think I got pretty much what I went for.  I didn't get all that I went for because you can only learn so much about business in two years, no matter what school you're at.  And then, because I was competing with, at that school, I was competing with, with kids, classmates who had already been in business and, or kids who had a, a stock portfolio since they were teenagers and managing their own portfolios.  So, I mean I, I didn't, I didn't even know about a checkbook until later in life.  So, but I, I had an understanding.  I had a glimpse of what the business world, the big business world was all about.  And part of my thinking back in those days was that I had friends who were considered revolutionaries, who were, who were either in organizations similar to the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] or at least pretending to be but, but had decided that, that they needed to really operate outside of the system.  And I felt that I was not made of that kind of personality, that, that I also felt that if there was going to be revolution of some kind, that there needed to be people on the inside.  And that's the way, part of the way I projected my--aside from the economic forces are just so tremendously powerful, that unless you really understand what that is all about, controlling your destiny and influencing resources is, you know, it's not, it's not the beyond the realm of possibility that, that I might have influenced the location of a billion dollar facility in and urban area or in the City of Detroit [Michigan], that might have gone to a green field someplace in Indiana or far away from an urban environment.  And so an urban environment is always code name for, you know, a black population.  So I think that, that power is not often viewed or even understood, stood or seen, but it's something that, assuming that you're properly positioned, you could influence, you know, assuming it's top of mind, you can have a major impact on the lives of people and they not necessarily know it and not anyone necessarily know, would know it.  But that isn't what's the most important at the end of the day.  It's important for you to know it.  So, I would say that if I look back on my career, that I've, that I've, I've been lucky enough to not only have a successful career in finance, which is what I majored in at, at Wharton, and learned about a major business and industry, but one that had major influences on the African American community, and so, and been lucky enough for the last ten years to represent the company [DaimlerChrysler; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan] externally, and while doing that, being also able to control a significant chunk of resources and influence their direction.
Story_ID: 265834
Speaker 1: Well you mentioned something, I think very important, in that you were in a position, but you also had the mindset.  But we'll go back to that.  I want to just go back to you coming here.  And I you've talked about this in at least the things that I wrote.  But you were, you formed this group with a group of people.  And can you talk about that and, and why that was sort of done?  And, and actually, you know, you end up getting all these promotions, like twelve promotions in thirteen years or something like that.  You were sort of on a, you know, a, well, not sort of; you were sort of on a fast track.  But here you are, you're, you know you've, you say you strategically searched out Chrysler [Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan], you know, for the reasons you talked about.  You come in, and I, how soon did this group sort of--
Speaker 2: Well, that really was maybe within four years, within four or five years, '73 [1973] to '78 [1978], so I would say about four or five years.  But I, it, the, the way it occurred to me was that the, was a guy who was, who became president of the company, and I read his background with a certain amount of fascination; I mean I was curious.  Just how did he--he wasn't a very old guy.  He was a fairly young person.  And I wanted to understand how he--what his, his experiences had been, where did he, where did he go, and how did he get there, and, and his education background and all of those things.  And I, I, I, I did what analysis I could on that, and got what information I could get, and concluded that that wasn't in the cards for me, that track, I didn't think.  And so, he had a mentor, and he had people who put him on the track that he was on.  And so I needed to figure out how to get on a (laughter) track.  And so, I was not likely to have someone in a very powerful position to, to do that 'cause I didn't know anyone in a very powerful position.  So I thought that there was power in leveraging knowledge and information and collaboration among a, a group of people that were connected.  And so that's when I, that was the reason I formed the group.  And, and we operated very effectively for several years, not a long time, but, but in a, in a very critical part of our, our career where we were just entering the middle management ranks, the middle management executive ranks.
Story_ID: 265835
Speaker 1: Can you talk about some of your techniques?  I mean what the group employed, like going to the right restaurants and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we got together on, on, once a month.  And we picked a very nice restaurant.  And we would spend a couple of hours together, often without a formal agenda, but usually each of us had some issue that we wanted to talk about.  But the conversation would range from everything from dress--if there was somebody in the group that we didn't think was, you know, dressing the part, we would talk about them--to what promotions, what openings were in what, what areas within the company [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan] and within finance, and, and how we would all--we would ca- compare notes and share what, what was happening in our part of the company.  And that knowledge is extremely important and powerful when you know what's happening around you, and, and especially when viewed through the prism of, of, of looking for opportunities for those of us.  And, and a few years later, one of the people left finance and went into sales and marketing.  And they were looking for a person to fill the slot, and so he put my name in the hopper.  And I did the interview, and I got the job, but he had already set the stage.
Story_ID: 265836
Speaker 1: And so what we found is that it's very powerful if, if, if in your area of comfort and familiarity, if, if you see an opportunity, it often takes just a, a feather, you know, to deflect two tons of, of, of, of opportunity.  And, and so we did that very well for each other, and we all ended up in the same--when the revolution came, the revolution was really [Lee] Iacocca coming to take the reins of the company [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan].  He brought in, you know finance, new finance leadership, new leadership in lots of positions.  And so, it was a sinking boat and that we were on of leadership and kind of the old regime--
Speaker 2: Until he came?
Speaker 1: --in fin, finance, after he came.  And there was a new blood coming in.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so you needed to know when to get off the, the, that boat and onto the new boat.  And, and we did that, and most of us ended up in the same (laughter), the same department.
Speaker 2: Most of the, this group?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now, how many, how large was the group, [HistoryMaker W.] Frank [Fountain]?
Speaker 1: About seven, six--
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: --or seven at the--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --at the, at, at its peak.
Speaker 2: And the racial composition of the group?
Speaker 1: Oh, they were all white males and--
Speaker 2: All white males except you?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Huh, and how did you, so were you the token member of the group?
Speaker 1: Well, keep in mind, I organized the group.
Speaker 2: This is, but that, see, this is what--
Speaker 1: The group was my idea.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I'm just saying, this is sort of an interesting thing.  Were there, how many Wharton [School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] grads were there?
Speaker 1: None.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So there was a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] grad who just retired as a senior vice president.  There was a vice president who is still here in a pretty critical position in the company.  I think we're it.
Speaker 2: Three of you left?
Speaker 1: Well, until the end of the year.  One left at the end of the year.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: There were would been three of us--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --who would have survived the, the recent change.  And, and so now there are two of us from that particular group.  But all of the members did, most of the members of the group did well.  I think one or two left the company.
Story_ID: 265837
Speaker 1: But, in any case, that simply was a help along the way, and I was lucky enough to, to develop enough mentors, not in the classic sense, not in the, as we think of mentors today.  But these were people that--well, my philosophy was that if you worked, if you worked, if you did your job very well, you wanted to do it well enough that people would want you to work for them again and would recommend you through other people.  And so once you established kind of a solid base reputation along those lines, you really didn't have to work.  Jobs came to you, and opportunities came to you.  You had created a demand, a demand for your talents, because when you're looking for somebody to fill an opening, and you want somebody that, one, you can, you feel that can get the job done and that you can communicate with, et cetera.  And so you go looking for those kinds of people, and my challenge was to become one of those kinds of people.  So, you know, using other, I wouldn't call 'em bag of tricks, but, you know, one of the things that I always wanted to do was to learn my job as quickly as I could, and to make a contribution, and then move on.  And so you, by doing that, you help create the environment and the desire on the part of people.  One reaction would be that they want to keep you.  And, and that happened to me once in my career, where I was promoted, but they wanted to keep me in that particular area, and I had to escape.  But, but most of the time if you, if you really make a contribution, the people are not going to object to your leaving and moving on in your career.  We also wanted to--you needed to understand your, not just your boss's, but your boss's boss's biggest assets.  I mean what was it that they considered their biggest--it might not have been anything you had to do within your job, and, but you needed to understand that.  And because that way you could look for opportunity to help them, even though it wasn't necessarily in your purview of responsibility.  And you could communicate with them, and you could give advice to them.  I was never shy about giving advice to my, a level or two above me in, in a way that, that, you know, you want to engage people in a way sometimes to help them find the answer even though you know what the answer is.  You want to make them think that it's their idea.  But then they'll have a pleasant recollection that it was with you when they had the (laughter) idea.
Story_ID: 265838
Speaker 1: So in many ways you're saying you would get in and try to learn the job real quickly and then look for areas that sort of needed your help and, and advice, you know, and give advice.  Is that, those are--
Speaker 2: Well, it's not quite that simple, but you, you wanted to go in and make a--every job that you go into, a new job, there were always opportunities.  I mean things could have been running smoothly, and all you had to do is learn what somebody else did and that was it, and just do it and ride in, you know, into the sunset.  But I always looked for ways to, you know, what can I do to significantly improved this job?  Sometimes it meant changing the job.  It might have meant that the job wasn't the right-- constructed in the right way in the first place, so, even eliminating the job, if you find different ways to do things.  But so often people will go in, and they say okay, well, what is the job?  Where is the job description?  Okay, now, I'll work to try to understand what you want me to do.  Well, you want to understand that, but then you want to understand that in a broader context of things.  Just what is this contributing to the broader picture, and is this the best way to get this particular thing done?  It might say no, it isn't, but you need an open mind to, to go in and--and it might require one helluva amount of work in order to get people to see your point of view because many managers, they just want the status quo to exist.  They don't want you to come in and, and start changing stuff.  It's, then, then, that creates risk and confusion in their lives.  And so they'd rather you just do your thing, and, and don't rock the boat, don't go making any, "I'm not interested in big improvements.  I'm just coasting here, and I'm happy, and I'm, I'm enjoying life, and so don't screw it up for me, [HistoryMaker W. Frank] Fountain."  So you gotta think what's in the best interest of your, your boss.  If, if, if you find one that, that thinks that way, then you need to do what you can.  But you also need to plot your exit strategy because you, you don't want to be in that environment.  You don't want to be in that shadow.  And you needed, you know, you need to maneuver out of it, into a, a pasture that gives you flexibility; or as in some cases, if you find the wrong kind of match, then maybe you need to work for a promotional opportunity for your boss so that they can move on to something better.  And I never engaged in it myself, but you know, it's, it's, it's not uncommon to, for your subordinates to pull the rug from underneath you if you prove to be a major obstacle.  But I never engaged in that because I never thought you had to do that in order to, to keep moving.
Story_ID: 269763
Speaker 1: Talk about that time period when you came in.  You know, you were talking about the economic environment in nineteen--you said it was around sev--
Speaker 2: It's 1973.
Speaker 1: --seventy-three [1973].
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1973 was a, you know, a, a decent year for the company [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan].  You know, the Penn Central [Transportation Company] crash, you know, which put pressure on all commercial pressure, soaked up the commercial paper market for, for corporates.  Because routinely what companies would do back in those days prior to the Penn Central, was to issue commercial paper, and they would raise money, even working capital that way.  When the Penn Central defaulted on its commercial paper, then the whole market kind of collapsed.  And that sent everybody running for cover, and there were many liquidity shortages, et cetera, et cetera.  Well, that was like '71 [1971]. Seventy [1970], '71 [1971].  Well, the company had come out of that, and '72 [1971] must have been a, a fair year; and '73 [1973] was a fair year; and '74 [1974] was headed down in the dumper and, and headed into a major recession.  And the auto industry was hit.  But, and I had moved to a plant, Hamtramck [Michigan] assembly plant.  And I went on vacation Thanksgiving break.  And when I got back, I had a telegram, a yellow telegram saying that don't bother coming into work.  We'll, we'll call you when we want you to come back to work.  So, basically, I had been laid off with lots of others, and this was all the company's attempt to, to cut costs and weather the, the storm.  Because when inflation galloped up, cost went out of--even though there was wage and price controls--well, no, what, wage and price and controls, it put the damper on the, on sales.  I mean it, it sent us into a recession.  And you know, that wasn't going to be effective very long.  And what agon- caused a lot of agony is that, you know, the suppliers had the pressure--they lifted wage and price controls, and inflation went through the roof, because people weren't asking for price increases or couldn't get price increases.  But they didn't, they didn't just, you know, assume that they'd never happened.  They went for everything they had ever dreamed of afterwards, and so it was a nasty scene.  Anyway, the company was doing pretty poorly, and we were laying off engineers; even the HR [Human Resources] department was on a week and off a week.  It was like any, unlike anything you've ever seen.  But I took the time off.  Nah, I didn't take off.  I, I continued to work.  I didn't have anything else to do.  My wife was working at the local bank.  And the reason I was at that plant was to impart experience a year and close.  And we were near the year-end, and I wanted to experience the year-end close and, and move on.  And so I continued to work every day until the, somebody complained that, you know, I was screwing up things by working when I was supposed to be laid off.
Story_ID: 269764
Speaker 1: So I was off a little while, and then I ended up, the HR [Human Resources] people kept tell me well, just hang tough; we'll, we'll, we'll, we'll get you.  So they eventually got me a job at our parts operation, service and parts, and which, you know, the parts business was going strong.  And that's where I went, and for a safe haven, for a year.  And then I went into the procurement purchasing area.
Speaker 2: But this is all, is this all within finance still?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, yes, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm still all in, in finance.  And I did okay at the plant, and I did okay at service and parts, and then was promoted to my first level executive after a year at service and parts in the purchasing office.  And by this time, you know, I was moving around people that I knew or had met somewhere along the way over the previous five, four or five years, and then moved vertically in procurement and the finance side of things in, in the purchasing office, and managed to escape the purchasing office and, and get on the--it was while I was in that job that I created this, this group, organized this group, not because my career was not going well.  It's just that I was strategic, thinking strategically about things.
Speaker 2: So you're saying when you were in purchasing, that's when you created the group? Okay.  Is that the time that he didn't really want to see, your boss didn't really want to see you leave?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in that--
Speaker 2: In that period.
Speaker 1: --in that period I--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because I, I did leave for a short time.
Story_ID: 269765
Speaker 1: One of my friends and I went to staff a project in the president's office, which was a big deal.  We had an office on the, back then the fifth floor.  And the president had these ideas about a, all of the functions in the company [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan] put, putting together business plans.  But he didn't want to let finance do the analysis of them, so they found two young fresh M.B.A.s, and gave the job to go through all of the, the business plans.  And there was a, kind of an office-level group of up and coming people or office levels that was, were close to the president, they were supposed to go through the business plans and, and make recommendations to him for changes in the functions.  And so as it turned out, my buddy and I, we, we did all of the analysis and, and summarized the plans.  And so what the group was served up was what we thought (laughter) should happen.  So that was, that was--and, and they took basically what we had to say and endeavored to act on it.  So in terms of power, I mean that was a, that was real power.  And so it was called the business plan assessment team or something.  And so that was, that was a major break because now I was, I was, had left because the president-- wasn't the president.  The president himself didn't know us, but someone close to the president knew us, of us, and, and brought us together, and said you go, go and, and, and do this.  So, our management didn't, couldn't have anything, I mean they didn't like it, but they I was away for three, four months.  While I was away, I wasn't that in, interested in going back.  While I was away, they promoted me (laughter), to make sure that I would come back.  And so, and so I went back, and, and that prolonged my stay, longer than I wanted to, in, in, in, in, in that, that area. But by then, having served on this, in the president's office, now, unfortunately, again, when people say they want mentors, a mentor, you don't need a mentor.  You need to be able to create mentors every other day because their lifespan is no different than any other-- they're quite perishable like everybody else.  And so, it wasn't long before the president fell out of favor with the--actually it was [Lee] Iacocca who replaced that president. Iacocca came over not as CEO; he came over as president.  And he was president for almost a year before he got the CEO job.  The C- the CEO [John Riccardo] recruited him specifically to replace him eventually, and that was, but that took about a year.  But Lee replaced him, so now, you know the guy that we, the, that, the team that--
Speaker 2: That had cultivated, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that we, you know, knew us and could anointed us and all that stuff, they were gone.  So now you had to, to start anew.  So, you know, you looked at knee--Lee's team once he became CEO, and, and you work to get on that bandwagon.
Story_ID: 269766
Speaker 1: I remember going to an interview with the guy's name, the guy, the, the, the, that guy who was head of the Corporate Financial Analysis group and in the middle of the day, the middle of the afternoon.  Well, before I got back to my building, as soon as I got back, my boss [at Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan] and his boss called me down to say: "We understand you've been interviewing, [HistoryMaker W. Frank] Fountain."  And I thought, well, 'cause see, a, a friend, a senior friend in the HR [Human Resources] department had arranged this, this meeting.  It was just it should not have been in the middle of the day because when all of--he was brand new, and when all of the people in the bullpen saw me going into his office and the door closed for a period, that word went back to my leaders, you know, in a nanosecond.  So I just said look, you, there's no truth to the fact that I'm--(unclear)--interviewing here at all.  I occasionally attend the Harvard Business Club's [Harvard Business School Club of Michigan] through a guy that they knew.  And I said I met this guy before, and we talked.  And I said he's new here, and he doesn't, he doesn't know many people, and I'm one of the few people he is acquainted with.  So, being in finance, he just wanted to call and, and ask me questions.  And he didn't want the door opened 'cause, you know.  So, that's all that was.  You know, I know the, the rules, and I would never go for an interview without asking your permission.  Well, so now they, they couldn't prove differently.  And so, but I, they kept me there longer, and I could see where they were really digging a hole, because Lee [Iacocca] was bringing in a, a guy out of retirement to run the purchasing office.  And I knew that, and I could see that, and, and I was trying to prepare my boss for that day.  You know, here's the kind--I'd done the research.  He's coming from Ford [Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan].  This is what I understand they do at Ford.  You know, we'd better tighten up these areas, absolutely no interest, so.  And inflation was picking up that year at a, a galloping rate.  And we had blown way past the budget for something called material econ [economics].  This is cost that grew, goes up on the goods that you buy, the parts and components.  And we were in the hundreds of millions already, and we were just in the first few months of the year, so.  And I wasn't being allowed to forecast it, let me, let the system know that I've got this issue.  So that was a dangerous situation.  That could have gotten me fired.  And because my finance folks were at the central operation and was smart enough to see that, okay, this is the, this is what's happening in the macroeconomic sphere of things.  How the hell is it that you guys are not gonna incur increased costs?  And we all knew what it was.  I had the numbers.  But I would go in front of the vice president, my boss and my boss's, my boss, my boss's, my boss's boss and, and my boss would trot me in, in front of the, the vice president along with the head purchasing guy, operating guy, like the number two guy in the organization, and I would have to argue my case.  He's an ex-finance guy.  He said that my forecast was full of shit.  And so, here I am, arguing with this, you know, a few levels way above me, and so I could see where this is a, this was a recipe for disaster.  And we were denying suppliers' requests for increases just arbitrarily, and they weren't gonna go away.
Story_ID: 269767
Speaker 1: I had to figure out a way to escape, and so I did.  And I escaped to the, the place where I had so-called done the interview some time earlier.  I went into a holding pattern, because I couldn't go there directly, politically.  And so, but it was a tough time in my career because I, one, I was sitting on a body of, of--I was part of the--it wasn't that I was part of a conspiracy.  I had knowledge and information that we were not being honest in our forecast, and it was on thin ice, that we could hang our hat on the fact that we were resisting.  And that was unrealistic.  And so as a upstanding finance-type, I was not supposed to tolerate that.  I was supposed to challenge them to, to the mat.  But, you know, I may or may not have survived.  That was one issue.  The other issue is that these new people were coming in, and I didn't want them to--they trotted me in front of the guy to talk to the, these new head of procurement and who ultimately thereafter became president of the company.  I'm supposed to go and explain what we're doing--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and while the, my bosses sit around and look at me.  So I survived that and es- escaped because of help I received from the HR [Human Resources] people and part of Lee's [Lee Iacocca] new team, elsewhere.  And so, that was a bit of luck.  And, and I managed to, to get into another environment, and, and continue to prosper, and eventually the house of cards collapsed.  And those people went by the wayside, but I was not (laughter) at the scene.
Speaker 2: In that house of--now what period of time is that, [HistoryMaker W.] Frank [Fountain]?  I mean what period of time--
Speaker 1: This is seventy--
Speaker 2: --you're talking about the--
Speaker 1: --seventy-eight [1978], '79 [1979].
Story_ID: 269768
Speaker 1: This is just before we go, this, this '79 [1979], and this is before we to ask for a government bailout.
Speaker 2: And then once that, did you, now, did you personally believe that that bailout would happen?  'Cause that was very significant.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, very significant.  It was history-making.  And [Lee] Iacocca was a, you know, was earning his keep.  He was a heck of a leader at the time.  And he went down an exuded confidence.  We mobilized the--I didn't understand the full scope of our campaign at the time.  But we had one of the biggest lobbying efforts in the history that this country has ever known before or since when we mobilized our banks, our dealers, our suppliers and all of that, and got the loan guarantee passed.  And so that was a Herculean effort, but it was all happening under Lee's leadership.  And that's why the, the CEO who knew that that was the only outcome, a guy named John Riccardo, stepped aside and recruited Lee because he know, he knew he needed a, a fresh face to carry, to lead the company [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan] go to Washington [D.C.] at that point.  And to his credit, he did that.  If truth be known and the history is written, he was a much of a savior of the company as Lee was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because he put aside his ego.  And he's still alive.  A few years ago I had lunch with him.  He came and I had lunch with him.  You say well, why would he wanted to see me and have lunch with me?  Well, because he, I think he wanted me to, to make a contribution to something.  I think that was what it was.  But anyway, that was a, I ended up in a, in, in the real hotspot in finance.  And that was the, you know, we would work around the clock sometimes to, to manage the whole process, the financial reporting and analysis process to support the loan guarantee--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and the treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury] and, and their consultants, and it was a major effort.  And so being in that spot at that time with the nucleus of people that I, I was with, you know, it's like going into a war, going into a battle and coming out.  I mean you, you, you come out, if you survive, relatively close.
Speaker 2: So what was the name of that group?
Speaker 1: Corporate financial analyst.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) okay.
Speaker 1: It may have had a different name.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Later, it was the predecessor to, to the Corporate financial analyses, but, but it's where all of the budgeting and the forecasting--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and the financial planning for the company took place.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's where, as we were hemorrhaging, you know, or each time we'd look, we, our outlook had dropped a few hundred million, we had to take that news up because we saw it first.  And at the same time, anytime you took up, say, a three hundred million dollar deterioration, you also had to take up the ideas or the plan to offset it.  And so, whether that was head count cuts or you name it, we had to, we spent night after night generating ideas and ideas and ideas.
Story_ID: 269769
Speaker 1: This is a time where Chrysler [Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan], I mean [Lee] Iacocca coming on.  He represents, you know, once you got the bailout, then you're sort of--I don't want to say lean and mean, but you're, you know, you had also--how long after that did the minivan come--
Speaker 2: It was in, in, in, under development at the time.  And the, the launch of the minivan--oh, I, I'm guessing a little bit--was like '83 [1983].  So it was under development, and it was in our financial projections.  We usually went out five years.  And we would show the volume as incremental value to, you know, on top of the volume we had for the products we had running.  And the government and their consultants would challenge us, because they'd say, "We think that: one, you don't have a clue as to whether or not this thing is going to succeed 'cause there's nothing out there ever like it.  And we think that the closest thing it comes to are station wagons, and we think it's gonna wipe out all station wagons and probably knock out some trucks."  And so they wanted us to take volume out of our projection and not put in so much incremental volume.  Well, it was a smashing success, and we wished when we launched it that we had had two plants of capacity as opposed to one.  Lee always maintained he wanted two, but his minions around him wouldn't sign up for that.
Story_ID: 269770
Speaker 1: I have one question.  When a new line comes, what is the, the, the span of time to get a new line?  And what is the period of sort of gestation where you know that it's gonna work or not, I mean just, you know, from, from in the, you know, conceptual stage to--
Speaker 2: In those days, it was about five years.
Speaker 1: That's it?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, maybe five years plus, from the, the initial--
Speaker 1: Drawings?
Speaker 2: --designs and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The, well, for five, five years.  And you don't know if it's gonna be a success.  You market test it, the design, and you, you get feedback from, from these workshops and, and these groups that look at the vehicle.  But you don't know if it's gonna be a success really until it hits the market.  And so, you can have the design right and not have the pricing right.  You could have a lot of things right and have some things wrong and it not really take off.  So, but today, that length of time is maybe thirty-six months from that same--we've knocked off two years--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at least.  I think Toyota [Motor Corporation, Toyota, Aichi, Japan] is going for like a twenty-four-month vehicle.  We, I think we put the [Chrysler] Crossfire together in about twenty-four months, but we did it, we did it by taking things off shelves.  It was a real quick kind of thing.  So, the K-car was, it was the minivan, but there was also the K-car was really the bread and butter vehicle that we were bringing out [of the Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan].  And the K-car turned out to be, after a, a few miscues, to be a success.  But that's what we were, that was the biggest product.  We, we had both going on at the same time.  But we were trying to survive until we launched the K-car and the minivan.
Story_ID: 269771
Speaker 1: [Lee] Iacocca's span of time, that was how long a period of time he was here, and then things--how long was he here?  He was here--
Speaker 2: He was here from--
Speaker 1: Ten--
Speaker 2: --from, from '78 [1978]--
Speaker 1: Eight [1978] to eighty--
Speaker 2: --to, to--
Speaker 1: --fo--
Speaker 2: --ninety-two [1992].
Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992], okay.
Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992].
Speaker 1: So twir- okay, one, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: But in that time period, Chrysler [Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan] saw things go over.  Everything shot through the roof, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, we went through cycles.
Speaker 1: You went through, 'cause you talk about it being cyclical business.  And then it started to--did it start to tank before he left, or he came back?  'Cause he tried to buy, he was trying to reengineer--
Speaker 2: No, we, we had a fairly prosperous '80s [1980s].  Near the end of the '80s [1980s] we began to experience some volume losses and began to struggle and then--
Speaker 1: And the Japanese (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and then the recession--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --came.  A round hit us most severely around the time of the Desert Storm [Gulf War].  You know, like '91 [1991] was the bottom of it, but we had began to slide going into that timeframe.  And then we came out in '92 [1992], late '92 [1992], early '93 [1993].  I think we had--when I left finance in '93 [1993] we had had two quarters of--we had had the fourth quarter profit and a first quarter profit.  So we'd come out, but Lee left before things really turned.
Speaker 1: But he wanted to, he wanted to do a buy--
Speaker 2: Well, he, he was, he came back.  I think he was involved with Kirk Kerkorian.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But that failed.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It was, there was a perception that that was not a good thing?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on who was perceiving it.  I think, you know, and what they were trying to do is to get control of the, of the company.  And they needed the management to go along with their plan, and senior management did not; for whatever reasons, they, they did not.  So, that's, that's what happened.
Speaker 1: So from a, a finance standpoint, what, do you have views on that one way or the other?
Speaker 2: On?
Speaker 1: On that decision, on the board's decision at that point.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was the right decision.  You know, there are lots of decisions along the way.  It wasn't--by '98 [1998], you know, we were, had merged with Daimler-Benz [AG].  So, you know, I'm not sure how that would have changed the course of things, but it, it, I'm pretty certain that it would have had a major impact.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you think the merger would have happened with Daimler-Benz, had that, had there been that--
Speaker 2: I don't know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --if it would have--obviously I'm being a, a little cautious because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, because you're so--okay, so--
Speaker 2: Now, we're, we're in--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.  Okay, but let me--
Speaker 2: --with--
Speaker 1: --let me ask, so, you, what year do you leave finance?
Speaker 2: In '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993], okay.  That's around the time that he leaves, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's around, okay.
Story_ID: 265848
Speaker 1: The head of our Washington [D.C.] office retired, and the person that had been brought in some years earlier to ultimately replace him, replaced him.  And after a while, he came looking for a number two person to work for him in the Washington [government affairs] office [of DaimlerChrysler; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan].  And he had grown up on the [Capitol] Hill [Washington, D.C.], where he had his experience.  I think he was on the Hill when we hired them.  And they thought that if there was gonna be a number two person, the next number two person should be someone who grew up in the, in the car business, in the, in the company, in Detroit [Michigan].  So, he went looking, went to HR [Human Resources].  The person who happened to have been the, the vice president of personnel at the time was my former boss, who was at the time assistant controller.  He became controller, and I replaced him.  Well, he knew in my annual performance appraisals that I would put down the top finance jobs as, as, as, you know, positions that I aspire to.  But I'd also put down the VP of the Washington office.  And so when the new guy went to him then he brought my name up, and I got, had gotten to know the new guy when he was doing his apprenticeship here.  And so we knew each other enough for him to not reject the idea.  And so I was approached, and I thought about it for, I don't know, maybe almost a couple of months before I was forced to make a decision.  Because I was in the queue, I'd just come of--we were just coming out of the recession.  I had the toughest job in finance, and I had survived.  And so, I didn't necessarily want to get out of the queue for, you know, the controller's job or some other top job, although the controller was fairly young and didn't seem to be interested in going anywhere.  And the treasury was also relatively new.  And so there weren't, weren't any other jobs in finance that I wanted to--and I just didn't want to stay in the job that I was in necessarily.  But an opportunity to--see, that was the level just below where I am now, in terms of rank.  Today it's considered a vice president, non-officer vice president, but a vice president.  And so, it was an opportunity for me to go down and have most of the Washington operation reporting directly to me from day one.  And I thought, well, this was a, this was an opportunity, and I wanted to go to Washington.  And I'm getting out of the pressure cooker, which is what it had been, because in finance, the pressure's on in, in bad times something fierce, and you know, to cut costs, to conserve cash, to do all kinds of things that make you very unpopular if, depending on how you do it.  And in good times there's pressure on because you, you're still forecasting what profits are going to be.  And it's a risk forecasting the company's position because if you miss it by a significant amount, then you may be looking for a job.  If you miss it by a certain amount and upset the auto analyst, they will tank your stock.  You don't want to be responsible for that either.  So, but in any case, I saw going to Washington as an opportunity and maybe to develop a new career.  But I was assured that I could step out of the queue and that I could come back, that I wouldn't lose my place in the queue for the top finance jobs.  And so on that basis I went to Washington.
Story_ID: 265849
Speaker 1: But this was totally different in many ways because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, totally.
Speaker 1: Totally.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is about lobbying; it's about public policy; it's government relations.  It's completely different than what I left, what I was doing.
Speaker 1: But it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Completely in a sense that we had done in my, in my finance days, I had gotten involved in conducting public policy analysis, understanding what [Lee] Iacocca's issues were, and how he wanted to promote those issues.  My group, I had a group called competitive analysis at one time, was a part of my responsibility.  And we knew how to package what Lee was looking for better than the people in Washington [D.C.], and even though they had consultants and things like that.  But we knew the, we could mold and shape the data in a way that, that Lee says well, this is what I've been looking for.  And so I had some sense of what public policy analysis was all about and had supported the, with analysis and its--provided analytical support to the Washington [government affairs] office on certain issues.  And so it wasn't completely foreign from that--(unclear)--but, but the, the, the art of lobbying and government relations were always new stuff for me.
Speaker 1: So how--did you find that you were good at it?  'Cause I mean that, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, my strengths was understanding, were understanding what was important to Detroit [Michigan], understanding what was important back here, and my knowledge of back here versus my colleagues in the Washington office at the time.  And so--and my ability to organize, and analyze, and package, and present and all of those things.  So, using all of that helped me add value from day one, to some extent, even though I didn't--I, I knew where the White House [Washington, D.C.] was and had some idea where the [Capitol] Hill [Washington, D.C.] was, but I didn't know how to get inside.  But that was only part of the job [executive director of government affairs], and we had people who understood the lobbying beat and could do that.  I didn't necessarily have to do that at my level.
Story_ID: 265850
Speaker 1: You also, I mean, should give some credence to your, your think tank experience too that you had--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, that the (simultaneous) --
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) yeah, before.  I mean I--you're not, you know--
Speaker 2: That, that--
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: --helped me throughout--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --my--
Speaker 1: Career.
Speaker 2: --career.
Speaker 1: So, so you did that for how man--five--was it, how many years you, ninety--
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay.
Speaker 2: Almost--
Speaker 1: And that--
Speaker 2: --less--
Speaker 1: --and so that put you on a different track.  Now, what happened during that two-year period?  Did you have some lens or successes in that period?
Speaker 2: Well, what was happening back here is this, the chief financial officer left the company [DaimlerChrysler; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan] before I was comfortably in Washington [D.C.], which meant the guy who was VP in personnel moved over and became the chief financial officer.  He was the guy that I'd replaced when he was the assistant controller.  So there was buzz about me coming back to help him in his new role.  And so all it did was just keep the pot churning and not let me get comfortable in Washington.  And then he and I had spent some time together talking about running the finance company, which was an officer's position.  And so, that didn't materialize almost by accident, a series of circumstances.  So then I was told--they became concerned that I, you know, had gotten that close that they wanted to, they said not worry, to sit tight.  They were gonna, you know, there was gonna be a, an officer's position for me.  So now I really can't get comfortable in Washington.  This is about a year and a half in.  So, but my predecessor was retiring, age sixty-five, and so this job happened to be an opportunity, and I came back into it.
Speaker 1: So that's '98 [1998]?
Speaker 2: No, this is--
Speaker 1: Nine--
Speaker 2: -no, this is '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Five, '95 [1995], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '93 [1993], to '95 [1995]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was in Washington.  I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I came back and was elected an officer in, in July of '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 265851
Speaker 1: But how did the position change?  You were elected an officer [vice president for government affairs], but what, what, what was the position that came?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: You were vi--
Speaker 2: I picked up the responsibility for the philanthropic operation of, of, of the company [DaimlerChrysler; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan] as well as--that was the main difference.
Speaker 1: Did you like that?  Have you liked that?
Speaker 2: Oh, having that responsibility?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's worked very well with, with my, my combination of my state and local government relation stand- responsibilities, where I'm able to bring in various incentives for our investment in new plant and equipment around the country.  And at the same time, take the resources and use the philanthropic arm of the company to project and promote the image of the company and promote the concept of a, being a good corporate neighbor and a, a good neighbor and a good citizen.  And that serves the other side of my responsibilities very well.  So the two are complementary, and the one has enabled me to continue to get resources from the company in the not so profitable environment.
Speaker 1: Now are you unique among a sort of foundation, you know, company foundation ex- executives in terms of your finance background?  Have you found that--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --most likely.
Speaker 1: 'Cause most people don't go that particular route.
Speaker 2: And, and most, in most companies it's not combined under a person who has both of these responsibilities as it is here.
Story_ID: 265852
Speaker 1: So are you happy about this period of your life?  I mean what are you, where, where is [HistoryMaker W.] Frank Fountain in his sort of career path?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I'm, this, this external affairs responsibility has given me an opportunity to, it's been a complete change from the early part of my-- the first twenty years, the first two-thirds of my career.  And it has allowed me to work with people and work with problems and external issues, which is something you don't get in finance.  And I feel a great sense of satisfaction for the organizations that I've been able to embrace and support and some of the leadership I've been able to provide in many different organizations and settings that I would not have been able to do in other functions in the company [DaimlerChrysler; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan].  And it's allowed me to be, to guide the company in our philanthropic endeavors in, in making a difference. And, and I've been allowed, for the most part, to, to manage my own workload. I haven't--I mean my, my, my focus, my priorities.
Story_ID: 265853
Speaker 1: I've been successful in surviving the merger [with Daimler-Benz AG].  And one of, out of thirty officers at the time of the merger, I think there are four of us who were officers at the time that's here today.  And so I enjoyed my finance career with the company [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan].  I made a difference I think.  There was a period, a time from ninety--from '84 [1984], the fall of '84 [1984] to the--no, maybe it's the fall of '85 [1985] to '88 [1988], where I was--no, from late '85 [1985] to early June of '90 [1990] I did forty-two consecutive presentations to the board of directors, even though I changed.  I went from treasury, went from the controller's office to the treasurer's office and back to the controller's office.  And, and there were three, during that period, three presenters to the board: a corporate economists.  We had, we had an hour of, of a two-hour, two and a half hour board meeting every meeting.  And a corporate economist had twenty minutes; someone from the controller's office would have twenty minutes; and someone from the treasurer's office would have twenty minutes.  And, and over that period, I traversed the two finance jobs and never missed a meeting.  And this was often about Lee's [Lee Iacocca] performance to the board, and I survived that period of time.  And you know, it's one of the highlights of my, my career.  So, after a certain time period, the image that the leadership had of me was such that they could read-- they could easily project me into an officer's position because of how entered their psyche and--but it was hazardous duty, and, and the big accomplishment was surviving because we were carred- called dancing bears, and not all dancing bears survived. That meant that I went to the board meetings in New York [New York] and wherever they were and interacted very carefully with--and, and went to the finance committee meetings, particularly when I was in treasury because the treasurer would take me.  And I would sit there with, with our, Lee and the every top people and the very key board members.  This was the most powerful group of the board in terms of governance, and I had a, I was at, at the table, observing not, generally not, at that particular meeting.
Story_ID: 265854
Speaker 1: I'd say, you know, that experience and the experience of, you know, my career, external affairs career, I think has, has been a great, great opportunity for--and in this job I now interact, you know, on a global basis with, with my colleagues in, in, in Europe and other parts of the world.  I got involved in, in Africa in, when Reverend Leon Sullivan came to visit our CEO.  And I made my first trip to Africa, to Zimbabwe in '97 [1997] and was asked by Reverend Sullivan to help him with his summits, to not lose money.  He lost money in Zimbabwe.  And so I used to go to Phoenix [Arizona] like once a month, and I explained to him that the idea was just about controlling costs, about raising revenue, raising money, that if you really wanted to do this thing, wanted me to do it, I had to get involved in, in, in the whole management of the whole thing and the controlling costs.  So that's how I got into Africa.  And so that partly explains why I'm today the chair of the board of the Corporate Council in Africa [sic. Corporate Council on Africa], which about two hundred U.S. companies and which represent about 85 percent of all U.S. investment in Africa.  And so, through that, from that platform, I'm in my third year as chair.  I'm on a first-name basis with some of the African presidents and many of the ministers and the ambassadorial corps and that kind of thing.  And so that's something that I do, and I'm allowed to.  And I add value because I work within our South African operation.  And it's, it's because our chairman is, grew up, spent a large part of his early career in South Africa.  It creates an environment that further supports me doing what I want to do to help Africa from a U.S. vantage point.
Story_ID: 265855
Speaker 1: So I can point to other things like that, that this position [senior vice president for government affairs] has allowed me to do that has been very rewarding, and including I, without any direction internally, decided to try to help improve the Detroit Public [Schools] system, which led to putting in place a reformed school board, which mean the board members would be appointed as opposed to elected, and got legislation--I won't say that I got legislation passed; I'm not supposed to say that--just say that legislation was passed to put that in place for five years, actually six years.  And so I served on the, the school board for four years, and of the four years, was chair of the board for almost three years, so, which was not a popular thing to do.  And we took a lot of flak, and I had people arrested in the, and, and put out or taken out physically out of, out of the school board meetings, but, but recruited and hired two CEOs, the district or superintendents, as you call them.  And we've managed to, within the past month, we opened up what will probably be the finest performing arts high school in the, in the country at a cost of a hundred million plus [dollars], built, finished, polished, and another feeder high school, arguably one of the best in the city.  We opened up, that was opened Sunday night, Saturday night.  That's another hundred million dollar facility, not to mention, we've been, there'd been up tides and lows.  In the last few years we've had a continuing and improving reading scores of, from a major reading program.  But I've been able to do things like that from this vantage point.  You'd say well, okay, what's the connection there?  Well, we've invested billions of dollars in new plants and equipment in the City of Detroit [Michigan], and we need, we need talent in order to run them.  And we'd like to hire people from the city.  So that's the connection.  So I'm able to do things like that, and as in addition to serving as chair of the board of Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and on the board, Board of Overseers, seers, you know, all total I think I'm on maybe un, maybe twenty-five plus boards and have leadership positions in a, a lot of 'em. So, I think it's been a great, a great, a great job, a great career [at DaimlerChrysler; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan].  And this is my thirty-- I'm into my, August 13th will be thirty-two years.
Speaker 2: Are you planning to retire at sixty-two or sixty-five?  You're sixty-one, right?
Speaker 1: I'm sixty.
Speaker 2: Sixty, okay.  You're gonna be sixty-one this year?  No.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, every year you're at least one more
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know, I know, okay.
Speaker 1: I haven't broken the code on--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, stop, [HistoryMaker W.] Frank [Fountain].
Speaker 1: --how to slow that process down.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, okay.  Seriously, are you retiring, sixty--
Speaker 1: Well, I have no--
Speaker 2: You have no thoughts.
Speaker 1: No plans.
Speaker 2: Plans, okay.
Speaker 1: I have no announcements--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in that regard to make.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I could have retired maybe three years go.
Story_ID: 265856
Speaker 1: But I want to ask you one, one thing, and it relates to a statement that you had made earlier about our civil rights organizations.  And you also said that, that it's dollars plus organization.  That's what you sort of believed, dollars plus organization.  What do you mean by that, and what do you mean by that as a, in term of the, the, the black community, sorry.
Speaker 2: Well, I should stay away from my philosophy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, sorry.  Okay, well, no, we believe--
Speaker 2: No, no, but--
Speaker 1: We have philosophy at the end of the, of our interview.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, I, I would say that, I think that, you know, speaking as an African American and, and, and addressing the African American issues, I think that, that we've made lots of progress on the one hand.  And that can be manifested in, you know, on the business front, as I mentioned earlier the number of, of C- African American CEOs.  But, again, there's capacity for a lot more, and I think that will happen.  What I think we, I'd like to see us do is, is consistently as a people become more business-oriented, more entrepreneurial, and begin to control more resources and produce the services or products.  And I'm hoping that in this process, well, one, we need to support the process because we don't have enough out of it.  But I think out of the African American community needs to come more, we need some super successful entrepreneurs, people that amass great wealth, and is then able to use that great wealth to address issues that are unique to our community in a major way, to be philanthropists, to have the resources to influence public policy, to influence the political community, because if you don't have resources and you don't control resources, just having the vote isn't enough.  And, and I, and I don't--there, there, there still are great voids in our community and in our leadership, just on the education front alone that's playing out in urban center after urban center is, is, is a crisis and also a tragedy at the same time, where you have illiteracy rates of almost 50 percent.  These are the adult population that can't read or, or write.  And if you can't read or write in this society, this economy, guess what?  You're doomed and become an enormous burden on, on your fellow citizens.  And so, there's a, an enormous amount of work yet to be done.  I think the great civil rights leaders of the day certainly, you know, knocked the doors open and some cases knocked them down, but the hard part is, is still in front of us.  And so, I'm hoping for some billionaires and I--that it isn't just, it isn't enough acquire the wealth.  The most important thing in the acquisition of wealth is the disposition of the wealth and using it for, using it to, to make, to change society in, in, in a, in positive ways.
Story_ID: 265857
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the Executive Leadership Council, and then I wanna ask you a legacy question.  But I want to ask you about the Executive Leadership Council and the role that, you know, what you think.  You've addressed some of it, so it doesn't have to be a long answer.  But, you know, why that organization has been so important, and, and, and how I even came to be?
Speaker 2: Well, the Executive Leadership Council was founded by Al Martins [Alvaro L. Martins] and a group of, of brothers, and maybe a sister was there, in the '80s [1980s] because there were so few African Americans in the corporate world.  And most of them lived a pretty lonely existence when it came to other people of color in similar positions, despite the so-called progress that had been made in the decades of the '70s [1970s] and, and, and that was being made in the '80s [1980s].  So, the executive leadership idea was to bring us together primarily to share our experiences with each other, to network with each other, to find solutions and answers to our common problems, which were quite a few common problems, whether you were in the leadership position in American Express, or General Motors [Corporation, Detroit, Michigan], or GE [General Electric], or Sara Lee [Corporation], Rockwell [International Corporation].  I mean we've all had common issues.  And, and there were a growing number of us that said that we needed an organization that would bring us together and address our needs, if you will.  And therefore the, the Executive Leadership Council was created, and it has grown very rapidly over the past what's now eighteen-plus years.  I think that while the growth, we've grown, and three hundred people isn't a critical mass of people.  But it does represent a, a trend, and there are no and were no organizations to fill the void.  There were no professional groups that focused on African American executives, senior people and, and the, the corporate world that were, you know, the National Black MBA Association, which is the closest thing that addressed the--and, and there's still a need for a group like the, the National Black MBA Association.  But the Executive Leadership Council is a, is a--and it may diffuse in its mission over time, but it was to primarily focus on the corporate exec [executive], not entrepreneurs, not businesspeople, not bankers per se, not consultants, but the corporate business folks.  So, it has done very well in its, in it, in its, in its evolution, and I think it still is evolving.  Most of the people that were members back when I joined are now retired.  They're the Jim Kaisers [HistoryMaker James Kaiser] of the world who decided to go and pursue entrepreneurial instincts and, and have done quite well, so.  And there's a growing cadre of retired Executive Leadership Council members who, most are still active and doing things, and, but that's part of the cycle.  And we have new people coming on board who have made their way up the ladder.  And in theory, you should be a few levels away from the CEO in order to be a member.  And trying to maintain that focus and all this I think is pretty important.  But, but it's a very important leadership group.
Story_ID: 265858
Speaker 1: I think Carl Brooks is doing a good job in the, in his work, in his leadership.  And, and so I think every leader of the organization has made their contribution.  And I was the president of the, head of the foundation for a number of years and on the board.  I was head of the foundation of this board and was on the board of the [Executive Leadership] Council.  So it's still one of the most important groups in my lexicon of support groups.  And it's very important to the younger members of our company to become members of the Executive Leadership Council and provide leadership.  And, and I think [HistoryMaker] Dr. Price Cobbs has added a, a, a, a very effective dimension to it.  We now have something called the Leadership Institute [sic. the Institute for Leadership Development & Research], headed by a guy named Dennis Dowdell [Jr.].
Story_ID: 265859
Speaker 1: And so, you know, we need to continue to improve on how to take the wealth of experience and knowledge, and, and transfer that into modules that, that our young people can understand and benefit from, 'cause if, it's important that, speaking of legacy, I think that if, if I will have, in the eyes of many, been, had a successful career, successful corporate career, for me to have come and gone without leaving some indelible mark behind, then I think it will all have been for naught.  And I think while you're here to be a success, not just for success sake, you want to have an impact on things.  And so I'm, I think that's why it's very important to have a, a new crop, a broader base of, of younger African Americans who are in senior management positions that I could say, you know, weren't the case before I arrived and that I have some impact on, on the direction of our young people, who hopefully can benefit from, in some way, from my experiences and from my, what hasn't always been just success.  Success has been defined by a certain amount of pain, and agony, and sacrifice that you make to not only get in the upper echelons of the pyramid in, in corporate America, but also staying there.  It's not something that can be taken for granted.  It's a fairly fragile existence fraught with, you know, a lot of rewards but also a lot of pain and, and agony.  And, and so you want to try to help make it better for those, for those yet to, yet to come.
Story_ID: 265860
Speaker 1: So what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I, I want to be remembered for someone who didn't just have a successful corporate career, but tried to make a, a permanent difference on the organization and its behavior, but also the community at large, someone who was not just willing to write checks and say the right things, but someone who was able to, willing to put their own skin in the game, and, and roll up their shirt sleeves, and, and face the risk that comes with confronting problems and issues head on, that comes with trying to make a change in the face of considerable resistance, and willingness to do that where there, there were no other compelling reasons other than to try to make a difference.  There were no hidden personal agendas or self-aggrandizement that was being sought, just wanted to help move the needle.  So I hope that that's what I'm remembered by.  And I'm not looking for any, not really interested in any, any tributes or--I think your presence and existence has to be of an impact that you don't really need those things to, to be remembered.
