Story_ID: 655323
Speaker 1: I'm Denise DeBurst Gines [Denise Gines], the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Would you state your name and spell it for me, please, includ- including middle name?
Speaker 2: Timothy Benedict Francis, T-I-M-O-T-H-Y, B-E-N-E-D-I-C-T, F-R-A-N-C-I-S [HistoryMaker Timothy Francis].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: April 17th, 1958.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Your occupation?
Speaker 2: Lawyer.
Speaker 1: Location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Sher Garner law firm [Sher Garner Cahill Richter Klein and Hilbert, LLC], 909 Poydras Street, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And today's date.
Speaker 2: May 23rd, 2017.
Story_ID: 655324
Speaker 1: All right, so I'm gonna start with some very simple questions.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color?  Blue.
Speaker 1: And what do you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Flash fried oysters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --crawfish etouffee, gumbo, and fresh salmon, medium rare--
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a--
Speaker 2: --with sweet potatoes (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I do.  I love Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And what about your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is summer.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite quote or saying?
Speaker 2: I guess one of my favorite quotes, at least the one that immediately comes to mind is one my father [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] always tells me, and that is the banjo player should never follow the banjo maker.
Story_ID: 655325
Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about what you know about your ancestry, and we'll begin on your mother's side of the family.  Can you tell me your mother's name, spell it for me, please, and when and where she was born?
Speaker 2: Blanche Macdonald Francis, B-L-A-N-C-H-E, Macdonald, M-A-C-D-O-N-A-L-D, Francis, F-R-A-N-C-I-S.
Speaker 1: Do you know the year she was born?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: In New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, tell me about your mother.  Did she share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother grew up here in New Orleans.  Her father, his name was Guillermo Macdonald, born in Havana, Cuba, and his family was from Scotland.  In fact, I think his great uncle was the Ramsay MacDonald, Labour Party prime minister of England and the MacDonald family had sent a number of their nephews and sons and cousins to the Caribbean as engineers to build bridges, and my grandmother--grandfather met a--I think a woman from the Dominican Republic and married her--well, his, his father, I'm sorry, and then moved to Cuba where my grandfather was born, and then he was recruited by Booker T. Washington to come study at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] where he met my grandmother.  So, my grandfather ended up in New Orleans and interestingly was--I think became a brick mason and spent a lot of time working at Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And so one of the interesting stories my mother would tell about her childhood was that she had gotten to know a woman named Katharine Drexel [Saint Katharine Drexel], and Katharine Drexel who most recently was canonized a saint by Pope John Paul, I think the second [Saint Pope John Paul II], was just a phenomenal woman who helped founded Xavier University where my mother ultimately went to school.  And so she got to know a living saint and, and talking about, you know, the times that my grandfather would drive her around and, and those sort of stories were interesting to know about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what did your mother--you--she--you--she went to Xavier University and what was her occupation?
Speaker 2: She was sort of a, a community activist.  She ultimately, I think, went to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] to work on her master's degree, but came back and taught for a while at Xavier, I think physical education, and then married my father [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] and they had six kids and, you know, for that--for most part, you know, raised six kids and was involved in a number of community activities in, in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what about your grandmother?  Do you know much about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: I know a little bit about my grandmother.  She was born in New Orleans--I think she was born in New Orleans, but she, too, attended Tuskegee where she met my grandfather.  I think she was a seamstress for a while and so that's where she learned the trade there and met my grandfather.  And she was mulatto, half black, half white, and, you know, married my grandfather and moved to New Orleans and--where they settled here.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Elizabeth Collins Macdonald.
Story_ID: 655326
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your, your father.
Speaker 2: My (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His name--his name?
Speaker 2: Norman Christopher Francis [HistoryMaker Norman Francis].
Speaker 1: And did he share stories about his growing up as well?
Speaker 2: He did.  My father was born in Southwest Louisiana in Lafayette, which was sort of the heart of Acadiana, which we--where a lot of the French Canadians had moved from Nova Scotia in Canada down to Southwest Louisiana.  And interestingly, his, his grandfather's name was changed.  It was Francez, C-E-Z, because his father was French and his mother was African or African Indian, and the Catholic nuns at the time when he was born said there's no such thing as a black Francez, it must be Francis and they changed his name (laughter) to Francis, so--which was interesting at the time.  And so--but my father--you know, one of the things--he, he talked about his childhood and, and the thing that had the most impression on him was that although his father who was a barber and his mother who really didn't work weren't, weren't educated, they taught him the lessons that have stayed with him throughout his life and ultimately led him to, you know, get the Presidential Medal of Freedom and that is that God operates through decency.  And it's how you treat people and how you realize that everybody is important in all aspects of your life and that, you know, you just can't always kowtow to people who you think are important, but it's the people who have--who help you through everyday life who you really have to respect.  And, and he's, you know, operated that, and that's the most important lesson I've learned.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did your father have siblings?
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: And can you tell me who they are?
Speaker 2: He had--his oldest brother was a man named Joseph Abel Francis [Joseph Francis] who was the third African American to become a Catholic bishop in the United States.  He helped found Verbum Dei High School in Los Angeles [California] in Watts, which was a very important high school for young African Americans there, and then ultimately moved to--he was a priest at the time but moved to Newark, New Jersey, from there where he became the auxiliary bishop of New Jersey.  And then his sister, Mabel Bobb, Mabel Francis Bobb [Mabel Francis Bailey], was an educator in Southwest Louisiana and, in fact, was married to the mayor of Grand Coteau, Louisiana [John Bobb, Jr.], for a long time until his passing.  But, she was an educator.  His next sister, Pauline Navarre Francis [Pauline Francis Navarre], was also an educator in Southwest Louisiana.  And then his final sister--oh my god, I'm having a senior moment here--Boykins lived in St. Louis, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And now tell me the names (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Velma Boykins [Velma Francis Boykins].
Speaker 1: Velma, okay.
Speaker 2: Golly.  I--
Speaker 1: Tell me his, his grandparents' names once again.
Speaker 2: Mabel Coco Francis was his mother and Joseph Abel Francis was his father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father's date of birth?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: He's eighty-six (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: You can do the math.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I didn't ask you about your mother's siblings.  Did your mother [Blanche Macdonald Francis] have siblings?
Speaker 2: She did.  She--her--actually, her, her last sibling just passed a couple of weeks ago, but her siblings were Clarita Reed, which--Clarita Macdonald Reed.  She lived in New Orleans and was a professor at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] for many, many years, thirty plus years.  And her son is sort of considered one of the top intellectuals in America, Adolph Reed, Jr., who is a professor at University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] who writes about race and, and the economy in the United States.  Her other broth- sister, Consuela [Consuela Macdonald McDaniel], lived in New--Trenton, New Jersey, and was an educator as well.  Her brother, William Barrington Macdonald [William Macdonald], lived here in New Orleans [Louisiana] and worked in various sort of construction related activities.  And her--am I missing a sister, brother?  I think that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She had two sisters and a brother.
Story_ID: 655327
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your mother [Blanche Macdonald Francis] and father [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] met and married?
Speaker 2: I think they met when she was teaching.  She was older, maybe four or five years older than my father, and she may have been teaching at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] at--when he was a student.  They may have met around that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And you said that they married and had six children, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --tell me about your siblings and where you fall in line.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I am the second oldest out of six siblings.  My oldest brother, Michael Christopher Francis [Michael Francis], is a anesthesiologist here in New Orleans [Louisiana] where he practices pain management.  The brother underneath me is the executive vice president of the Times Picayune.  His name is David Jerome Francis [David Francis] and was the first African American publisher of a--the major newspaper here in New Orleans.  The sister underneath me, Kathleen Theresa Francis [Kathleen Francis], lives in New Jersey where she has been chairman of WISE, which is the Women in Sports Executives organization [sic. Women in Sports and Events], which is the largest women's sports organization, and she's worked at Major League Baseball and USTA [United States Tennis Association], and I think serves on a nominating committee at USTA and is involved in a lot of athletic stuff.  And my brother, Patrick Francis, is a administrator at the University of Texas in the health sciences department [University of Texas System Office of Health Affairs, Austin, Texas].  He oversees the budgets for MD Anderson [University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas] and a lot of other--their related medical facilities.  And my sister, Christina [Christina Francis], is the--like a senior communications director for Magic Johnson.  She sort of helps him with all of his businesses in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is that s- five people?
Speaker 1: That's five.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 655328
Speaker 1: All right.  So, let's talk about your growing up.  What's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory.  My (laughter), my earliest childhood memory--well, I grew up on Xavier University's campus [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], so my earliest childhood memory was just having the freedom as a five year old, six year old to just wander and run throughout a major college campus in New Orleans [Louisiana] that was so wonderful of a place because you had all these young African American students from around the country and it was, at the time, run by Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament.  So, it was such a multicultural place to be where you had, you know, white professors, black students, black professors, and people from all walks of life.  And so it was sort of a freedom of being able to just wander and meet and learn and experience life in a way that was very protective because at the same time, we're in the middle of the civil rights era where, you know, when I--I think I was ten years old--what--I can't remember what year it was, but, you know, my father [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] when he was there housed the Freedom Riders when they escaped from Alabama.  So, it was--you know, and he became president the year that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.  So, it was interesting having, you know, sort of this dichotomy of living in a place that seemed amazing because blacks and whites and everybody else got along, but outside of those corridors, it was just not a great place to be.  I'd walk to my grammar school [St. Rita Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana] and where we integrated the Catholic schools and white kids would spit on me and say, "Look, he peed on himself," or taunt me, and it was--then I'd come home to this safe environment.  It was sort of, you know, weird and disconcerting that America could be--obviously America's very different, but just within a couple of blocks how different things could be.
Story_ID: 655329
Speaker 1: Let's just back up a little bit.  You--your father [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] became the president of Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] in, in 1968?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And tell me the name of the high school--not the high school, the elementary school that you went to.
Speaker 2: St. Rita--
Speaker 1: St. Rita.
Speaker 2: --elementary school [St. Rita Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how many black students were there the year that you attended, the years you attended?
Speaker 2: In my class--I mean, all my siblings for the most part went there.  So--but, I mean, during different stages, but I only remember maybe one, one or two other African Americans in my class, maybe one.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you remember any--were, were you taught by nuns or by lay teachers.
Speaker 2: Both.  Nuns and lay teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is, is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All white.
Speaker 1: And was there anyone who might have encouraged you in any way or seemed to be protective of you?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: No, not at all?  Okay.  All right.  During your elementary school years, what other activities were you involved in?
Speaker 2: I played baseball.  We were involved in a lot of athletics and which sort of brings, brings me to one of an interesting stories.  I remember when I was ten years old, my brother who is one year younger than me, David [David Francis], were playing at Carrollton Boosters playground [Carrollton-Audubon Batture Fields, New Orleans, Louisiana] where a lot of the kids where I went to elementary school also played softball.  I remember one day we were practicing and they told us we had to go to the office 'cause there was an issue.  So, we were brought into the Carrollton Boosters office and my mother [Blanche Macdonald Francis] was sitting there crying, we're like, "What's going on?"  You know, we're just sort of ten years old, nine years old, and she said, "I'll tell you when we get in the car."  And we got in the car and she says, "Well you can't play here because they--because you're black."  And we're like, whoa.  When we--you know, I remember really weird feelings of like, wow.  I mean, these are all my friends I go to school with.  How am I gonna explain to them that, you know--'cause we were growing up--we knew we were black, but like we just thought we were kids, right?  So how am I gonna--I remember the feelings like it was yesterday.  How am I gonna go to school and I'm gonna feel weird, "Why aren't you coming anymore?"  Because of my--color of my skin.  It's like, I--how does a ten year old kid explain that?  So--but, ultimately, because of a friendship my father had with Moon Landrieu, who ultimately became the mayor of New Orleans [Louisiana] and secretary of housing and urban development.  He was a city council person at the time and was a former law school classmate at Loyola where my father was the first African American to finish from Loyola law school [Loyola University New Orleans College of Law] here in New Orleans, basically called up the playground and said we're shutting it down unless you integrate it.  And so that was in '68 [1968] that that happened.  So, that's one of my other early memories as a kid of, you know, sort of being part of the process.
Story_ID: 655330
Speaker 1: Did your family have any traditions during the holidays that you can remember?
Speaker 2: Well, we obvious- you know, we celebrated Christmas and would, you know--and Thanksgiving and--with family in a sort of very Catholic sort of way with Mass and, and, and occasionally we would drive to Lafayette [Louisiana] to visit my father's [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] family while they were still alive.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Being Catholic and a lot of young Catholic boys are altar boys, was that something that you--
Speaker 2: Loved to do?
Speaker 1: --did you do?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I--interestingly, I, I was an altar boy and I remember vividly my mother [Blanche Macdonald Francis] waking us up at six [o'clock] in the morning to go be altar boys for 6:30 Mass.  And I guess they thought religion, which is a great thing, was a good way to kind of give kids focus and direction and they sent us to a high school seminary of all boys (laughter), which was, you know, great education and interesting experience, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: St. John Vianney Prep [St. John Vianney Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Story_ID: 655331
Speaker 1: What other things did you enjoy doing during your elementary years [at St. Rita Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Painting.  My--one of my first jobs as a kid--I think I might've been eight or nine years old, living on the college campus [of Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], one of--I had an affinity to sports and arts.  And so I spent a great deal of my young--my youth hanging out at the art department with John Scott [John T. Scott], who I consider to be one of my, my mentors.  Unfortunately, John is not with us anymore, but John was an amazing artist.  He ultimately received the MacArthur genius award [MacArthur Grant].  So, at the age of eight or nine, I would hang out there and learn how to paint, learn how to make art, and he would pay I think two bucks [dollars] an hour to help him polish bronze and steel and work on his sculptures.  So, that was really--and it still is a passion of mine today, art.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did you--were you an avid reader as an elementary student?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't.  I mean, I was--I--more--I painted and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --played sports--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --more than read.  That was a chore to me.  I should--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I guess I shouldn't say that, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well, what type of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was okay student.  I mean, I--when I was focused--I mean, I'm sure there were--there were times when I was brilliant 'cause I had to be and other times that I was just not cutting the mustard.
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?  Were you mischievous or?  Well, tell me what do you think the type of child that you were?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm told (laughter) I was mischievous and outgoing.  I mean, I--my, my other siblings were probably a lot more studious than I was.  And, and I probably spent way too much time as a ten year old, eleven year old, twelve year old hanging out on a college campus in the dormitories learning about life and, and what not.  So--but, I mean, all within, you know, reason.  I mean, it was nothing that was, you know, out of bounds.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were your thoughts of what you would become during those years?
Speaker 2: I thought I'd become an artist, but as I got older, I realized that most artists didn't make a living.  And so I really tried to pursue it on parallel tracks.  I mean, I ultimately went to law school [Tulane University Law School, New Orleans, Louisiana], but I continued to paint and I had shows at galleries around the country and, and then ultimately went into doing art publishing, which was a--sort of an extension or expression of creating art.
Story_ID: 655332
Speaker 1: So, after elementary school [at St. Rita Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana], tell me the name of--you went straight into high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you said it was an all-boys school?  Tell--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --me the name of the school again?  The--
Speaker 2: It was a--
Speaker 1: --the name of the school.
Speaker 2: Oh, St. John Prep, St. John Vianney Prep [St. John Vianney Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, tell me about your experience there.
Speaker 2: It was a great experience.  I mean, it was--you know, I walked to school every day pretty much; it was not far away.  And it was--we had maybe two hundred kids in the whole school.  It was maybe twenty to forty in a class.  So, it, it created unique opportunity to, to play a lot of sports, to be really thoughtful 'cause it was a high school seminary.  So, there was a lot of time in chapel and prayer and meditation and reflection about life and just kind of developing as a holistic person.  So, I have--most of my great friends, you know, have--I'm still in touch with from that high school experience and all have gone on to do well.  None of them are priests, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Who are some of your friends?
Speaker 2: Brian Jackson [Brian A. Jackson], who went there.  Brian is now a federal judge and a chief judge in, in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], Ronnie McClain [Ronald McClain] who is--now runs a nonprofit in town, Ferd Cheri [Fernand J. Cheri] who, you know, I lost track with but now back in touch.  He's now the auxiliary--he actually went on to become a priest.  He's now a bishop here in New Orleans [Louisiana], and, and others.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, so what were your extracurricular activities during high school?  You continued to paint at that time--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and--
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: But mostly sports.  I mean, I played football, was quarterback on the football team and baseball, and we won state championship my senior year, which was great and I was named most valuable player in the state for pitching or, or just in the whole state.  But, but mostly just, you know, athletics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And were there any--who were your role models at that time?
Speaker 2: John Scott [John T. Scott] and my father [HistoryMaker Norman Francis].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 655333
Speaker 1: And tell me more about your father [HistoryMaker Norman Francis].  You, you talked about the fact that during the civil rights era that the Freedom Riders were housed at, at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you expound on that a little bit?
Speaker 2: About that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or the stories that you know, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --about that.
Speaker 2: Well, my father, he, he, he--interestingly, he grew up in La- as I mentioned, grew up in Lafayette, Louisiana, very poor, but was a really smart guy, I mean, did really well, and so he went to a Catholic school [St. Paul Catholic School; Holy Family Catholic School, Lafayette, Louisiana], and after high school didn't have an idea about what he was gonna do 'cause they just didn't have money for college.  And fortunately for him, one of the nuns there made a phone call to Xavier and said, "I have this really bright kid, we need to give him a chance."  And so he was able to go to Xavier and I presume had a work scholarship and some other scholarships and was a mathematics major and really excelled and did well to ultimately go to law school [at Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana], and, and then after that was shipped off to the war.  I guess it was World War II [WWII].  He was--lived in Germany and then came back and practiced but went--basically went back to Xavier to serve as the dean of students, and so at a very young age, I guess--golly, that would've been back in 19--in early '60s [1960s], was there.  And--but when he did practice, he did do some civil rights law and worked with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and a number of other--the senior lawyers.  He was of counsel to I think Douglas [Nils Douglas]--who was--Douglas and Elie [Lolis Elie], which had represented, you know, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and a bunch of folks, you know, of that era.  And so there were so few African Americans in New Orleans [Louisiana] that had law degrees who were involved that, you know, he, he, he was, you know, certainly a beneficiary of civil rights era and was committed to doing the right thing.  And so--and through educating kids and, you know--so, as a role model, I mean, I sort of got to get a good sense of what it--what it meant to, to be engaged.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, because the schools were being integrated when you were going into elementary school [at St. Rita Catholic School, New Orleans, Louisiana], I know that Ruby Bridges integrated one of the schools [William Frantz Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  Do you remember talk about her being one of the first children to integrate one of the schools in, in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: I don't from that--not--I remember it now as an adult (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --and, and reading back on it, but I wasn't--I don't have a memory of it at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I was a kid, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you, you were very young (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at, at that time.
Story_ID: 655334
Speaker 1: In high school [St. John Vianney Preparatory School, New Orleans, Louisiana], what are your, your desires for your life after high school?  Did you know that you were going to go to college?  You knew that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But did you know where you were gonna go?  Was--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] going to absolutely be the only place to go?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  In fact--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I, I did not go--I did graduate from Xavier, but I first went to the University of Louisiana in Lafayette [University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Lafayette, Louisiana] to play baseball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in--at that point when I got--my arm was burned out after playing three years of high school and pitching every game, I got--and I just quit.  I just said I, I just want to have fun.  So (laughter) I did and I got yanked and brought back to New Orleans [Louisiana] (laughter) to go to Xavier to get serious again.  So--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --I ultimately finished from Xavier.  And, and then after that--am I going too far now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We, we--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --still--we still want to talk about the transition from high school into--going to Lafayette.  Tell me about that experience.  How--because, I mean, you said you were the most valuable player and so did you get a scholarship, a baseball scholarship to go to Lafayette?
Speaker 2: No, I did not.  I was--they recruited but sort of more as a--as a walk on.  But, at, at the time, I was like 5'8", 145 pounds, a skinny little kid, and--but was, you know, invited to come try out and to, to be on the team, but did not have a scholarship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your experience like there, going from living on the Xavier campus to this campus now?
Speaker 2: Freedom (laughter), freedom (laughter).  But, you know, it was--it was great going there because my grandparents [Francis' paternal grandparents, Mabel Coco Francis and Joseph Abel Francis] were still alive at the time and lived in Lafayette [Louisiana] and had other family members there as well.  So, it was great to be away from home, but also good to be in a place where if I needed to go get a meal or see a familiar face and--but, it was also only a, a two hour, three hour car ride back to New Orleans.
Story_ID: 655335
Speaker 1: All right.  So, you come back to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] you say to, to get serious.  So, tell me about the experience at Xavier--at Xavier.
Speaker 2: I mean--
Speaker 1: As a student when--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you lived there.
Speaker 2: I mean, Xavier was a great educational opportunity for me.  I mean, it--the professors were serious.  They expected more of me.  I couldn't hide, couldn't run.  I mean, I had to be focused, couldn't embarrass (laughter) myself or my father [HistoryMaker Norman Francis].  And so it was really a chance to, to, to, to, to be focused and to, to start making some serious decisions about what I wanted to be.  And, and at the time, I was thinking about law school, and as you know, you can't get into law school unless you have good grades, and so I really got focused and tried to get on the A track, which I did and, and ultimately was successful in, you know, graduating and then getting into law school.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, and during your college years there, what other activities were you involved in?
Speaker 2: I--at that point, I just was studying.  I mean, I, I--playing catchup.  I was, you know, taking eight ho- eighteen hours a semester both semesters, going to summer school and really, you know, locked down on education and being focused and, you know, making sure that I got it all done and got my grades tight.  So, I didn't--was not involved in athletics at Xavier at all or any other sort of--didn't pledge a fraternity there, just really stayed focused on academics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so what year do you graduate?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: And with what type of degree?
Speaker 2: Bachelor's in political science.
Story_ID: 655336
Speaker 1: Were you thinking that you would go straight into law school, or what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought it might be best to take a year off and a unique opportunity came up.  It was--President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was the president of the United States at the time and Moon Landrieu who was a friend was wor- was secretary of housing and urban development and, and it was an opportunity to go work in Washington [D.C.] on his staff.  So, I left New Orleans [Louisiana], moved to Washington, and worked for the secretary of housing and urban development for a year.  But, midway through that term, Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was elected president and the secretary asked, the new secretary of housing and urban development--I think it was Secretary Pierce [Samuel Pierce]--if I could stay on another six months to complete the year because I was accepted to law school.  And so when I--at least continued to work and then after that I would leave and, and then went back to New Orleans to go to Tulane Law School [Tulane University Law School, New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, during your year working as the assistant to secretary of housing and urban development, what were some of your functions and what did you work on?  What special projects, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I do remember a few of them.  I worked on--it was a program called the UDAG, the Urban Development Action Grant program, and one of the major projects is here in New Orleans, it's the Canal Place theaters [Theatres at Canal Place, New Orleans, Louisiana], the Westin hotel [The Westin New Orleans Canal Place, New Orleans, Louisiana].  It's a huge, might have been a hundred million dollar project at the time, but it was--you know, had to do research and help the, the, the developers on their applications in trying to get this grant, so I worked on that.  I also spent a lot of time traveling with the secretary as he would go meet with mayors of different cities and talk about projects in those areas and do follow up for them.  So, it--my focus was pretty much, you know on--you know, just sort of staffing and follow up in advance and, and the major project was the, the one here in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, this is '81 [1981] to '82 [1982].  And what was it like being in--living in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: It was great, I mean, 'cause I lived with the secretary, so (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Oh, you did?  Oh.
Speaker 2: --I had a driver--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --I had a driver to work and back.  And, and so it was--it was--it was--'cause I got to meet everybody in Washington and have made great friends as a result of that.  And, and then I actually--let me--let me make sure I have my dates right.  Yeah, for six months, a few--wait, maybe it's three or four months I lived with the secretary and then I left and was roommates with my lifetime friend, Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial], a childhood friend I should say, who was at law school at Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] at the time, and so he and I shared a house while I was working and he was in law school.  So--and then I came back to New Orleans--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --after that period.
Story_ID: 655337
Speaker 1: What--how did you decide what law schools, or what law schools did you apply to?
Speaker 2: I only applied to a few.  I applied to Tulane [Tulane University Law School] here in New Orleans [Louisiana], Loyola [Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana], Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  I can't remember if I--how many others I applied to, but got accepted at all and decided--and I got a full scholarship to Tulane.  So, that helped me make the decision.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And just while we were talking about Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial], let--talk to me about your friendship and about his family as well.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Marc Morial is a childhood friend and our parents became friends at--they went to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] together.  But, Marc's father [Ernest Morial] was the first African American mayor of the City of New Orleans, and ultimately Marc was elected mayor of the city and then president of the United States Conference of Mayors, and now he's executive director of the, the National Urban League.  So, we grew up as mischievous kids, hanging out on Xavier's campus and in the city and, and developed a really great friendship and, you know, ultimately, you know, was able to, as mayor represent the City of New Orleans and still represent him as the president of the National Urban League as a--from a lawyer's perspective.  So, we have a--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --great continued friendship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you come back and attend--go to Tulane.  Now, tell me--give me more detail about law school.
Speaker 2: Well, bef- when I came back to New Orleans, it was like a brief period before I started, so I worked--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the district attorney's office for Harry Connick [Harry Connick, Sr.], who--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was a famous district attorney here in New Orleans and the father of Harry Connick, Jr., whom I knew as a kid and--or him as a kid rather (laughter).  So, after that, I started Tulane Law School in the fall--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as a, you know, first year law student.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me more about the work at the DA's office.
Speaker 2: I worked with the assistant DAs that were assigned to Judge Israel Augustine's section.  I think Judge Augustine [Israel M. Augustine, Jr.] might've been the first African American judge over in criminal court and the building is now named after him [Israel M. Augustine Criminal Justice Center, New Orleans, Louisiana].  But, I, you know, did research.  When I say did research, helped organize evidence and things for all the trials they would have in, in criminal court, which was fascinating because it was a good introduction into the law, good introduction in terms of how the system works.  It was just fascinating.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you think you would want to be a criminal lawyer?
Speaker 2: No, I did not (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was that before or after you worked there?
Speaker 2: Both (laughter).
Story_ID: 655338
Speaker 1: All right.  So, tell me about your first year as a first year law student.
Speaker 2: I mean, it was an eye opener.  I mean, law school was extremely competitive, intense.  I did run for class president and win, so I was president of our freshman class in law school, which sort of got me engaged in a lot of--you know, to meet kids from all around the--I say kids, but law students from all around the country and, and so--but it was--it was a very intense but rewarding experience.
Speaker 1: What about your professors?
Speaker 2: My law school professors were bright, engaging, I'm--can't--I don't know if I would say memorable, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: There aren't any that are memorable (laughter)?  Okay.
Speaker 2: There probably are a few that are memorable, but I just, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, is there anything in law school--I mean, because--I mean, it's, it--it's intense, during your years there, that you can remember or want to reflect about?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, ask your question again?
Speaker 1: Okay.  During your years at Tulane [Tulane University Law School, New Orleans, Louisiana], are there any events that happened or any--anything in the classes that you can remember that--something unusual that might have happened during that time at all during your--okay.  Let me reph--
Speaker 2: My years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, anything memorable that happened while I was in law school.  You know, not really.  It was pretty much a--just a intense I don't want to say boring but, I mean it's (laughter)--it was--you know, there was nothing really memorable at law school.  I don't mean that in a bad way, I--negative way.  I mean, law school was just--you know, it's not like college.  I mean, it's graduate school.  You, you know you go, you lectured, you take notes, you study, you take exams, and you go home.  I mean, it was not, you know--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, some people tell stories about moot courts and, you know, the different, you know, things that go on during--I just thought maybe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, right.
Speaker 1: --that something--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I--
Speaker 1: --like that would--
Speaker 2: --I did moot--
Speaker 1: --might have been--
Speaker 2: --court competition and was a--made it to the finals, didn't win, but, but, yeah.  But, that was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --something to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, fine (laughter).
Speaker 2: I wish I could--
Speaker 1: No, I, I--
Speaker 2: I wish I, I--I wish I, I could tell you something more exciting about law school, but it just wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you make any long time relationships with any of the law students that were in your class?
Speaker 2: I did.  I mean, I'm still friendly with many of my law school classmates.  And, and, and actually, some of the younger students who I was able to mentor--I mean, I did do recruiting for Tulane Law School while I was there and help recruit, you know, particularly African American students to come and, and mentored them while they were there, and, so who of all--many of whom have gone on to do really well.  Some have become judges.  Several of them--Terri Love is a judge.  Roland Belsome was my good friends who is now Fourth Circuit court of appeals judge [State of Louisiana Court of Appeal, Fourth Circuit].  So, you know, those were sort of great memories of--I guess I should've said that before, but law school is such a blur, it's so long ago.  But, yeah, mentoring a lot of the younger lawyers who--law students was great and seeing how well they've turned out and how well they're doing now is, you know, a--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --one of my fond memories.
Speaker 1: Who was the president while you were attending? Do you remember?
Speaker 2: The president of Tulane?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I think it was Eamon Kelly.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And Paul Verkuil [Paul R. Verkuil] would've been the dean of the law school and I think he either ultimately went on to be president of William and Mary college [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] or another major institution.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay.  Yeah, he--Paul Verkuil was--yeah, the dean from '78 [1978] to '85 [1985], okay.  All right.  So, graduation day, glad to have it over with, huh (laughter)?
Speaker 2: From law school?  Yeah, and one of the interesting things, which was great is my father [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] gave the graduation address.  So, that was a nice, memorable experience of law school (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pretty sure he did.
Story_ID: 655339
Speaker 1: Okay, so what are your plans now after law school [Tulane University Law School, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I practice--started practicing law at a law firm named McGlinchey Stafford [McGlinchey, Stafford, Mintz, Cellini and Lang; McGlinchey Stafford] here in New Orleans [Louisiana] where I worked in the sort of business section and did some commercial litigation and worked on contracts for one of the senior name partners.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: I stayed there for about--I can't remember.  Was it two years?  I think it was two years and then I left to go--a unique opportunity opened up for me to go back to Washington [D.C.] to work as a legislative assistant and a counsel to John Breaux, who just got elected to the United States Senate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What year were you admitted to the bar, in--
Speaker 2: I think 1985.
Speaker 1: All right.  Passed it the first time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's not always for everyone (laughter).  Okay.  So--okay, so now let's talk--
Speaker 2: Wait, did I?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean--
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember.  It's been so long.  I don't know if I conditioned it or passed it the first time.  I didn't flunk it.  How about that?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, we know you, you got admitted anyway.  Okay.  But--okay, so you go to, to D.C. and so how long--you're there for like two years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: --let's talk about some of the things that--and Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was, was, was president then, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Not yet?
Speaker 2: Wait, in '86 [1986]?
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986] is when--
Speaker 2: Was Reagan still president or was it--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush]?
Speaker 1: Still was president, yeah.
Speaker 2: I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he served--
Speaker 2: I think--
Speaker 1: --until '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: --I think it was--oh, he was.
Speaker 1: Reagan--yeah, Reagan served from '81 [1981] to '89 [1989].  Okay, so talk more about your, your work there for those two years.  You, you were an advisor on--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked on a number of different issues.  I worked on housing issues, labor issues, education issues, judiciary issues.  I--one of the unique things I remember was having the opportunity to, to vet two nominees to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, Robert Bork and, I think--I'm trying to remember the other candidates name at the time.  It might've been someone named Kennedy [Anthony Kennedy].  But, Senator Breaux, perhaps like a lot of us that I don't remember if he was on judiciary or not, but had to interview a number of these candidates.  And so we would prep them and sit in on the meetings and get to ask questions of the, the candidates.  So, that was a very, very interesting experience at that point.
Story_ID: 655340
Speaker 1: And so what happens after the two years is up?
Speaker 2: After the two years is up, I move to Los Angeles [California] where I work for Stevie Wonder as his chief operating officer.
Speaker 1: How did that come about?
Speaker 2: I, I met Stevie back in 1984 and we became friends, sort of kindred spirits in a way, and when I moved to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], he was interested in the--some legislation, the digital audio tape legislation, so he wanted to make a statement, so I sort of helped him sort of craft his position on it and, and so forth.  And, you know, but we just--really, we were just friends, but, but it, it sort of morphed into a little bit of a--more of a professional sort of relationship given his interest in legislation and issues and being in the [U.S.] Senate, and being able to help him advance some of those things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and so you went to work as--what was your, your title?
Speaker 2: At Stevie?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Chief operating officer and president of his foundation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Wonder Foundation.
Speaker 1: And well--okay, so you were over daily operations.  Tell me some of the things that you did as the chief operating officer for this organization, for that organization.
Speaker 2: Well, it was--it, it, it really had no borders in a way (laughter), if it's--if that's okay to say because it was--it--probably spent more time telling people no than anything else because you'd get offers for business deals and--from everybody all over the world.  And so I'd be on the front line of meeting with people and analyzing business deals and, and at the time, Stevie's primarily--his primary business was his tour.  And so he sort of had a tour manager and agents and others that sort of managed that, and so it was sort of the collateral things that were coming his way, opportunities to be--you know, to do film deals, et cetera.  So--and also to try to develop those sort of opportunities for him as well.  So, I spent a lot of time involved with just managing ideas, you know, being a bridge between Stevie and his politics and things of that sort.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And, and tell me what type of person is Stevie?
Speaker 2: He is probably the most giving, loving, emotionally available, disciplined artist, human being you'll ever meet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Anything else you want to--what about the foundation?  What does the foundation do, Stevie Wonder's foundation?
Speaker 2: Well, the foundation I think now has morphed into what, what he calls the--he has a major event every year now he does called House Full of Toys, which raises money to give joy to kids during Christmas by buying toys and opportunities for them now.  And at the time, the Wonder Foundation was sort of set up as a pass through to give--to help organizations that supported the visually impaired.
Speaker 1: I see.  And how long do you work for Stevie's organization?
Speaker 2: I think it might've been six years, yeah.
Story_ID: 655341
Speaker 1: And so what, what happens next?
Speaker 2: I took time after Stevie [Stevie Wonder] to do screenwriting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so--and to do art publishing.  I just decided I was gonna take a break and do something creative, and so did screenwriting and art publishing and worked with a number of important artists like [HistoryMaker] Sam Gilliam, [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett, Fred Brown [Frederick J. Brown], John Scott [John T. Scott], and developed limited edition silk screen prints, and just sort of hung out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And screenwriting, what did you write?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a, a number of projects that--I had a writing partner at the time, Lisa Jones [Lisa Jones Johnson], and so we developed a lot of projects and--that got attention but never got made, so ultimately just sort of hung it up, and then after that moved back to New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, you--they--it didn't get attention, but what type of stuff were, were you writing?  What did--was there a project that you wrote?  What was the name of it?  What was it about?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Well, one of them was called 'Lucid Interval,' which was a story about a young kid from Germany whose father was a well known psychiatrist doing experiments on fear.  And when he died, his will had provided that in order for his son to inherit this money, he had to continue these experiments.  So, he moved to the United States and moved to a college campus to execute these experiments.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It sounds interesting.
Speaker 2: That's one of them (laughter).
Speaker 1: You need to keep trying to, to get that one made, sounds interesting.  Okay.  And any others that were your favorite?  I mean, you, you still have these in the back of your mind somewhere, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I've recently reignited my writing career and, and I guess at some point we'll talk about that where I, I now have a deal with FremantleMedia [FremantleMedia Ltd.] to do a television series.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So, after you finish your--and how long were you doing screenwriting and art publishing?
Speaker 2: Just for a couple years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, from--you're with Stevie until '91 [1991]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, some of that stuff I did sort of simultaneous--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Story_ID: 655342
Speaker 1: All right, so you come back to New Orleans [Louisiana] to, to what firm?
Speaker 2: The firm I started with, McGlinchey Stafford [McGlinchey, Stafford, Mintz, Cellini and Lang; McGlinchey Stafford].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did you do there?  What type of law?
Speaker 2: Well, I came back as sort of on a very different circumstance.  I came back as of counsel.  So, I--so when I came back, I started doing more sort of government relations work, some litigation, and putting together deals, and at the same time, I had the flexibility to pursue my other business interests, which were, I got involved in developing two hotels, one called Hotel Le Cirque [Hotel Modern New Orleans], which is right at Lee Circle [New Orleans, Louisiana], which is sort of a--now has the controversy of having Robert E. Lee removed from the front of it, which I'm thrilled about, and then the other is the Pere Marquette Renaissance [Renaissance New Orleans Pere Marquette French Quarter Area Hotel, New Orleans, Louisiana], which was a Marriott hotel [Marriott International, Inc.].  It was one of the first times Marriott had moved into sort of a fashion forward boutique style hotel for their Renaissance brand [Renaissance Hotels].  So, I worked with a number of guys in developing that as a hotel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A former office building that was converted.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and your personal life, what's going on?
Speaker 2: When I came back, I was single.  I wasn't--not married.  So, just hanging out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Working hard.
Speaker 1: All right.  So now, let me see.  This--and then what happens after that?  Where, where do you go to work after--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --after that?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I--a number of lawyers from the McGlinchey Stafford firm decided to leave and set up a new firm called Sher Garner [Sher Garner Cahill Richter Klein McAlister and Hubert, LLC; Sher Garner Cahill Richter Klein and Hilbert, LLC, New Orleans, Louisiana], which is where I now practice law.  And I guess it had to be about sixteen years ago now.  Time flies.  But--and it's about--around the time that I got married [to Ashley McIntire Francis], too.  So, now I'm, I'm, I'm married with two kids who are eleven [Sara Francis] and thirteen [Olivia Francis]; and practicing law at the Sher Garner law firm.
Story_ID: 655343
Speaker 1: So, tell me who do you marry?
Speaker 2: Ashley Francis, Ashley McIntire Francis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how did you meet?
Speaker 2: We met through a mutual friend.  And it was interesting.  I went to a Super Bowl party with Michelle Miller Morial [HistoryMaker Michelle Miller] who--my best friend's wife now, who is a, a reporter for CBS in, in New York [New York], we were at a party and I happened to be talking to Ashley and, and had gone to the party with Michelle, and she says she had to leave to go back on air at the time.  And so she said, "He must like you.  Give him his--give him your number 'cause he's gotta leave now.  He's bringing me back to work."  And so that's--I sort of laugh and say, "You know what?  Don't leave.  I'm bringing her back to work.  I'll be right back."  And so that's sort of how we met and been together ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what year was this?
Speaker 2: Goodness.  What year was that?  That would've been--
Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993] or '94 [1994]?
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was been--no, let me think, seventeen years ago maybe?  Sixteen years ago, seventeen years ago?
Speaker 1: That would be 2000.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, around--well, yeah, around '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '98 [1998], 1998, '99 [1999], 2000.  Yeah, we got engaged in 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, wow.  Time flies.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 655344
Speaker 1: All right.  So now, the firm that you work for, Sher Garner [Sher Garner Cahill Richter Klein McAlister and Hubert, LLC; Sher Garner Cahill Richter Klein and Hilbert, LLC, New Orleans, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, and tell me about this firm.
Speaker 2: Sher Garner, we have like forty-five lawyers and it's--firm is broken into two parts.  Half does commercial litigation, the other half does real estate and business transactions and tax.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your focus is?
Speaker 2: Real estate transactions and commercial litigation and some government relations work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And can I backtrack for a second?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: You know, I've--I'm just thinking 'cause it--as we're moving forward, there's a couple of things that I wanted to mention that was--fun projects that I was able to do in the years before I got--I think before I got to the firm.  I co-wrote a book with--I gotta give a plug for my book, with two other lawyers [Lisa Jones Johnson and Walter C. Jones] called 'So You Want to Be a Lawyer' ['So You Want to Be a Lawyer: The Ultimate Guide to Getting Into and Succeeding in Law School'] and we started working on that as part of our writing in Los Angeles [California].  It's a student's guide to getting into, through, and employed after law school, which was originally published by Borders books [Borders Group, Inc.] and then Borders went bankrupt and it was recently picked up and it's being republished again.  But, it's an exciting book and it's a practical guide and exercise that if you can--is--our sort of premise is if you can get through this book, then law school is for you (laughter).  If you--if you find it boring and can't get through it, you probably shouldn't go.  And so that--that's sort of the focus of that book.  And, and also during that period when I was writing, I had the pleasure of co-producing or co-exec producing an album with Lionel Hampton called 'For the Love of Music,' which is one of the last albums that he did.  And on that album, we had artists--Stevie Wonder wrote a song for us, Chaka Khan wrote a song, Grover Washington [Grover Washington, Jr.] was on it, Tito Puente, Josh Redman [Joshua Redman], Ron Carter.  A lot of the greats came out to, to participate on that record.  So, I've--I'm, now I'm remembering back of some of the other things I did while--during that period.  So--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I just wanted to--
Speaker 1: In, in, in L.A., okay.
Speaker 2: --fill in the blanks.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's good 'cause I, I, I was still like in 1994, so--and I, I just had more information about that.  But, if we could go back to 1994 time.  Now, were you still in L.A. in 1994?
Speaker 2: I may have been going back and forth from New Orleans [Louisiana] to L.A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think it might've been around '95 [1995] that I'm--actually came back, '94 [1994], '95 [1995].
Story_ID: 655345
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, let's just go back just a little bit because I know that there's more information that you can tell me about Stevie.  Do you have a great story about Stevie Wonder and the time that you were working for him?
Speaker 2: Sure.  One of--one of the interesting stories that's sort of revealing about Stevie I think is when we were working together, Archbishop Desmond Tutu would call Stevie up and say, "Look, we want to--I want to get to come see you, I want to get together," and Stevie was in the middle of making an album, and when he sort of goes into the creative space, he's really unavailable.  And so--and this was at a time when, you know, apartheid was still a hot issue and the walls having come down, so to speak.  And, and the archbishop people would keep calling and calling and I would say, "I'm, I'm--archbishop, look, he'd love to help you, he'd love to be on your board, but he's not ready to commit right now."  And so finally the archbishop called up and said--or his people called and said, "Well, archbishop says he'd like to meet with you.  Can you come to Washington [D.C.] and just visit with him and talk to him about where Stevie is and all this sort of stuff?"  And so I said, "Sure.  I--let me get permission," and went back to Stevie and he said, "Sure, go, go meet with him."  I said, "What should I tell him?"  He said, "Well, you know what to say."  You know, it was like (laughter) he wouldn't give me any guidance.  So, I'm, you know, young at the time, thinking, oh my god, I'm gonna go meet this amazing man and I, I really don't know what to say.  And so I fly to Washington to meet with Archbishop Desmond Tutu and his--all of his guys are with him, Allan Boesak and a few of the other folks who were part of the movement.  And the archbishop was so gracious and nice and he--you know, he says, "Tim [HistoryMaker Timothy Francis], how--what's Stevie--I know he supports, you know, our cause, but why won't he give me an answer?"  And it was one of those moments where (laughter) you look at this icon.  I, I, I think he got a Nobel Peace Prize, asking you directly what's up with your boy, right (laughter)?  And so--and, and, and, and, and it's one of those things where I could honestly look at him and say that--'cause I knew Stevie so well that, "He wants to help you and typically when people ask for things and he's not ready to say yes or no it's because he wants to give you something more than what you're asking for."  And he said, "If you tell me that's the case, I'll believe you."  And I said, "I promise," (laughter), "you that's the case."  And then ultimately fast forwarding, I don't know if it was three months later or six months later, there was a major event at the Kennedy center [John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum] in Boston [Massachusetts], one of the Kennedy centers I think--I can't remember the name of it--where Mandela [Nelson Mandela] was there.  It was just unbelievable group of people from Jacqueline Onassis [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] to Paul Simon, et cetera, and Stevie showed up and, and it was there that he announced that he had written a song and he was dedicating all the proceeds to the cause, which was more than what they asked for and more than him just writing a check and more than him just lending his name to their foundation or whatever he wanted as board--joining the board.  And, and, and, and knowing what I know about Stevie, had he said, "I'm writing a song for you and I'm gonna donate all the proceeds," the phone would've rang 24/7 until that moment.  "Where's the song?  When is it gonna be released?"  And he just was--he just knew that, you know, "Guys, you know I'm good.  You just gotta be cool."  And I said that as well as I--and I didn't know he was gonna give a song, so--but, it happened.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And so that's one of my favorite Stevie stories.  I have others but, you know, it's one of them.
Speaker 1: Well, you can tell us more.  But, so do you remember the name of the song or?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: You don't?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how surprised was everyone--
Speaker 2: Shocked.
Speaker 1: --when they announced that?
Speaker 2: And he played it and sang it.  It was--people were in tears.  It was amazing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what did bishop--archbishop--Bishop Tutu say to you?  Did you talk to him after that?
Speaker 2: I didn't--I didn't get a reaction after the fact, but I'm sure he, he--you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --may--he and Stevie may have had a moment together, but I, I, I did not sense that the first time we had gotten together.
Speaker 1: Did you have an opportunity to, to meet Mandela [Nelson Mandela] during that time?
Speaker 2: I did not, unfortunately.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Did you ever get a chance to meet him?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No? Okay.
Story_ID: 655346
Speaker 1: (Background noise) Okay, and is there another story about Stevie [Stevie Wonder]?  Because--were you--you were working with him when he was working on the soundtrack for Spike Lee's movie 'Jungle Fever'?
Speaker 2: I don't remember during that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --time period.  You know one other interesting story, fun story, but this is sort of a recent one if that's okay to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --jump out of line.  But, I've most recently been, been doing Stevie's speechwriting for him--I say recently, the last several years, for his work as the United Nations messenger of peace through the United Nations.  And so one of the things that I'm, I'm very proud of and excited about is that Stevie was very engaged in helping to get a treaty passed that got--I can't remember if it was thirty to forty countries signed on to help the visually impaired get access to braille material and electronic material at a--an affordable price so that they can read books [Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who are Blind, Visually Impaired or Otherwise Print Disabled].  It's--it just makes, you know, 300 million people around the world who can't read--we have I think it's 300 or 30 million, I can't remember, but it's a extraordinarily big number of people who can't read because of a visual impairment.  And so this treaty helps to get that done.  And so we had to give a speech--well, I say we, Stevie had to give a speech that I helped him put together at WIPO, the World Intellectual Property Organization in Geneva [Switzerland].  And, you know, part of the sell at that meeting was why the visually impaired need to have access to braille or have access to electronic material so they can read.  And so I got notice of this speech on a Thursday and it was to be given on Friday, so I had to like jump on a plane, fly overnight, write the speech on the way.  We get there and I email it to the guy, I said, "Can you help print it out," and it was time to give the speech and Stevie says, "Well, how am I gonna read it?"  I'm like, oh my god.  Can we get it translated to braille?  Can we do any of that sort of stuff, and it was like not enough time to get it done.  And so the way he was able to deliver the speech was I had to call him on his cell phone from my cell phone, sitting in the room while he gave the speech with a little earphone in and read it to him in a way where I--it was translated into like a hundred different languages or fifty different languages, and I'm hearing him talk and give it while I'm sitting there and reading this speech to him and worrying about a dropped call and what would've happened.  And, but we got through it and, and it sort of was the beginning of the momentum when he showed up and demonstrated how important it was to him that he would get on a plane, come deliver a major address, make a promise to do a concert once they got it done to motivate all these, you know, ministers of information to go back to their countries and talk to their prime ministers and get this momentum going.
Speaker 1: Wow.  That's--that is absolutely amazing.  And that had to be--you had to be on pins and needles trying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I could not--
Speaker 1: --to get that speech done.
Speaker 2: --have been more stressed out (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: And that continues to happen by the way (laughter) as we--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, wow.  So, during this time, too, or, or right after this time, now, you're, you're very young doing these things and working with, with Stevie 'cause you're just turning about thirty--
Speaker 2: Something like that--
Speaker 1: --thirty-one.
Speaker 2: --like that.
Speaker 1: Something like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And then you're featured in Ebony magazine as one of the thirty leaders of the future on the, the list.  What, what were your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I forgot that happened (laughter).  You know, that's--what an honor.  I forgot that even happened.  Yeah.  I mean, I--you know, it was--I guess I was engaged in so many different disciplines from the art world to politics to business to law that maybe one day I'll get a focus, I hope (laughter).
Story_ID: 655347
Speaker 1: So, now, back to Lionel Hampton.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the work that you have--that you did with him as well.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, Lionel who I consider to be sort of my godfather, I go back with Lionel to when I was a young, young kid, and the connection there relates to the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament.  He was taught to play the drums by a nun in Chicago [Illinois] and was coming down to New Orleans [Louisiana] and the nun says, "Well, if you're going to New Orleans, you gotta look up the Francis family."  And so he did and came and met my father [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] and met my siblings [Michael Francis, David Francis, Kathleen Francis, Patrick Francis and Christina Francis] and I and we hit it off and he said--at the time, I said--told him, I said I wanted to be a lawyer, and he said, "Well if you ever become a lawyer, you'll be my lawyer as soon as you get your law degree and get your--pass the bar," and he held true to that word.  So, once I became a lawyer, he hired me as his lawyer and--but I ended up, you know, doing more things than just practicing law for him or, you know, on his behalf, obviously, you know, worked on producing his album.  And one of the exciting things that we did was I, I arranged for a private label champagne to be made in his honor, which I think was the first time an African American had had a true champagne named after him by a winery in Vertus [France] called Paul Goerg, which is one of the top wine producers in the Champagne region.  They do their own label and they also produce grapes or other wine or--to convert into champagne for a lot of the other major houses like Veuve Clicquot and others.  So, they're one of the top, top labels.  And so we put together a--an amazing tour which started with him getting the highest honor from the president of Austria [Thomas Klestil] and launched the champagne there, which was an exciting time to do it.  So, we had our grand opening there and then went from there to other cities, celebrating his champagne and having these champagne (laughter) announcements including one at the United Nations in New York [United Nations Headquarters, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Why was Austria selected as the first place (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they wanted the--the president of Austria wanted to honor Lionel, and so we said, "Look, if we're gonna do this, let's have a combined celebration," and so that's what we did and it worked out really well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what about the work on, on, the album?  What is your part there?
Speaker 2: I was the executive producer along with my writing partner at the time, Lisa Jones [Lisa Jones Johnson], and we went to Motown [Motown Records] and made the pitch and got [HistoryMaker] Steve McKeever who was the president of MoJazz [MoJazz Records].  He had created this new label called MoJazz.  And so we--Lionel was getting up there in age and had--just had a stroke and so we wanted to do something that would celebrate his music and his life.  And as you know, Lionel started way back in the day with Louis Armstrong as Louis Armstrong's drummer.  And it was at that time at a recording session that Louis said, "Hey man, do you know what those things are over there?"  Which was the vibraphone.  And so Lionel got on the vibes and started playing it and really impressed him.  And I think that--at that point, they probably made the first sort of serious jazz record with--including a vibraphone.  And so, you know, Lionel starting with Louis Armstrong, integrating the Benny Goodman band, having discovered Dinah Washington, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, young Harry Connick [Harry Connick, Jr.] and the Marsalis brothers and, you know, just a long list of people who have played in his orchestra or he helped discover or he helped mentor.  We wanted to do a record that would include some of the, you know, more established jazz musicians as well as some of the newer people like Josh Redman [Joshua Redman] and Marcus Roberts, I think played on the record.  And so we, we called it 'For the Love of Music.'  And as I mentioned earlier, Stevie [Stevie Wonder] wrote a song and Chaka Khan wrote a song.  So, it was just a delightful--it was not necessarily a sort of typical, traditional jazz record.  We remade some pop songs into jazz and did some more traditional stuff, too.  And I think Lionel did now one of my favorite renditions of Louis Armstrong's song, "Wonderful World" ["What a Wonderful World"], on that record.
Story_ID: 655348
Speaker 1: All right, so, now, we can move forward (laughter) a little bit and you're still pretty young, and then you come back to, to New Orleans [Louisiana], and you get married [to Ashley McIntire Francis].  And your friend, Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial], is running for mayor.
Speaker 2: Mayor, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, tell me about that time.
Speaker 2: Well, that was an interesting time.  I mean, Marc was thirty-six years old and, and I was--still had one foot in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at the time, but he got elected, I moved back to New Orleans, and sort of became part of his--not--I didn't work for the city in an official capacity, but sort of helped--you know, helped him navigate, you know, the political world and, and, and on different initiatives and so forth.  So, it was--it was a--it was a good time to see a young friend who--to rise to that level and to do such an amazing job at running the city.  At the time that Marc was elected, the City of New Orleans had sort of an unprecedented high crime rate and Marc very wisely did a national search to identify a top crime fighting guy in Richard Pennington who, unfortunately, recently passed in Atlanta [Georgia].  It was sort of a tragedy.  But, Richard and Marc can almost solely be credited with coming in and putting in a sort of new form of policing that helped reduce crime, reduce murders in the City of New Orleans, and when that happens, the economy changes.  And, in fact, as a beneficiary of that in a way, we sort of developed Hotel Le Cirque [Hotel Modern New Orleans], which is right at Lee Circle [New Orleans, Louisiana], which at the time was not the most desirable location to do a hotel, but because of how they were turning the city around and the development of the, the World War II museum [National WWII Museum, New Orleans, Louisiana] right behind it, that whole area has now developed in a way that's become a very vibrant economic corridor in the city in large measure from the great work that Marc did in his early years in terms of getting down crime and, and getting folks to move back into the city.
Speaker 1: Well, that's interesting to be able to turn a hotel around or even to develop a hotel.  I mean, how do you do that?
Speaker 2: It's not easy.  It's (laughter) not easy.  And you do it with great partners and friends.  I mean, I partnered with a couple of guys who were already in the business and--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --sort of understood how to do boutiques, but I worked very closely with the architects and interior designers and brought in--it actually became I think either the first or second what we call design hotel in the country, and the only other one at the time was the Chambers in New York [Chambers Hotel, New York, New York], and design hotel was a brand.  I mean, obviously, you know, Philippe Starck and Ian Schrager and all of those guys had sort of created this--the whole, you know, boutique design concept, but it was sort of new to the South and new to New Orleans.  And so it was exciting and fun and, and a big learning curve to getting it done, and learned a lot of lessons as a result of it.
Speaker 1: And, and do you think that people actually enjoy the boutique style of hotels now?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think so.  I mean, there, there are always gonna be people who want full service hotels and, and want big hotels because they want to be able to have conferencing centers and access to pools and all that sort of stuff as a part of their experience, but there are other people who want to be able to pop in, like they're popping into their condo in New York [New York] or Chicago [Illinois] without running into a thousand people in the lobby.  They can get to their room quickly and it has some service available to it.  But--and unfortunately nowadays what's happened is the whole notion of a boutique hotel means small rooms, but at least comfortable beds and soft pillows and great linens.  But, yeah, you know, it's--it--I think there's still a nice niche for boutique hotels.
Story_ID: 655349
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, let's talk about you come back to--you come back to the firm and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we're back here at Sher Garner [Sher Garner Cahill Richter Klein McAlister and Hubert, LLC; Sher Garner Cahill Richter Klein and Hilbert, LLC, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And let's talk about some of your work that you have done with this firm as well.
Speaker 2: Well, one of the most recent things that we got involved with--and I'll--and I'll sort of go back a little bit, too, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but just 'cause it's sort of topical at the time where New Orleans [Louisiana] has just gone through revisiting or refighting the Civil War in the sense that it just took down four Confederate monuments that were celebrating a very ugly part of our past.  And, and this firm was--got involved in supporting the cause of taking down the monuments in that we represented the, the National Urban League, the--I think the Council of Jewish Women [National Council of Jewish Women], NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in writing an amicus brief to the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit] supporting the city's right to take them down.  And but if, if I can talk about what we've done at the firm that's been important goes back to right after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  Our firm has traditionally been sort of what we would call sort of a classic white shoe defense firm where you represent insurance companies and, you know, major corporations, and et cetera.  But after Katrina, all of our major institutions for the most part were on their backs under water, drowning, and needed counsel, and--which meant you had to make some tough decisions about whether or not you would sue insurance companies, the federal government, and other things like that.  And we, we had to quickly pivot and make a business decision about who we would stand with.  Now, this is not to suggest that, you know, we have any sort of animus against insurance companies.  We defend insurance companies; we're happy to do it.  But, you know, institutions like Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], Children's Hospital [New Orleans, Louisiana], and other major institutions who are the lifeblood of this--lifeblood of this community needed representation and needed somebody to stand with them and fight the good fight to make sure that they got their money from FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency], got their money from insurance companies.  And so we, we were willing to put aside our bread and butter to then stand with these institutions that needed good counsel to dig out of a big hole, and it took a while, but we got there and, and ultimately what you find out by--you know, sometimes no good deed goes unpunished and sometimes good deeds are rewarded by having done good work and other people recognize it and they say, hey, look, I saw what you did for this institution, we want you to represent us.  And so--not that we did it with the expectation that would get anything about it.  We did it at the risk that we would lose our core business by having to step out there, but we did it and we represented all these institutions that really mean the world to New Orleans and what New Orleans is all about.
Story_ID: 655350
Speaker 1: Well, we'll, we'll talk more about that and what your company [Sher Garner Cahill Richter Klein and Hilbert, LLC, New Orleans, Louisiana] did accomplish, but on a personal note when Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] happened, what--where were you and what, what are your remembrances of that time?
Speaker 2: Well, that was a, a very, very, very stressful time.  Ray Nagin was the mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana] and, unfortunately, was not prepared to deal with a crisis in a way that a mayor should've been in--prepared to deal with and it was his first one, we get that, but I remember like it was yesterday at my home, my father [HistoryMaker Norman Francis] calling and talking to my wife [Ashley McIntire Francis] and says, "Get out of town.  This doesn't look good."  And, and part of the reason why was because my wife was nine months pregnant and worried that if this storm hit--she had to have a C section [Cesarean section]--that there'd be no electricity, no hospitals, no nothing.  So, I remember her walking in the room and saying, "I don't know what you're doing, but your dad just called, I'm leaving."  And I had a two year old at the time, too.  So, she went and packed up her suitcase and (laughter) was getting ready to leave.  I said, "Well, I guess I'm going, too," and grabbed just like a toothbrush and a t-shirt and a pair of pants 'cause I thought I'd be back in a few moments, you know, in a day or two.  And as it turns out, we had driven to Hattiesburg, Mississippi, where my wife's uncle is a doctor and said, "Look, you can have the baby here," and we got to Hattiesburg and as fate would have it, the storm shifted a little bit to the east and hit Hattiesburg really hard, and it was triage circumstances at the hospital.  It was really, really bad.  So, we then had to make a decision about where to go have this baby.  And so we jumped in the--we had to cut trees out, jumped in the car to drive to Jackson, Mississippi, on a half a tank of gas, which is not enough and the lines for gas were miles--mi- miles and miles long.  So, we were like, "Oh my god, we're never gonna make it to the hospital.  I gotta have a C section."  So, we drove to the front of the gas line.  I said, "Get out the car," (laughter).  So, my wife who was pregnant at the time got out of the car to show everybody she was pregnant and they let her--let us get gas and we ultimately made it to Jackson, Mississippi, where we slept--we could only find a friend's office who had electricity, so we slept on the floor of the office for a couple of days until we were able to find a doctor and, and checked into Baptist hospital [Baptist Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi] to have a baby.  So, but I, I must say at the time, the, the people of Jackson, Mississippi, were just amazing and so gracious and giving.  The, the anesthesiologist at Baptist hospital basically said--when he heard the story, he says, "I'm not charging you," just amazing.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: I go to a coffee shop, people would say, "You're not from here.  You're not from around here, are you?"  So, I said, "No I'm not," (laughter).  Said, "Well, I'm buying your coffee."  I mean, it--they could not have been more lovely.  So, I know you guys are going to Jackson to do more interviews, but just a great place to, to be after the storm.
Speaker 1: Wow.  That's--that is a great story.  Okay.  And so you had a baby boy or girl?
Speaker 2: Two girls.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what are your daughters' names now?
Speaker 2: The first one is Olivia Grace Francis [Olivia Francis]; and the youngest one who was born in Jackson, Mississippi, is Sara Katharine Francis [Sara Francis].
Story_ID: 655351
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, back to the firm [Sher Garner Cahill Richter Klein and Hilbert, LLC, New Orleans, Louisiana] and, and representing, you know, the different institutions and during--or after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], is there a story about any one thing in particular that you can remember as far as getting things done for any institution?
Speaker 2: The, the--wow, there's so many stories.  Let me just think.  I mean, one of the big stories was just representing Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and helping them get the money they needed, I mean, from both FEMA [Federal Emergency Management Agency] and from their, their insurance company [Travelers Property Casualty Company of America] who was battling because, you know, one of the interesting things about these instances is, you know, it's sort of like when you have health insurance and you--they say, "Well, you have two insurances?  I don't want to pay."  "No, you pay."  "No, I'm not gonna pay.  You're gonna--." So, you have this dance you have to do with, with FEMA, your insurance companies, and what's the set off because, you know, it's like the chicken and egg--who wants to pay, who doesn't want to pay, and, and trying to explain to them that your costs are really way beyond--your actual costs are way beyond what may be covered and why certain things ought to be in this bucket versus another bucket and they're not to pay the same thing.  One's claiming that, "Well, this is paying the same thing they're gonna pay."  I said, "No, this one's for this and yours is for that," and, and so it was really tricky.  And when you think about--and for Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], too, I mean these institutions that are educating young African Americans and at a critical point that if they don't open their doors and start getting revenue in, they would collapse forever.  It was not just another flood or storm.  It was, will the faculty leave and take jobs someplace else and never come back?  And you--and you lose your accreditation.  Will the students not come back?  And a lot of students didn't come back.  A lot of these schools have--are finally getting back up to their pre-Katrina enrollment.  But, it was so critical that you be able to send the message to your faculty and students, "We will be open, we will survive," because if you didn't, they'd be gone forever.  I mean, once you lose your faculty and they're gone and you lose a year, you can't just--you can't just redo it.  And so--I mean, when I say it was desperate and the fight was fierce and it's unbelievable at how certain institutions didn't understand how critical it was to give them the money.
Speaker 1: I absolutely understand, but let--let's pause here.
Story_ID: 655352
Speaker 1: Okay so tell me about foundations that you might have been a part of before or even during Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].
Speaker 2: Sure.  As I mentioned to you just dating back to when I was a little, young kid, I just had a love of the arts and have served on a number of arts boards from the, the Contemporary Arts Center of New Orleans [Contemporary Arts Center New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], the New Orleans Museum of Art [New Orleans, Louisiana], the Ogden Museum of Southern Art [New Orleans, Louisiana], and served on a, a number of juries on the selection of art for public spaces.  My wife [Ashley McIntire Francis] and I, who both have a passion of art, were able to create the Blanche and Norman C. Francis Collection at Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] in honor of our--my, my parents [Blanche Macdonald Francis and HistoryMaker Norman Francis] and obviously her parents, too, but--which includes lots of amazing artists, Romare Bearden to Jacob Lawrence to John Scott [John T. Scott] and Frederick Brown [Frederick J. Brown], and it's taken on a life of its own in terms of developing.  And so the, the, the spirit and, and--I should add that John Scott was a part of helping this--start this collection.  And so the spirit of which it was created was to help Xavier have an environment where both students and faculty and staff could live and work and grow to appreciate the arts and understand things of beauty and be inspired and, and to, to be creative thinkers.  And so we've recently also done the same thing, but not in any particular name, made a major donation to Tulane University [New Orleans, Louisiana] as well, of some major works of art and sculpture, to kind of mostly African American artists to start exposing students at, at Tulane and others who live and work and, you know, attend there to be exposed to artists like Frederick Brown and John Scott and, and others.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And have made major donations to the New Orleans Museum of Art--of the--of artists as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so when, when will one of your pieces (laughter) be included in the collection?
Speaker 2: Oh, there--one of mine is there now.  Yeah, a major piece I did a while back is, is in the collection.  So--
Speaker 1: That's nice.  That's really great.  What about boards?  What boards are you a part of or have been a part of?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I've served on a number of boards including the New Orleans Sugar Bowl, which is the sort of a major civic board that helps put on the Sugar Bowl football classic [Sugar Bowl Classic], which is one of--considered one of the top bowls in the country.  They also do other events for high schools for track and field and soccer and, and, and so forth.  I've also served on the Lionel Hampton Foundation board [Lionel and Gladys Hampton Foundation].  My father's leadership board, which is called the Norman C. Francis Leadership Institute [New Orleans, Louisiana], which takes young people in the New Orleans [Louisiana] community who are up and coming leaders mostly between the ages of thirty and forty-five to, to go through this adaptive leadership program.  We hired a, a gentleman who has taught this course at Harvard [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the Cambridge Institute [Cambridge Institute of International Education, Waltham, Massachusetts], Marty Linsky [Martin Linsky], who flies down and does a yearlong intensive training program of young people, and so I'm very engaged in helping to stand that up and to keep it--keep it rolling.  Also, I've served on the southern region of the Anti-Defamation League board, which helps to deal with anti-Semitism, racism, hate, does great programs like No Place For Hate in, in high schools and grammar schools in the city and around the, the southern region.  I've also served on, on Tulane University's--currently serve on Tulane University's Board of Administrators board, which is a great opportunity to be engaged in higher education, have--having grown up in that system if you will with a father who is the college president.  It's very interesting to, to be at a major institution and to hopefully make a difference in terms of, you know, good stewardship in terms of how Tulane operates and, and, and involves on their diversity issues and all, all sorts of other issues as well.  I've also served on my daughters' school board, Louise McGehee School [Louise S. McGehee School, New Orleans, Louisiana] board of directors; and, and if you give me a few more minutes, I'll think of some more (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 655353
Speaker 1: Major work here, we're, we're coming closer to today's times, but are there any particular or interesting cases that you worked on in this firm [Sher Garner Cahill Richter Klein and Hilbert, LLC, New Orleans, Louisiana] recently?
Speaker 2: Well, the--there are a couple of interesting cases, one that we are working on now which is the shrinking coastline of Louisiana.  We have been engaged by the governor [John Bel Edwards] and others to help deal with the shrinking coastline of Louisiana.  The, the oil and gas companies in the United States have dredged throughout the marshes and, and I believe their documents will show this whereas other scientific documents, when you dredge in the marshes, it allows for saltwater intrusion to enter into the, the marshes, which kills it and dis- and sort of disintegrates it.  And that, that ultimately kills the front line of protection for hurricanes.  Having marshes and built up grass areas, et cetera, is a barrier to storm surges.  And Louisiana is losing I don't know how many football fields a day of this marshland and at some point, the Gulf [Gulf of Mexico] may be at the door of the City of New Orleans [Louisiana].  And so there's a effort afoot to hold those responsible for having done the dredging in, in the marshes responsible to help pay for a solution and a fix.
Speaker 1: I see.  Yeah, that seems like that, that would be very, very important, to get that han- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean it's the most--
Speaker 1: --yeah, to get that handled.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the most pressing and compelling and potentially devastating issue facing Louisiana today.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Okay.  All right.  Anything else?
Speaker 2: Well, we were involved in a major lawsuit a while back against a number of people regarding crime cameras in the City of New Orleans, which ultimately led to sort of uncovering wide scale corruption in the City of New Orleans.  And, and as a result, a number of city officials and others were indicted and, and sent to jail.  And, you know, in a city where people were being murdered and, and, and lots of crime was going on, there was corruption with respect to crime cameras and those--and, and being bootlegged and not operating properly, et cetera, that caused--you know, caused so much waste and, and, and, and, and unsolved crimes that we were involved in prosecuting that case and it, it led to unveiling some things that helped to make a difference in how the city operates now.
Story_ID: 655354
Speaker 1: Tell me, what are your thoughts about how the city operates from, say over the last ten years, things that are, are, are going because before Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], you know, there was a different type of culture and, and now, once a lot of people left and did not come back, the culture seems to have changed.  Do you have that feeling about New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, the--yes and no.  I mean, it--look, so many people died of a broken heart after Katrina because of the failures of our government, federal government, city government, state government, just the loss of their property, the inability to fight insurance companies and, and so you lost people that way and you lost people who just packed up and left.  And people who packed up and left are on all sorts of levels, people who were very wealthy who just packed up and left and people who were poor and could no longer afford to live here because they didn't know whether or not--for example, in the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana], whether or not city services were going to be provided to that--their communities anymore because there just wasn't enough density in those areas for people to, to, to come back and say, "Well, if can move back here, will I have fire protection, will I have police protection?"  And the alternatives of moving deeper or closer into the heart of town to higher ground are so expensive, they couldn't afford to come in.  Now, that impacts the community in a variety of different ways.  On one hand, it impacts the community because a lot of these people were service workers, and so when you lose service workers, restaurants, hotels, and, and, and the service community don't have people to work there because they can't afford to live closer 'cause there's no public transportation getting them back and forth and they just can't afford to, to be in a town where they don't have access to good healthcare, et cetera.  So--but, what is interesting about New Orleans is that the preservationists and others who remained, were committed to the architecture, committed to the culture, chefs and others who were committed to the cuisine have remained and, and gotten better and stronger in their resolve for standing this community up.  Our new leadership has done the same thing.  And lots of people, bottom fishers or otherwise, saw New Orleans as a very unique opportunity to come and invest.  And so there are areas of the city that had been dying but had great bones and great architecture that are now getting investments that are standing up and creating a--you know, a, a--reviving our culture and our economy in ways that were--had--were dy- were dying before.  I mean, in places where perhaps African Americans, you know, lived in but left 'cause they couldn't afford to--now new people are coming in is sort of gentrified in a way, but they're coming in and spending their money and saving these properties and saving the spirit, and, and our musicians, fortunately, have remained.  And so with respect to our cuisine, our culture, our music, it's still here.  We've lost a lot of people, but people are still coming back.  So, New Orleans has experienced, as a result of tragedy and, and not saying it justifies it, sort of an economic renaissance that's really unparalleled because after Katrina, you know--I, I, I don't want to say hundreds but, you know, 20, 30, $40 billion were spent in rebuilding this community infrastructure in insurance money and houses, et cetera, and then after the BP [BP P.L.C.] oil spill, 20, $30 billion were spent in this community in, in a settlement fund that got invested in this town.  So, you know, pre-Katrina New Orleans was fine, but all of a sudden, you know, it kind of, you know, hits--a flood hits and all of a sudden and then the BP hits and all of a sudden billions of dollars come in.  And so, there's been a renewed sort of energy here and, and it--we are getting to the point now where historic buildings are getting redone and built out in a way that's never happened before to the point where we may not have many more left to redo, which is--is what it is, but it's sort of like, you know, the alternative was they would've decayed and fallen down.
Story_ID: 655355
Speaker 1: Well, I, I do see that.  But, the people who were living here, a, a lot of them, I should say, were renting their properties and have moved to places where--I mean, they actually don't want to come back because they were either able to purchase property in, in another city or found a, a new way of life.  Do you see in the near future that people who want to come back will be able to not necessarily live in New Orleans [Louisiana] proper, you know, like in the city where everything is high, but do you see in the future with this new leadership that there will be any way that people who do want to come back to New Orleans will be afford--will be able to afford to come back and, and live, you know, a comfortable life here?
Speaker 2: I hope so.  But, what worries me about that happening and whether--and--look, they, they may have gone on, frankly, to actually make a better living someplace else.  They may have made more money, saved more money, had a better quality of life, better education experience for their kids who have been lifted up in a way that are in a better position to come back.  But, you know, I hate to say this, but if they're smarter (laughter) now and they look back and where they may have to go back to, if they were--think even about the 9th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana]--look, the 9th Ward is sort of on the way down to St. Bernard Parish [Louisiana], Plaquemines Parish [Louisiana] where our coast is shrinking.  And so when you think about the shrinking coast and how that's coming towards them first, do you want to move back to a place that whether or not it--you can--it's been redeveloped, you now have city services, you have electricity, you have fire, you have police, you have all those sort of protections, but there's--coast is shrinking and, and, and it's coming towards you (laughter), I--but you're--and you're smarter now (laughter), you know, 'cause you've gone to a city where you got maybe better educational opportunities, et cetera, but a job that--you know, do you want to come back, where you're gonna--but I do think--I, I have to--there are a lot of people coming back.  I mean, it's no--you--you're not from here, but I gotta tell you, there's no place like home.  Everybody comes back to New Orleans.  I'm sorry.  I mean, they may not go back to Chicago [Illinois] 'cause it's so cold, but you come back to New Orleans for a lot of other reasons (laughter), you know.  But--you know, so, I hope so because the folks that have left are missed and it's tragic because most people leave and their families don't come with them.  And so it's--once you break up the family, it's--you know (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 655356
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I understand (laughter).  Now, what are your thoughts about the change in leadership, from having, you know, black mayors and the turnaround that's going on in, in the City of New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Well, that's an interesting question.  I mean--and it really has a--it's hard to just start right there because, you know, one of the things I mentioned to you early on was that, you know, while I was at Tulane Law School [Tulane University Law School, New Orleans, Louisiana], having the opportunity to mentor young law students who were coming up that have gone on to do great things and be in positions.  I mean, we have to figure out a way to train and prepare young African Americans for public service.  It's sort of what this leadership institute [Norman C. Francis Leadership Institute, New Orleans, Louisiana] does.  It prepares them for, for public service in a way to understand that the first generation people, you know, like Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial] had the benefit of having a father who was a mayor [Ernest Morial], who knew how to operate in a political system, who knew that there were dos and don'ts and lines that you shouldn't cross, and how to be really smart.  I mean, Sidney Barthelemy was a--an astute mayor.  He, he--his father wasn't a mayor, but he, he got it.  I mean, Ray Nagin didn't understand the lines and blurred the lines and ended up, you know, losing his freedom as a result of it.  And it, it created an opportunity for New Orleans to elect a white mayor [Mitch Landrieu], albeit someone who was credible and smart and who's done the right job and probably taken on issues that a black mayor could not take on, like the monuments.  And I believe he's had a commitment to diversity in his administration.  He's demonstrated that and he's had a, a commitment to diversity in contracting services with the City of New Orleans.  So, look, when you get a white mayor who can do the right thing, great.  Now, in a city like New Orleans where you have--for a long time had a white mayor--a city who's 60 percent African American and you have a white mayor, a white DA [district attorney], and a white U.S. attorney, it presents an opportunity for a real crisis in leadership, when you have a Ferguson like in Missouri, if you have something like that in New Orleans.  I mean, you--in cities where you have majority population, African American pop- you need strong community leaders, whether they're mayors, head of city council, DA, U.S. attorneys, to be a part of the chorus of people who help stand up the city and who can help manage the discussion, help--have the credibility with a community that when they say they're gonna do something, they're trusted that they're gonna do it.  And that's not always--always exclusive to a color, whether you're black or white; I get that.  But, you know, sometimes, you know, people will trust just because of the color or distrust just because of a color.  And, you know, there's no easy fix or switch that you can turn on or off.  And so New Orleans is going to be looking at electing a new mayor soon.  I don't know that any white candidates will run.  I mean, a couple of them--people who were interested said, "You know, I don't know that we could ever elect another white mayor."  And really, it's tragic if we get to the point where people look that way because you nee- in any election, you need to have the strongest candidates, black, white, Jewish, gay, whatever, straight, whatever it may be who are committed to public service, who are smart, who can raise the debate and the discussion about the future of New--the City of New Orleans, and even if they don't win, they've raised a debate and raised the issues in a way that the other candidate has to acknowledge and deal with and be held accountable to.  So, in six months, we have a new election.  We may end up with our first female mayor of New Orleans [LaToya Cantrell], I don't know, but it's, it's gonna be interesting.
Story_ID: 655357
Speaker 1: Well, while we're talking about (clears throat) elections and, and politics, what are your reflections about Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] being elected first African American president of the United States?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good one.  I, I almost want to tear up--(cough) a sip--'cause my immediate thought is, is this true or not?  I mean, but for the most part--for my daughters [Olivia Francis and Sara Francis], it's the first president they've known.  And for a generation of young people, that's all they've known.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Where were you the night of the election?  Do you remember?  The first election.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember what--the first one?  I can't--I must've been at home with friends celebrating.  I mean, you know, when you think (laughter), think about where we are now (laughter)--when you think about where we are now and the level of credibility--look, I, I can't sit here and tell you I agree with everything President Obama did or disagree with everything he did.  I mean, I'm not gonna get into that, but if we were to look at--try to be intellectually honest for a moment and look at, you know, people who did an earnest job of bringing dignity and credibility and--to the office of presidency, he is one of the best ever to have done that whether you agree with his policies about economics, about gender, he, he tried to do it in a very thoughtful, dignified way, and that's all we can ever ask of anybody because we have a country that will always be divided and always see things different.  It's just who we are.  I mean, even families, you know, how to parent.  I mean, you're gonna have a wife who's gonna think parenting ought to be one way, a father may think a different way, and the same thing will be between Republicans and Independents and Democrats forever and ever.  But, I mean, you know, to--you know, to kind of get back to him in an unemotional way, it's sort of like I think he brought dignity to the office in a way of how he operated, how he raised his kids [Sasha Obama and Malia Obama], how he conducted themselves, how he--there may be African Americans that disagree with a lot of things, but how--we ought to feel proud in terms of how he conducted himself.  And the first lady [Michelle Obama].
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 655358
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you think we should talk about before we go forward?
Speaker 2: Not at this moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, is it true that you have received over forty honorary degrees from different universities?
Speaker 2: No way (laughter).  That's my father [HistoryMaker Norman Francis].
Speaker 1: Oh, it's your father?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm lucky I got the two I got (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about those two then.  Okay, so--
Speaker 2: No, I mean, my, my undergraduate degree [from Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and my law degree [from Tulane University Law School, New Orleans, Louisiana] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh.  Okay (laughter), okay.  All right.  Yeah, so they--you know, some--I mean, father and son, which you never know because you still have many more years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's true.  You never know, huh?
Speaker 1: And your father has done some, some amazing things.  Of, of course he--you're gonna follow in his footsteps because you're halfway there.  Okay.  So, other boards, you said you might think of other things that you're doing for your community, and I'm look- okay, what--New Orleans Aviation Board?
Speaker 2: No, that was--
Speaker 1: Was that you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, this must be a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe we better take a little--
Speaker 1: This--
Speaker 2: --break and I can scratch through some stuff--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for you (laughter)?
Story_ID: 655359
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about what's coming up next for you in your life, what you're doing now as far as art and movies.
Speaker 2: Great (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Whatever you want to talk about.
Speaker 2: Well, I've, I've started, you know, writing again in my spare time and wrote a screenplay about the first female director of the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] and her road to getting there.  It's fictional because it hasn't happened yet.  And it landed on the desk of a producer at Lionsgate Television, who called me up and said, "Look, this is intriguing.  How do you know about all this stuff?"  And, and the screenplay was about the vetting process and I had the great fortune of working during the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration with both the United States senators, Senator Mary Landrieu and Senator David Vitter in vetting federal judges and U.S. attorneys here in Louisiana for consideration or recommendation to be nominated by the president, and a majority of--not all of them, were nominated and now serving in, in serious positions, and, and was recently asked by the new senator, Senator Cassidy [Bill Cassidy], to do the same thing under the Trump [President Donald John Trump] administration to help them in the vetting process.  And so it sort of inspired me to write this screenplay about what would a woman have to go through to become the first female director of the CIA.  And so having some background, I've worked in the [U.S.] Senate and done this recently, I wrote this screenplay that landed at Lionsgate and they called me up and said, "Would you want to do this as a television series?"  And I said, "Yes."  They said, "But, we only like one aspect of it that we want to pull out of it and develop," which was she had hired consultants to help her through the process.  And so the screenplay morphed into a television series, which is now at FremantleMedia [FremantleMedia Ltd.], but it's about lobbyists in Los Ange- and lobbyists in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and how they operate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I wrote a pilot for it and we're getting ready to take it out and fingers are crossed that it'll show up on your Amazon Video or Netflix or (laughter), or one of your cable channels soon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm a Netflix fanatic, so that will be really great.  What about your artwork?  Are you working--painting?
Speaker 2: I have not been painting recently, although I am committed to getting back to it.  It's--I don't have time to write and to paint, so if the writing dies, I will paint again.  So (laughter), it, it is on the--on the--on the drawing boards.  But, also I, I just reconnected with the estate of a great friend, Frederick Brown [Frederick J. Brown], who is an amazing artist, who I did work with before and published his work.  Fred was one of the first African Americans to have a one man exhibition at the Museum of the Chinese Revolution [National Museum of China] in Tiananmen Square [Beijing, China] and showed at Marlborough [Marlborough Gallery] in New York [New York] for many, many years and other major galleries, and I publish a lot of his work.  And so I'm talking with his estate about going back and now publishing posthumously some of his work, his prints, fine art prints to, to put back in commerce.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so what, what do you think you want to write next?  Or you're just gonna wait to see what happens with the pilot?  Do you think that you'll ever write a book?
Speaker 2: Well, I do have two other screenplays that I've just finished.  One is about a--it's based in New Orleans [Louisiana] about a corrupt DA [district attorney] who dies and his daughter becomes the, the DA and is charged with a crime and has to defend herself.  And the other one is top secret.  I can't talk about it yet because it's too good an idea; it might get stolen.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Well, we'll be on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, I, I don't know that I--maybe write a book, but not, not yet.
Story_ID: 655360
Speaker 1: What ha- would you like to do that you have not done?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question because on my bucket list is to get the movie made or the television series.  I mean, I've, you know, written a book already, the lawyer book ['So You Want to Be a Lawyer: The Ultimate Guide to Getting Into and Succeeding in Law School,' Timothy B. Francis, Lisa Jones Johnson and Walter C. Jones] and done a--I mean, a, a CD ['For the Love of Music'] with Lionel Hampton, a bunch of major stars.  I did play a role in a movie, 'On the 7th Day' ['Woman Thou Art Loosed: On the 7th Day'], forgot about that, it's all coming back to me now, with Blair Underwood, a great friend, Neema Barnette, who is a director, who directed a movie for T.D. Jakes [HistoryMaker Bishop T.D. Jakes], and asked me--I never acted before in my life and said, "I'm doing this movie and I want you to play Blair Underwood's friend, make him comfortable in New Orleans [Louisiana]," and I said, "I'm not doing it," and she made me do it, and it turned out to be a lot of fun.  But, so I've now acted in a movie, written a book, produced a record, published art, painted, built hotels, and so I just need to get my movie made and then I'll plant a tree (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Do you like to travel?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I do like to travel, yeah.
Speaker 1: And where have you traveled or where would you like to travel that you have not been?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I'd like to go to A- South Africa.  I'm going to northern Africa to Morocco with Stevie [Stevie Wonder].  We had a big culmination of his treaty [Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who are Blind, Visually Impaired or Otherwise Print Disabled] there and gave a major address, but I'd like to go to South Africa.  I mean, I've been to most of Europe, although I'd like to go to Scotland to see where my family is from, the Macdonalds, and then also--although the rest of my family's done it, I have not gone to Cuba, which I need to go to very soon while I still have some family in Cuba.
Story_ID: 655361
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: What do I want my legacy to be?  That's a good question.  I mean, I--you know, I, I mean the, the best legacy I, I could have is my kids [Olivia Francis and Sara Francis] and their good health, their commitment to the community and commitment to themselves, and to doing the right thing, that I was a good father.
Story_ID: 655362
Speaker 1: Because this video will be available for your kids' grandkids, you know, future generations, if there was a message that you would want to send to the future generations, what would it be?
Speaker 2: It's okay to care.  It's okay to love.  It's okay to do well as you do good.  It's okay to be you and to remember that there is a higher power out there, I believe it's God, and that if you have faith in yourself and each other, anything's possible as long as you're working towards the greater good.
Story_ID: 655363
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you want to talk about that we have not spoken about?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I--you know, what I'd like to, to say is--(cough) excuse me--I've, I've been lucky and blessed.  I mean, I don't feel like I've been successful or to the extent I've been successful I, I deserve any great credit for it.  But, probably one of the best things that have happened to me other than my kids [Olivia Francis and Sara Francis] is having my parents, my father [HistoryMaker Norman Francis], my mother [Blanche Macdonald Francis], who have done--or have done or did or continue to do good as they do well or do well as they do good.  And, and for, you know, my children and grandchildren, you want a role model?  Look at him.  I mean, he--he's a guy who has found a passion, found a commitment to education and empowerment, has educated, given out maybe fourteen thousand degrees, probably educated more African American doctors than anybody else, and has done it with the greatest of humility and grace.  And, and my mother was his partner and he couldn't have done it without her.  So, that's my legacy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, if there isn't anything else, I want to thank you for taking the time to share your story because it's going to be most inspirational to a lot of people that will watch this for so many years to come.  So, thank you for taking the time.
Speaker 2: Well, I will say one other thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If I can do it (laughter), you can do it, too, trust me.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's been a pleasure.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
