Story_ID: 666285
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Carol Fulp, C-A-R-O-L, F-U-L-P.
Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 28, 1952, Jamaica, Queens, New York.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the CEO of The Partnership [The Partnership, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts], a leadership development organization for executives and professionals of color.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is Friday, October 21, 2016.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my home, 54 Commonwealth Avenue in Boston [Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 666286
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight warm up questions we always ask, and they only require a short answer.  First one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Pancakes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmas.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: St. Thomas, [U.S.] Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: And the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: While we can.
Story_ID: 666287
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to do your, I'm going to ask about your family history, your mother's side of the family and your father's [Paris Nicholson, Jr.] side, but we're going to start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Miriam Nicholson [Miriam Riley Nicholson], M-I-R-I-A-M, N-I-C-H-O-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 8, 1935 [sic. 1933], Queens, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?  And what were they doing?
Speaker 2: My mother's side of the family came from St. Croix, St. Croix, [U.S.] Virgin Islands.  And her mother [Viola Hattersen Riley] came to the states, came to Jamaica [Queens, New York], as so many people did, in order to get a better education for their children.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So her mother came to the states, what around the nineteen teens [1910s] or--
Speaker 2: My mother--I would say my mother's family came to the states maybe in the 1920s.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, so are there, what are the stories on that side of the family?  I mean, what occupations did people have, and were there any stories about coming, you know, making their transition from St. Croix to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: The stories that I recall was the importance of being able to get an education in the states as we call it, the states.  So much opportunity was there.  And, so one really had the chance to further themselves by coming to New York, of all places, to get an education and also to be a path and an avenue for other family members from the Virgin Islands to come.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did your grandparents do for a living?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was a house maker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your grandfather [MacDonald Riley]?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a postal service worker.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do they bring any customs from St. Croix with them to New York that, you know--
Speaker 2: The one custom I really love that my grandmother brought was how she called her brother.  She called her brother, Alex [Alexander Hattersen], Brother.  And he called her Sister.  So today, I call my brother, Paris [Paris Nicholson III], Brother, and he calls me Sister.  And I love that tradition that we are able to retain.
Speaker 1: Now did they move from St. Croix into a Virgin Island community in New York or was it--
Speaker 2: They moved from St. Croix to the Jamaica area where other blacks--
Speaker 1: Jamaica, Queens, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Jamaica, Queens, where other blacks were living.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I know there, there are--there is a large population of black people that have an origin in the islands in Jamaica, Queens, some from, you know, the Virgin Islands, some from Jamaica, some from other places.  So, yeah, okay.  So did you have any idea why that--Jamaica, Queens became a, I mean, a place where so many settled, you know?
Speaker 2: I think because New York was always perceived as the land of opportunity, job availability.  There were others like them in that pocket of Jamaica, St. Albans [Queens, New York] and, so they chose to come there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They--was religion a factor at all?  Or were they Catholics or--
Speaker 2: Protestant.
Speaker 1: Protestants, okay.
Speaker 2: Episcopalian.
Story_ID: 666288
Speaker 1: So what did your mother [Miriam Riley Nicholson] tell you about growing up?  What was it like when she grew up?
Speaker 2: The one thing I remember about my mother and growing up was the advice she gave me was to always get your education.  That's the one thing they cannot take away from you.  And, so that's what I remember and that was passed down from her parents [Viola Hattersen Riley and MacDonald Riley].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she have a chance to finish school herself or--
Speaker 2: My mother didn't have the opportunity to finish school, but she went to Hunter College [New York, New York].  At that time, met my father [Paris Nicholson, Jr.], and they married and had me.  I'm the oldest of two.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now did your mother talk about what her aspirations were when she was going to Hunter?
Speaker 2: English.  My mother majored in English, so as a result, around the house, she would always c- correct your grammar.  And I'm alwa- I'm very grateful of that.
Story_ID: 666289
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Paris Oliver Nicholson, Jr. [Paris Nicholson, Jr.], P-A-R-I-S, O-L-I-V-E-R and then N-I-C-H-O-L-S-O-N, Paris Oliver Nicholson, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father, July, July 4th of 1934 [sic. July 11, 1932].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now again like what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side and how far back can you trace them?  And where were they living?
Speaker 2: I know much more about my father's side than my mother's [Miriam Riley Nicholson] side.  My father was--his family was also from the [U.S.] Virgin Islands, from St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, and they, too, chose to come to Queens [New York] for a better life.  His parents [Osee Lockhart Nicholson and Paris Nicholson, Sr.] chose to come to Queens for a better life, and he and my mother met, one from St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands], the other from St. Thomas.  They were drawn together and married.  There's an interesting story about my grandparents.  My grandmother was living in St. Thomas, and she had a music teacher who was older than she who was a widow [sic. divorcee], and they fell in love.  My grandmother's father [Alfred Lockhart, Sr.] disapproved of that marriage and, so they felt they had to leave the island in order to get greater opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And when you--well, now did your father have a chance to--now he was going to Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York].  You said that he--
Speaker 2: My mom went to Hunter.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But, and he, and she met your father in Manhattan [New York]
Speaker 2: She met my father in the community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The community of Jamaica--
Speaker 1: All right, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) New York [Jamaica, Queens, New York].  They both grew up in that area.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, did your father have a chance to go to school too?
Speaker 2: My father didn't go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, but he, too, became a postal worker.
Story_ID: 666290
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Miriam Riley Nicholson and Paris Nicholson, Jr.] met?
Speaker 2: I don't have any stories about how my parents met.  I do have stories about how they really worked hard to create a better life for my brother [Paris Nicholson III] and I.  And one of the stories is that my mother worked, my mother chose to go into a leadership development, a management training, I should say, program for Gertz department store [Queens, New York], and she worked hard in this leadership management training program.  And traditionally the highest person, the--ex- excuse me--the person who got the highest marks at your test at the end of the program would get a buyer's assignment on the main floor, and my mother got the highest score, and for the first time, the decision was made to select the two highest scored people, which obviously happened to be a white male, and my mother got the assignment in the basement of that department store, and the white male got the assignment on the main floor.  But regardless, I remember my mother working really hard at that assignment, and my father being very proud of how hard she worked and that was a success because she had achieved something that no other African American woman had achieve.
Story_ID: 666291
Speaker 1: Now when you consider your parents' personalities, their sense of humor, what they look like, what they walk like, what they talk like, their opinions, who do you--talents--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I take after my mother [Miriam Riley Nicholson].  I look like my mother.  I have her mannerisms and I have her voice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm hard working like my mother.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.
Speaker 2: My brother [Paris Nicholson III] takes after my father [Paris Nicholson, Jr.], who was so jovial and such a kidder and such a great personality and fun loving, and he takes after my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So your father worked for the U.S. Postal Service [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], which indicates to me that he had a good education whether he went to college or not because you don't pass the test to be able to--I mean, it's a literacy test is what it is, you know, to work for the post office.  You have to be physically fit and be able to read (laughter), you know, so where did he go to high school in--
Speaker 2: My father went to Jamaica High School [Queens, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Do you have an earliest--is it just you and your brother?
Speaker 2: It's just my brother and I.
Speaker 1: And who is the oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.  I'm eight years older.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he was your little brother at the time, I guess, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He wouldn't say that.
Story_ID: 666292
Speaker 1: So do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I have a memory of Christmastime when my mother [Miriam Riley Nicholson] was someone who worked hard, but I loved the fact that she was also very responsible and very giving to her in-laws [Osee Lockhart Nicholson and Paris Nicholson, Sr.] and would take great care to make them happy and to bring pleasure to them.  She would get a lot of joy out of wrapping Christmas gifts.  And one time I remember she had a very small box, cufflinks for my grandfather, and she took that box and wrapped it in a bigger box and a bigger box and a bigger box and a bigger box, all wrapped up so that she presented him with this big box and the joy of seeing him unwrap each one.  But I love the fact that I spent the time with my mother wrapping those boxes diligently with her, making a surprise, having a surprise.  And I love the fact that as my grandfather opened it, he had no idea what was about to come, and I think the joy and the thoughtfulness that my mother exhibited, she--it brought her joy to do something like that and to make him happy and give him the unexpected, the unusual, something nobody ever had.  I, I love that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is interesting, yeah.
Story_ID: 666293
Speaker 1: Describe your neighborhood, the neighborhood you grew up in and, you know, who lived there, what were the demographics and what were the main features of the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: We lived on Claude Avenue off of New York Avenue [Guy R. Brewer Boulevard] in Jamaica, Queens [New York], and we actually lived with my grandparents [Fulp's paternal grandparents, Osee Lockhart Nicholson and Paris Nicholson, Sr.].  We lived upstairs in an apartment that was made for my parents [Miriam Riley Nicholson and Paris Nicholson, Jr.].  It was a big brick house with a garage and land, and I was very proud of the big brick house.  It may have been the biggest on the block, but the people in that house worked really hard to have a lovely house.  I remember my grandfather had a car, and after church every Sunday, our activity was driving around all the various neighborhoods and looking at the houses, looking at the Christmas lights at Christmastime.  That was our activity.  We lived in an African American neighborhood.  My elementary school, P.S. 140 [Edward K. Ellington School, Queens, New York] was all African American.  But I also know how much my teachers valued me and wanted me to do well.  That's the neighborhood I lived in.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So what would be the major, like a thoroughfare through your--
Speaker 2: New York Avenue.
Speaker 1: New York Avenue, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 666294
Speaker 1: So did you go to the same grade school throughout, I mean the same school throughout grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to, I went to P.S. 140 [Edward K. Ellington School, Queens, New York] and then I believe at the age of twelve, my parents [Miriam Riley Nicholson and Paris Nicholson, Jr.], my brother [Paris Nicholson III] and I moved to a new complex in the area, a totally new complex.  It was called Rochdale Village [Queens, New York] and it was all Jewish people, and in the--there were twenty buildings.  Each was in a section of four, and I remember in our section of four, which was the first one built, there were only four African American families, so moving not too far away--near Van Wyck Expressway [Interstate 678]--moving not too far away was a totally different neighborhood, so moving from totally African American to a Jewish neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So how did things work out?  Did they work out all right in that neighborhood or was there--
Speaker 2: They did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They did.  My junior high school [J.H.S. 8, Richard S. Grossley School, Queens, New York] was mixed and then I went to Springfield Gardens High School [Queens, New York], which also was mixed race (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now I don't want to get you to high school yet.  'Cause there's some things that happened before you get there.
Story_ID: 666295
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about your aunt [sic. paternal cousin], Gertrude [Gertrude Lockhart Melchior].  Yeah, we have a note about her.  Tell us about her.
Speaker 2: My aunt Gertrude is my role model and my heroine.  As I mentioned, my family lived in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands and, so every summer, we had the opportunity to go and spend time in the islands, and my aunt Gertrude was a community leader and someone who everyone valued, who had great advice, who was so gracious, so magnanimous and was a Renaissance woman.  She was the president of the family company [Lockhart Companies Incorporated], store, department store.  Yet she also was known for her great bakery skills and, so if you were marr- getting married, she'd bake a cake for you.  No matter who you were on the island, you could always ask her to bake a cake and she would.  I was really impressed how she could be a great businesswoman, a great community leader and a great homemaker.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you did, did your family visit the Virgin Islands then?
Speaker 2: Frequently.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And after my mother worked at Gertz [Queens, New York], she went onto work for Swiss Airlines [Swiss International Airlines AG] and, so we were able to fly on airlines at a very reduced rate, so we were there frequently--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the holidays--
Speaker 1: So this is when you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and summers.
Speaker 1: --this is when you're young, right, you know, fairly young, right?
Speaker 2: About eleven.
Speaker 1: And--
Story_ID: 666296
Speaker 1: Now I, I have a note here that you traveled to an international camp in Switzerland when you were ten years old.  Is it ten or eleven now, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think it was twelve through sixteen.  It was four years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, twe- okay.  So you're age twelve.  How did this come about?  Through the airlines, I guess, right?  Is that--okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, my mother [Miriam Riley Nicholson] worked for Swiss Airlines [Swiss International Airlines AG] and in that capacity, learned about this international summer camp, Montana International Summer Camp [International Summer Camp Montana], in Switzerland [Crans-Montana, Switzerland] and sent me to camp there for four summers, and as you can imagine, it was an amazing opportunity.  First and foremost, there was an amazing sense of pride that my family could do that for their child, so you felt that--their sense of pride.  And then the experience that I had there was wonderful.  I learned how to ride horses.  I got the silver medal in horseback riding.  But my brother [Paris Nicholson III], when it was his time--he went to the same camp, too, but he got the gold medal--
Speaker 1: Did he?
Speaker 2: --for riding.  But just these inner city kids to be able to have this opportunity, it was wonderful.  But what I remember, what I learned there, obviously, because the camp was in Switzerland, a lot of wealthy Americans went there and a lot of Americans whose parents may have been traveling for the summer would drop their kids there, and they would go off and travel the rest of Europe.  There were kids at that time from all different countries, wealthy kids from Iran, from Brazil.  But what I learned there was it wasn't about money.  It was about your character.  And while I didn't have their wealth, I had principles that my family had instilled in me and given me, and they were tested there.  And I knew--it--for me, it was important to do the right thing.  I was tested to go off and do all sorts of crazy things, and I knew that my parents had given me these principles to live by, and it felt better to live by those principles than to test rules or push the boundaries of rules that were just average rules.  I came across kids who were spoiled who pushed the boundaries.
Speaker 1: I take it that if you were rich or even super rich, money really wouldn't be much use at the camp, you know, because it's--I don't know what you would do with it if you had--I mean, is that true, yeah?
Speaker 2: It wasn't that as much as I learned that money doesn't buy love, you know.  There were kids who might have been dropped off for the summer so their parents could go and do what they want, and that's fine, but those--they may not have felt loved.  I felt really loved because of the sense of pride my parents had in me having this opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were those types of principles and things I may have taken for granted that I learned others didn't have.
Speaker 1: Well, were there any other American children there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so were they primarily Americans or--
Speaker 2: I would say 60 percent were Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then the rest of them were from other kind of countries or from Switzerland?
Speaker 2: Other--primarily, it was an international camp.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so people's--whose parents may be in the oil business in the Middle East, they send their kids there.  People from South America would send their kids there.  It was a very interesting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So these summers--yeah.
Speaker 2: --experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So these are summers in the early '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 666297
Speaker 1: I take it you were a good student at school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  And did you have like a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I can tell you that I felt really privileged to have had French and I had, and I did well at French because I took French lessons at the camp [International Summer Camp Montana, Crans-Montana, Switzerland].  And I can tell you a story that really helped shape me.  When I went to junior high school [J.H.S. 8, Richard S. Grossley School, Queens, New York], which was my first experience in a mixed race high school, I was assigned to the Spanish class, and my mother [Miriam Riley Nicholson] had to come up to the school and explain, "She's taken French in camp and, so I would like her to be placed in the French class," so I went into the French class maybe a week after, you know, everyone else did and the first test that was given, I think I got an A minus, and another boy got the highest mark, but I made it a point to really study hard for the next test and I got the highest score in the class.  So I was on the bus coming home, the school bus, with all the kids in there, and the student, the white boy, who had gotten the highest score, initially came up to me and said, "You know, you really didn't get the highest score.  The teacher showed me your test, and you didn't get the highest score.  I did."  And that was the first time I experienced racism because I saw his anger, and his anger was more than somebody beating him and getting the highest.  It was that someone who he didn't think was as bright as him and a girl and a black could get a high mark.  I was equally appalled that he said he saw the test, that the teacher would show him the test.  But that--he came at me, this anger, and I remember at that moment what I chose to do was draw on the strength of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and all of the civil rights protesters and how they managed racism in the South and fought it with dignity and with grace and I chose to channel that and do the same thing.
Speaker 1: So what did you say?  Did you--
Speaker 2: I said, "I did get the highest score."  And that's all that I said.
Story_ID: 666298
Speaker 1: So what was the name your school that--your middle school?
Speaker 2: Junior High School 8 [J.H.S. 8, Richard S. Grossley School, Queens, New York].
Speaker 1: Ju- junior high school.  What was it?
Speaker 2: Junior High School 8.
Speaker 1: Oh, Junior High School 8, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) P.S. 140 [Edward K. Ellington School, Queens, New York], Junior High School 8.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So was the high school, I mean, the junior high school primarily Jewish?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  There were some blacks there but, yes.
Speaker 1: Now they--well, you know, did--what did you learn from the Jewish population at the school?  I mean, they're different from black people.  They're different from various populations of different other white ethnics.
Speaker 2: Because, because we lived in such a large Jewish population, a large area, my--I had a--my best friend was Jewish, and it, for me, it was very interesting getting to know someone who was different from me, totally different religion, different mores, different traditions, so I was curious and wanted to learn about them and really felt it was a privilege to get to know somebody who was different from me.
Speaker 1: Were they Hasidic or reform or conservative or--
Speaker 2: They were more reform.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  I know the--I think Brooklyn [New York] is the home of a lot of--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --Hasidic.
Speaker 2: This was more reform (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it's a whole totally different kind of a thing, yeah.  Okay, all right.  Well, so, and this is a time--I know I was in school about the same time when there was a lot of talk of the Holocaust and what happened and Eichmann [Adolf Eichmann] was on trial.  They were still hunting Nazi criminals in the news and, you know, this is a, kind of a lot of information was out there for the first time.  It seemed like it just--
Speaker 2: I--well, from the Jewish people, I've seen how close knit they are and how they took care of each other because of the Holocaust, and I always admired how they took care of each other as a people.
Speaker 1: And did you, did you compare what was going on in the black community to what was going on in the Jewish community on any level?
Speaker 2: You know, at that time, Jack Greenberg was head of the NAACP--
Speaker 1: Legal Defense Fund, yeah (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and, so you saw you had the same stories, so to speak and that these could be, these were white allies and, so we, I felt we could learn from them.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, so all right.  So, now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Springfield Garden High School [Springfield Gardens High School].
Speaker 1: That's in Queens [New York], too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Springfield Gardens, Queens, next town over from Jamaica, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was the makeup of that?  Is it still an integrated high school basically?
Speaker 2: It was integrated, but probably more integrated because you had African Americans from St. Albans [Queens, New York], Jama- Jamaica [Queens, New York] and then this large Rochdale Village [Queens, New York], so it was very integrated.
Story_ID: 666299
Speaker 1: In the summertime, you're going to Switzerland.
Speaker 2: Through age sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then after that, I'd go to St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What--how, how did, or what did you learn in Switzerland that--I mean, or how did you apply what you learned in Switzerland to the United States, or how did it translate with things you learned there?  Because you're having experiences that nobody else is or very few are having.  I don't know if anybody else had that kind of experience when you were in high school [Springfield Gardens High School, Queens, New York].
Speaker 2: Well, I made sure that people understood I was African American because it was an international camp [International Summer Camp Montana, Crans-Montana, Switzerland].  They may have thought you were Spanish, so I made sure to let people know I was black.  I was Negro.  I--Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  And, so I was made, I made sure to claim my heritage, so that was important to me because I was the only African American there and, so that--it was important for me to tell people who I was and explain my experience in the states.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what--I mean, what did it--I guess it had to give you a broader world view being there in the summertime and then coming back here, right?
Speaker 2: It gave me a broader worldview, but what I also was exposed to were people who, young people who had wealth and were disrespectful.  And I'll tell you a story.  So I came back from camp.  One of the girls lived in New York City [New York, New York] and was going to have a sleepover of friends and, so my mother [Miriam Riley Nicholson] dropped me off to her house, the--her maid, her babysitter was there, and we were going to, you know, spend the--overnight.  I think it was just overnight.  And they got so mischievous that they tied up the babysitter.  They took the father's penny jar and said they were going to take it and go to the bank and cash it.  And I came home on the, on the train.
Speaker 1: So this is behavior that is beyond the pale, I guess, for you.
Speaker 2: Well, what it taught me was they were so wealthy and that, you know, who, someone who hasn't had wealth, I always thought, all that, that could do for you, and when I saw that behavior, wealth doesn't necessarily bring character is what I learned at an early age.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There's a difference--I've had similar experiences where you wonder, you know (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --why would they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Acting out.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I--
Speaker 2: That's what I learned.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so I learned to value the family and the life that I had.
Story_ID: 666300
Speaker 1: What were you interested in primarily in high school [Springfield Gardens High School, Queens, New York]?
Speaker 2: Modern dance.  I was interested in ballet.  I was a booster for the basketball team.  And I even formed (laughter) a girls club called the Royal Eight [ph.].  We had jackets and we show--had emblems put on there, so I liked the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I take it there were, there were eight of you, I guess.
Speaker 2: I guess so (laughter).
Speaker 1: The Royal Eight and--
Speaker 2: I know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But I always was organizing stuff and I was elected secretary of the class (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Class, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, class secretary.  And I was popular but I was always doing things, organizing things and I liked that.
Story_ID: 666301
Speaker 1: Now what, what age were you in '68 [1968] when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated?  Where--do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was babysitting for a Jewish family and I was watching TV.  They were in the, they were in the city going to a play and they came back early, and I, you know, went home and watched the TV with my parents [Miriam Riley Nicholson and Paris Nicholson, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I--it was good for me to be with my parents.
Speaker 1: Were your parents involved in any of the civil rights activities when those days?
Speaker 2: My family--I remember, and this is really important.  I remember that was there was a year when New York African American families were supporting the boycotts in the South by choosing not to buy gifts at Christmastime so that we could demonstrate the economic power of our race, and I remember proudly not getting any Christmas gifts.  Nobody got any Christmas gifts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you were cognizant of what this was about and--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what--
Story_ID: 666302
Speaker 1: So you're in a, in a--on the college track, I'm sure, so as you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was on the college track but my guidance counselor when I sat down and met with them, they slotted me for community college, and my parents, my mother [Miriam Riley Nicholson] had to go to school [Springfield Gardens High School, Queens, New York] and talk to them.  But more--most importantly during that time frame, my father [Paris Nicholson, Jr.] died.  He had a rare disease called scleroderma, and my father was young.  He died at thirty-six.  Vibrant, you know, full of life, and he got this rare disease called scleroderma, and it's hardening of the skin, and he had it in his lungs and he would have to go to the hospital.  And one night, I heard the door and I heard the, saw the people from the hospital coming in and taking him out--the medics take him out, and I actually said, "Oh, good.  Daddy is going to the hospital, and he'll get better."  And he never came home.  I was sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was, and my, and my brother [Paris Nicholson III] was eight and that wasn't supposed to happen.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, okay.  So this was the year you, this was the last year you went to camp [International Summer Camp Montana, Crans-Montana, Switzerland], too, right?  Sixteen?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Like a pivotal year.  Now, so that, did that put a, like a more of an economic burden on your mother?
Speaker 2: I don't, I wouldn't say it was an economic burden as much as it was an emotional burden.  To lose a husband at thirty-five and to have two kids, one sixteen, another eight.  My mother was young and dutiful.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But for her, it was traumatic and, so I wound up being more of an adult than I had imagined.  I wound up making sure my mother was okay.  Thank goodness we had my [paternal] grandparents.
Story_ID: 666303
Speaker 1: My grandmother [Osee Lockhart Nicholson] took the--his death very hard, too.  She was his only, she was his only birth--she was, he was--excuse me--her only birth child.  She had three boys who were her stepchildren and she had miscarried a number of times before my father [Paris Nicholson, Jr.] was born, so to lose my father--by this time, they, too, moved to Rochdale Village [Queens, New York], so they were in the next building, but we, you know, always remained close.  That was traumatic for them.  And they moved back to the [U.S.] Virgin Islands.  So my family was split apart, so I had this wonderful--I moved from having this wonderful family where my grandparents were right there for you.  My parents were young and vibrant, dedicated, worked hard and dedicated themselves to making sure their children had a great life and were very proud of us, instilled good values in us.  That was from my parents and my grandparents.  And my father gets sick.  My mother [Miriam Riley Nicholson] is young, has to care for him and does so dutifully, but he dies, and my mother is really shaken.  My grandmother is really shaken.  And they took us one summer to the Virgin Islands, and we were there, my grandparents, and we--they chose to move back, so they moved back to the Virgin Islands.  My mother was in New York [New York] with us.  And all I knew was that I was supposed to work hard and get a good education, and everything was going to be okay.  And that wasn't the way it was turning out to be.  So at sixteen, I experienced trauma and tragedy.  And my mother--it was so difficult for my mother.  Later in life, I had learned that I had not only felt the loss of my father, but I felt the loss of my mother as well including my grandparents who moved to the Virgin Islands and took my brother [Paris Nicholson III], so my family, this nuclear family went like that.
Story_ID: 666304
Speaker 1: What happened a few years after that is my mother [Miriam Riley Nicholson] married my uncle [Liston Nicholson] and--
Speaker 2: Your father's [Paris Nicholson, Jr.] brother?
Speaker 1: My father's half-brother, yes.  And I thought everything would be okay again, but it wasn't.  My mother said the, you know, the best thing I could do was to make sure that I took care of myself.  And that was a very traumatic time for me.  A lot happened because as I went off to school--as a child, I should back up a little bit and tell you that at the age of seven, I developed petit mal epilepsy and you, and had staring spells and--
Speaker 2: So that's how that manifests itself?  You just go into a stare?
Speaker 1: At an early age, I would stare and just be out of it, I think, for maybe thirty seconds and I didn't realize.  But the trauma there hit me at seven when I was engaged in music and arts in elementary school [P.S. 140, Edward K. Ellington School, Queens, New York], and I remember the teacher saying, "Well, you know, Carol [HistoryMaker Carol Fulp], maybe you shouldn't, you know, you know you have this illness, maybe you shouldn't take--have the lead anymore in the school play," and, so they took me out of the lead, but I also remember that when I graduated from elementary school that I got the award for arts and music and that was a vindicator for me.
Speaker 2: Now how frequently did this happen?
Speaker 1: It's hard to say, maybe, maybe once a day or every other day.
Speaker 2: Okay, that frequently, okay.  I didn't know.  I had a classmate in high school that sat behind me in biology, and it seemed to me that once a month maybe he would have a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's good.
Speaker 2: He would--
Speaker 1: It's just once a month.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we would, you know, try to, I had to learn how to help him, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, was it, was it petit mal or grand mal?
Speaker 2: No, it--I don't know the name but he--his body (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it, would it, is it a convulse?
Speaker 2: --would convulse.  And he would--
Speaker 1: He would have a grand mal seizure.
Speaker 2: --he would just fall off of his stool.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: He was a big strong guy.  He was like one of the strongest people in high school and, so we would try to--the basketball coach was our instructor, so he would, you know, try to help him but, you know, it happened like maybe once a month maybe.
Speaker 1: That's not bad.
Speaker 2: You know, and it, and it, you know, I just kind of remember that but, you know, that's a, that's frequently, yeah, once every other day.
Speaker 1: But mine were just staring spells.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I'd just stare.
Speaker 2: And how long would it last?
Speaker 1: I don't think long.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Because you--
Speaker 1: But just I'm out of it, so I don't know.
Speaker 2: You didn't have a sense of how long.
Speaker 1: I wish.  No, you just (snaps fingers) go out.  And fortunately it wasn't going out when I'm walking in the middle of the street.  And then, you know, it kind of subsided, I didn't have it, you know, it kind of--I felt I kind of grew out of it but--
Speaker 2: So does it still bother you at all today?
Speaker 1: At age eighteen, I had my first grand mal seizure--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --when I was about to go off to college and that was devastating, so family, you know, all disjointed and then I develop a grand mal seizure and that had tremendous trauma for me.  And I didn't, I got a scholarship to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and didn't--wasn't able to finish in time, you know, like four years and, so ultimately I got my degree from the University of the State of New York [Albany, New York], but those were dark, those were dark days.  And then the medication they gave you was really heavy drugs, so to speak, just like lethargic.  Very different medicine (claps hands) today.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I heard people say that, yeah.
Speaker 1: So that period, I would say, from eighteen to twenty-eight, that period was a tough period, probably my darkest period.  So much change and for me, trauma.
Story_ID: 666305
Speaker 1: You went to Boston U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] and any- and just looking around the house here, anybody can tell, you're really into art.
Speaker 2: Ah (simultaneous)!
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you just said you're in- you were into dance and modern dance and ballet and all that.  Did you play an instrument, too, in school?
Speaker 2: In junior high [J.H.S. 8, Richard S. Grossley School, Queens, New York] I played, I--well, I played piano because my grandmother [Fulp's paternal grandmother, Osee Lockhart Nicholson] was a, you know, played piano, was a piano teacher, so I played piano and I went to piano lessons and then in high school [Springfield Gardens High School, Queens, New York] I also played the megaphone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: All right.  Did you write?
Speaker 2: Write, yes.
Speaker 1: I figured (laughter).
Story_ID: 666306
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what was your major at Boston U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], what did you decide to major in?
Speaker 2: Liberal arts, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just--did they have a general like liberal arts kind of a--
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then to like, you know, you know, I was trying to figure out what to do, and I was very physical, physically fit so, you know, I would either do, I would probably go into physical education or, you know, liberal arts, just, you know, wanting to have a general studies and psychology.  Those are areas I love.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you have a favorite professor at Boston U or a favorite class?
Speaker 2: No.  I--it was a dark period for me.  I don't remember a lot.
Speaker 1: Well, somebody might have stood out.  That's why I ask, you know, even though it was a down period so, but, so you're there for four--did--were you involved in activities on campus those four years?   I mean, I can't imagine you not be- being involved in them but--
Speaker 2: I think at that period it was trying to adjust my medicine and to find out how much I needed to take to control the seizures versus what was too much and not have me operate well so, but ultimately, you know, ultimately things got better, and I transferred and ultimately graduated from the University of the State of New York with a degree in liberal arts.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --which campus did you graduate from?
Speaker 2: Albany [New York].
Speaker 1: Albany, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Did the illness subside?  You said you grew out of it on some level.  Did it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, I, you know, I felt, you know, I--the medicine was heavy, so I stopped taking--and they said, "Well, let's see what happens."  And I didn't have a seizure for years, medicine free, fast forwarding, we can get back to it.  I didn't have a seizure until I was--had married and was getting a divorce so that stress (gestures)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --gave me a seizure.
Story_ID: 666307
Speaker 1: So four years, things are pretty bad and then when you're about twenty-two, they perk up a little bit, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Little later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, late twenties, they perk up, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Late twenties, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So what did you do after you graduated?
Speaker 2: I--my first job was at The Gillette Company here in Boston [Massachusetts], and I worked hard and excelled there and, I think, was promoted every year and a half.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, and Gillette is, of course, the razor blade company (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --here, the famous razor blade company here in Boston.  So what was it like working at Gillette?
Speaker 2: You were one of the few African Americans but, you know, you work hard.  You are diplomatic.  You do what you can to advance and get ahead and you seized opportunities that were available, and they were trying to diversify the climate, so you seized opportunities and said I can help you with that.  And, so ultimately moved into human resources.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I know you studied psychology in college.  But did that help you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in human resources?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what was, I guess, the--I probably won't ask you for a percentage but how--where there, was there a significant group of African Americans working in Gillette in those days?
Speaker 2: No, there weren't.
Speaker 1: Probably is not today either (laughter), I would guess, but I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, at that time, they also had a class action suit by African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they had to do things differently and, so I said, "I can help with that."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I began recruiting on historically black college campuses [HBCUs] and helping to bring African American graduates here to work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your job entailed some traveling?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And to campuses where you felt, you know, you could provide access for people and that was really good.  That was what Aunt Gertrude [Fulp's paternal cousin, Gertrude Lockhart Melchior] would do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have, did you know someone at Gillette?  I mean, how did you get hired by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I knew someone at Gillette, and they indicated that there was a job opening and I should apply, and I did and I got it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's 1976, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 666308
Speaker 1: So started Jet--Gillette [The Gillette Company] in '76 [1976], and you move into human resources.  After--how long was it when you got involved in human resources?
Speaker 2: Maybe about four, maybe about four years after starting with the company.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So you come in during the Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration, and Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was president by the time you got (laughter) involved in human resources.  You know, so, but the country is moving ahead, I guess.  Now you met, what--was it Bruce Boll- Bolling [Bruce Bolling]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  And he's from a very political family here in Boston [Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --right?  And--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: That was your first husband.
Speaker 2: My first husband.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's now deceased, unfortunately, at a very early age.  But my family was very engaged in politics in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands and, so, and my uncle [Liston Nicholson] who my mother [Miriam Riley Nicholson] married actually ran for city council in New York [New York City Council], so I was very engaged in stuffing envelopes (laughter), you know, many, many, many times in my early life, but I was attracted to him because he wanted to make a difference and, so I--we were married for about twelve or thirteen years, and he actually ran for mayor and that--it just became too much for me and that kind of life and, so we divorced.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And it does take a toll.  I mean, the running for office is really, for any office these days is really intense, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.  It's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) thing and for--in a big city--
Speaker 2: --twenty-four, seven.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, I remember people leaving notes on the car, on your, on your car, you know, angry at you and, you know, or something, but it was 24/7.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now his father was the first black president of the Boston City Council, right?
Speaker 2: No, he was.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was.
Speaker 2: He became (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: His father--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --was the first black state senator.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's Royal L. Bolling (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His--Royal Bolling, Sr.--his brother, Royal Bolling, Jr., was state representative, and Bruce ran for the city council and became the first black president of the city council.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was Bruce, okay.
Story_ID: 666309
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987], now you switched jobs, right, to--you started wor- working at WCVB, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how did that come about?
Speaker 2: I'm a big believer in, you know, community activities, and obviously married to a politician, you're at a lot of community events, and we had to go to one event, and I happened to sit next to the president of WCVB-TV [Boston, Massachusetts].  We struck up a conversation.  I enjoyed talking to him.  I learned a lot from him.  He shared with me.  I shared with him.  An opportunity to head up human resources there came available about three months later, and I had the opportunity to interview and got the job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's connections.
Speaker 1: So how did you like the job, and what was the state of employment, I guess, for African Americans at the station at that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I really, I loved the job.  I tell this story now.  I'd say make sure, you know, everyone knows this, but make sure you arrive to an interview early because you get a chance to feel and see the climate.  What's, you know, what is the culture like?  And culture is very important particularly for African Americans.  Is this a culture where I can thrive?  And I remember getting to the station early and I saw all sorts of people walk by.  You know, I saw people of color, women.  My perspective was you had to be, you know, thin, blonde and white to work there.  But I saw heavyset people.  I saw difference there.  And I even saw a man walk by with pink furry slippers so I knew I could, I could do well there.  I could be different there.  And that was the case, and I've been so fortunate to spend eleven years there making a difference because of the values that the station had.
Story_ID: 666310
Speaker 1: What was the biggest crisis you faced there?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in human resources so (laughter), you know, firing people.  You know, that was a crisis, you know.
Speaker 1: That was your--you had to do that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was my job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I always wanted to--I was looking, I was actually looking before I went there and I wanted to move into community relations because it's a passion--I'm passionate about community relations, and I found jobs in the community relations, but it may have been on the North Shore [Massachusetts].  It may have been in--it wasn't focused on Boston [Massachusetts], and I was passionate about Boston.  This was a job in human resources, but because it was known as the community station [WCVB-TV, Boston, Massachusetts], it produced more local programming than any other station in America, it was focused and rooted in community that I focused and was able to find a job on the skillset that I had in human resources, but the culture was community and, so I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, so this is, this is an ABC affiliate, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Which is--now in the, in a lot of cities during the '80s [1980s], they started cutting community--especially when the Reagan appointee [Mark Fowler] to the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] started, started changing the rules.  The stations didn't have to comply with community oriented--I mean, at the--they used to have a mandate, and in fact your license--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --renewal was tied to your community service (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Your community programming.
Speaker 1: --programming.  Right.  And, but this was, was this true by 1987?
Speaker 2: What happened was this sta- station was actually created with the intent on being community focused, so it followed that mantra so to speak and was award- by then, was award winning based on its community programming, so it tended to follow that philosophy and not cut--but, you know, as things move on given budgets, you know, it--things ultimately get cut.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: But it was a rich period for the station.
Story_ID: 666311
Speaker 1: Because this is an African American project, I guess I'll ask the question like this.  I know when I was in college, I guess, and I guess from the late '60s [1960s] on, just about every station because of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] rules had some sort of a black TV show.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: We had one in Dayton [Ohio] that came on with [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers, 'Red, Black and Green,' you know.  (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and they would interview people from the community--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on what they were doing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, here in Boston [Massachusetts], I know 'Say Brother' was--'Say'--
Speaker 2: 'Say Brother.'  So at--
Speaker 1: So, yeah.
Speaker 2: --at--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --Channel 5, at the ABC affiliate, they have 'CityLine,' and it's still on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they have 'CityLine.'  For Latinos, it was 'Aqui' at--in--at the station and that's no longer on.  But Channel 5 recently had a forum, a one hour forum to talk about, you know, black men and social justice and, so that was a special, so I'm proud that they're still doing work in that arena, and I had a chance to be in the audience in that for- in that forum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what shows did WCVB [WCVB-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] offer in those days in that regard?
Speaker 2: 'CityLine,' 'Aqui,' 'Miller's Court,' 'Good Day,' which 'Good Morning America' was patterned after, so they had those kind of local projects.  'Five on Five,' Sunday morning public affairs, so they had a number of public affairs programs that our--the community was very well aware of, and it did well in terms of ratings because you, as a community, were featured.  It wasn't something that came out of the can--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --somewhere else and just aired.
Story_ID: 666312
Speaker 1: What do you think your--what's the best thing that happened while you were at WC- CVB [WCVB-TV, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well, I started in community relations, and when the vice president of community programming moved on to form her own company, I went and pitched that they combine community programming and human resources and give me the job, so I had the chance to combi- to ultimately head a community programming and human resources and really make impact at the station, and I even did a little bit of on air work at that time in--on 'CityLine.'
Speaker 1: Now I'm seeing a pattern here that you don't seem to be afraid to ask for opportunities (laughter) when you see one, you know, coming, right?  You're (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).  I see things, see, I see possibilities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so not--it feels worse not to go for them than to go for them and it not work.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That makes sense.  So these--I--these two things are combined now, and you're able to do human resources and community affairs.  And, so tell me about the way you might have combined the two things there.
Speaker 2: I ran the two departments, learned a lot.  The department in human resources, if the techs did something wrong--my extension was 4060, and it got to a point where the--in the control room, if a tech did something wrong or cursed or whatever, they would say, "Uh-oh.  That's a 4060," like you'll be upstairs (laughter).  And when I left the station, and I left because I knew in order to grow, you had to leave.  I knew in order to grow I had to go back to corporate and, so I left to take a job at John Hancock [John Hancock Financial Services Inc.] with a big budget in community relations, where I could have even greater impact but I knew I had to go back to corporate.  But for me, what was really quite poignant, what for me was quite poignant was that the day that I was leaving, I'm turning on the eye opening news ['EyeOpener'] in my kitchen, and I see on the crawl, my name was Bolling at that time, I say--see on the crawl from these techs that I would always have to discipline, "Good luck, Carol Bolling [HistoryMaker Carol Fulp], we'll miss you."  Crawl.  And I just thought that was--these are people you have to fuss at all the time (laughter).  So it was family, and it was good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was good.
Story_ID: 666313
Speaker 1: How did the opportunity at John Hancock [John Hancock Financial Services Inc.] come about?  Because you're--I get that you're around a lot, in a lot of meetings, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --around town so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--
Speaker 2: My--I was on the board of the--Channel 5 [WCVB-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] had recommended that I go on the board of The Ad Club here into Boston [Massachusetts].  They were interested in diversifying the ad industry, and I became friends with the president of The Ad Club, who also happened to be on the board of John Hancock, and she told me about this opportunity in community relations, this newly created position.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now what were you able to do with this position now?  You have more resources to deal with and--
Speaker 2: More resources.  I tried to be as strategic as possible, linking the sports sponsorships that John Hancock had and creating community outreach programs around those sports sponsorships so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, what sports were sponsored?
Speaker 2: So for instance, they sponsored the Olympics and, so I created a program called--in conjunction with the Boston Public Schools, created the Olympic spirit essay competition where young kids were writing about Olympians who they admired, what traits they admired in them, and here's how they, too, utilized those traits in their community.  And then I had executives across the city interview the students to select a winner who would go with us to the Olympics and would meet the Olympian, read their essay, you know, before, you know, a host of dignitaries.  And I remember at that particular time, there were two students who were fabulous, and the publisher of The Globe [The Boston Globe] said, "You know, I'll throw in the money so we can have two students go."  And the president of Pine Manor College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] said, "And I'll give them both college scholarships," and, so what you're able to do when you can bring people together on behalf of community.  And one of the kids who won the essay was someone who had been homeless, and it's so important to--for executives to be able to see the struggles that people go through and how they create resilience and how it's our responsibility to help provide access for them.
Story_ID: 666314
Speaker 1: So you started with John Hancock [John Hancock Financial Services Inc.] in 1998 after eleven years at WCVB [WCVB-TV, Boston, Massachusetts].  Now, and I know there's got to be another--some other stories from that period of time at John Hancock.  So you were there how long?
Speaker 2: Fourteen years.
Speaker 1: Fourteen years, yeah.
Speaker 2: When Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] hit, I was personally impacted by that, and I sat in my office and I said, "How can I sit in this office without doing something?"  And, so I created an initiative called Boston Women Build in the Bayou and garnered thirty-five women across the city, including the governor's wife [Diane Bemus Patrick] and the mayor's wife [Angela Faletra Menino], and we went and we built--helped to build, the Boston house.  Raised moneys here, and we built a house as a part of the Habitat for Humanity village [Musicians' Village, New Orleans, Louisiana].  What I also was able to do was to get Channel 5's sister station [WGNO-TV] in New Orleans [Louisiana] to broadcast live there and I had the public affairs program manager from Channel 5 on the trip, so they were broadcasting here in Boston [Massachusetts] what we were doing.  The NPR station [WWNO Radio, New Orleans, Louisiana], we had someone from there broadcasting, so we were able to make a difference, leave our mark by saying, "Boston cares.  We're building a house for someone who's been impacted."  But we also had the opportunity to let Boston know what we were doing.  And instead--in those interviews for the New Orleans area, instead of me doing the interview, I had a salesman or the salespeople from John Hancock do the interview and say, "This is the kind of company I work for, and I'm here in the community, and they came down to support me."  So at the end of the day, we were able to do good by the community but business benefitted.  And, so I was able to, in the long run, at John Hancock, when the recession hit and financial service companies, you know, were being ostracized and, you know, they were taking a step back and, you know, not being out there so much, being more quiet, I recommended to the CEO, I said, "What do you think about combining community relations or corporate responsibility with brand management?  In that way, we can utilize who we were--are, what we've created as a community to differentiate ourselves from all the other financial service firms that are being labeled as greedy.  Look at all the good work we've done in community.  We can leverage the fact that when you put your John Hancock on something, it means something.  And given our track record in the community, all of these special projects that we've created.  When John Hancock sponsors something, the community benefits, whether it be a Major League Baseball [MLB] sponsorship, the Olympic sponsorship, Boston Marathon is another one.  We've created all of these community programmings so that, programs so that people benefit from our sponsorships.  Why don't we lead with that?"  And they agreed, and I was able to have two departments combined, similar to Channel 5 and I led corporate responsibility and brand management.
Speaker 1: And, so what year is this?  Okay.  You started in '98 [1998] and--let's see.
Speaker 2: So I would say maybe around two thousand and--well, it had to be 2008, 2009, around there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, um-hm.
Story_ID: 666315
Speaker 1: In the meantime though, you met Bernard Fulp [HistoryMaker C. Bernard Fulp] and got married.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In 2000, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.  Now how did you all meet?
Speaker 2: We met at a reception at the Museum of Fine Arts [Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Boston, Massachusetts], a John Biggers [John T. Biggers] reception, African American artist, and they had a wonderful reception, and Bernie and I met there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Biggers is a great artist so--
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh.  And to have him there and to hear (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --and, yeah, it was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know he's a--now I forgot this, he's like a mentor to Paul Goodnight [HistoryMaker Paul D. Goodnight], who's here.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  He--
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: --Goodnight talked about how he would call, would call Biggers, and Biggers would call him in the middle of the night to talk about art--
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: --that they were pla- that they were working on.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, interesting.  So at any rate, so your husband is a banker, and, yeah, one of our HistoryMakers, who we just interviewed.
Story_ID: 666316
Speaker 1: You do a lot of things, you know, so you--in the position at John Hancock [John Hancock Financial Services Inc.], you were like chair of Boston [Massachusetts], 2004.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The mayor asked me to co-chair the host committee for the Democratic Convention [2004 Democratic National Convention, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and, oh, okay.  So, now 2004 is--the mayor is Menino [Thomas Menino], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  And you worked with Paul Kirk, Steven Grossman, I see here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And backtracking a little bit, in 2002, you became vice president of John Hancock Financial Services so--
Speaker 2: I had (unclear).  I think I came on, I came on as second vice president, was promoted to vice president and then senior vice president.
Speaker 1: Now this seems like a real switch.  I don't know if it is in subst- in substance or not, but you're doing more community outreach and community ser- service, work for John Hanco- cock, but what does it mean to be vice president for financial services?
Speaker 2: I think community relations is community relations, regarded--regardless of the industry you're in.  And the industry I happened to be in was financial services, but my responsibility was create, to create strategy around impacting community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was also to ensure our businesspeople, to advise our businesspeople why impacting community was good for business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's not that much of a stretch.  I thought it was, it sounded like a strictly financial--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Just a--
Speaker 2: Just like PR [public relations] for one company is, you know, same PR for another.  You just learn the industry, but it's--we were doing community relations.
Story_ID: 666317
Speaker 1: Here are some of the community programs that John Hancock [John Hancock Financial Services Inc.] ran and there are probably, probably even more but--the John Hancock teen education program.  Can you, can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: John Hancock, for a long time, had a great relationship with the police department [Boston Police Department] and had a program called Summer of Opportunity and, so we ran that program where the police would refer forty kids who were on the fence.  They could go either way.  But what we would do is would be, we would house them at the company, give them summer internships along with life skills and job skills training and work with them to help them see a path to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a pretty, I mean, is there a success rate associated with that, that--
Speaker 2: It was pretty successful.  We did have students who, you know, didn't make it and, you know, went to jail, but for the most part, those students went on to college, and some of them even came back to work at John Hancock.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now there's something called the Financial Wizard?  And do you, do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had--because the company is filled with actuaries, we had the actuaries teaching math, which they love, to third graders in the Boston Public Schools, so we always tried to look at what assets we had as a company, whether it be sponsorships, the assets in terms of the strength, the skills of the employees and tried to link that to community.
Story_ID: 666318
Speaker 1: There's also the Boston Marathon Kenya Project.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Bernie [HistoryMaker C. Bernard Fulp] and I actually went to Kenya, and it was there that I had the idea to create a program based around John Hancock's [John Hancock Financial Services Inc.] longtime sponsorship of the Boston Marathon.  As you know, Kenyans, you know, tend to win the race, so I created a program, and you consult with the Boston Public Schools, and they said, "Kids are studying geography in the third grade and learning about different countries, so it would be great if you could teach third graders," so we taught students.  We had our volunteers of the company go into the classrooms and we taught students about Kenya, about the foods, the cultures, the tribes and then when the marathon came, we brought the world class runners, the winners of the marathon to the kids and we actually had our, we held our session at the Franklin Park Zoo [Boston, Massachusetts], so that the kids also could do a scavenger hunt and pick out plants, animals that were indigenous to Kenya, but each of the kids represented a tribe and explained to the marathoner their part of, you know, the Swahili tribe, and here's what we do, and they'd--then we'd bring them to the race marathon day, and they would be rooting for their champion to come in.  It was a wonderful experience for them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, I know the, most of the marathon winners are Kipsigis.  Yeah.  I had a teacher in college that was a Kipsigis.  That's why--
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: That's--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I remember Kipchein--Kipchoge Keino winning the '68 Olympics [1968 Summer Olympics, Mexico City, Mexico].  That just set a trend.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sam--
Speaker 2: It's amazing.
Speaker 1: Sam Kipkorgot [sic.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and all the rest of them, you know.  So this is a, is there a special relationship with the Kipsigis in terms of this, them being the marathon, win- winners at that level?
Speaker 2: What we do is every marathon winner from the previous year, we bring them into the--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So John Hancock would sponsor about a dozen elite runners obviously, the winners, but we'd make sure to bring those winners into the Franklin Park Zoo to teach the kids and one of the marathoners, said--the kids ask these amazing questions, and they said, "Well, when did you start running?"  And one of the champions said, "Well, you know, I had to run to school, and it was ten miles and, so I ran fast to--because I didn't want to be late."  And then they said, "Of course, you run home, but sometimes I ran home for lunch."  So just the determination, it was wonderful for the kids to understand a different culture and to hear from others about different cultures and then to become tied to these marathoners and be out on the finish line cheering them on.  It was just wonderful.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They'd have (gestures) Kenyan flags and (gestures) American flags.
Story_ID: 666319
Speaker 1: There's a partnership with the Edward Everett Elementary School [Boston, Massachusetts] and South Boston Neighborhood House [Boston, Massachusetts] and probably a lot of other programs but--
Speaker 2: (Nods head) At least a dozen.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 2: Girl power, right?  And we talked about financial wizards.  You know, just, we just created programming around the skillset of employees and around our sponsorships, so tried to make everything come alive.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you have a favorite program of these programs?
Speaker 2: I'd have to say it was the Boston Marathon Kenya Project.  You know, when you--for me, it was going to Kenya, and we saw a runner run across as the sun was setting, and you realize, you may know this int- you know, intelligently, but you realize that is how people make their living.  That's their mode of transportation and, so you want to be able to teach kids about a culture like that and that's why they win the marathon and the fact that when they win, they take their winnings and they bring it back to their village, so I wanted to tell that story and wanted brown, black kids to be able to see the power of these Kenyans.
Speaker 1: Now have you--when we look around the house here, there are a lot of African masks and a lot of black art.  Do you, have you been to Africa several times or just--
Speaker 2: We've been to Kenya, Tanzania, and I went to Rwanda with the first lady of Boston [Angela Faletra Menino].  We went to open, help open a girls school [Maranyundo Girls School, Nyamata, Rwanda] that was built on a killing field, so we try to travel and, you know, hope to do even more.
Story_ID: 666320
Speaker 1: You were the founding co-chair of Massachusetts Co- Conference for Women, right?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --that significant?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there have been--it's eleven years now.  The largest women's conference in the country.  I'm one of the eight co-founders, but each year, we have ten thousand women come and we have a variety of speakers from all across the country come and speak to these ten thousand women.  We have--yeah.  It's amazing, we have had--Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] a couple of years ago, [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou when she was with us.  We were so fortunate to have her.  But it's a very inspiring day to really help women propel their careers.
Story_ID: 666321
Speaker 1: Now did you play any role at all in O- in President Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] campaign in 2008?
Speaker 2: I was one of the five co-chairs of Obama for New England [Obama for America], so we were with him when he had 10 percent name recognition.  Didn't know how far the campaign would go, but we were going to go as far, we were going to go as far as the campaign went and, so we're there early on, just so believed in him and, you know, worked so hard, never thought I'd see this in my lifetime, and it was such an amazingly deserving candidate that we sacrificed so that we could help advance him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know your husband [HistoryMaker C. Bernard Fulp] had a picture of you all in the crowd in Chicago [Illinois], a screen shot from CNN--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with him (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at the--when it, when it was announced that he won.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You--okay.  How did you feel about it?  I guess everybody gets asked that on some level, but--about Obama win- winning in 2008?
Speaker 2: I felt so fortunate.  First of all, I felt, quite frankly, that God had placed us in this space in this lifetime to see it, that we have come from a point where families were marching on Washington [D.C.] in '63 [1963], where so many people had fought and died, and I never thought I'd see it in this lifetime and, so to be able to have such an amazing African American president, to be able to see the progress we could make, it makes you ask, "What are you called to do?"  Because this is spe- a very special time.  Challenging?  Of course, it is.  But to be able to see this history, to live this history, it's a gift and, so I ask, "What are we called to do?"
Story_ID: 666322
Speaker 1: And the following year in 2009, you received the Eleanor Roosevelt Award, and it was about, it was given by the Massachusetts Democratic Party [Massachusetts Democratic Party], right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your efforts--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I loved receiving that award because my aunt Gertrude [Fulp's paternal cousin, Gertrude Lockhart Melchior] went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and during World War II [WWII], she wasn't able to go home to the [U.S.] Virgin Islands and she tells the story that Eleanor Roosevelt had a few women from Howard University come over for tea, and she, and Aunt Gertrude was one of them, so I loved receiving the Eleanor Roosevelt Award.
Story_ID: 666323
Speaker 1: Also in regards to the [U.S.] Virgin Islands.  In 2009, you were named to the board of trustees of the University of the Virgin Islands [Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands].
Speaker 2: Yes, I served on the board for five years.  Our friend and colleague, the governor of the Virgin Islands [John de Jongh, Jr.] appointed me, and it was wonderful to be on the--a historically black college board [HBCU] but, yet in the Virgin Islands where my family's roots are from.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right.  So how many trips would you have to make a year there, to the Virgin Islands to--
Speaker 2: My husband [HistoryMaker C. Bernard Fulp] and I had bought a condo there, so a few years before--so I think I had about three board meetings there but then we'd also be there for Christmas and others holidays, so we got a chance--we still do get a chance to go back frequently.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are people in the Virgin Islands satisfied with being a territory or do they, do they--is there ever agitation about becoming a state or--
Speaker 2: Some do and some don't.  But I think that they are, because they have representation in [U.S.] Congress, because of that move, that's very helpful.  You find the agitation more in Puerto Rico next door.
Story_ID: 666324
Speaker 1: Yeah, in 2011, you were a representative of the United Nations to the sixty-fifth session of the United Nations General Assembly.  Is that correct?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how does this--I didn't even know that (laughter)--well, explain this, explain this.
Speaker 2: So each year, the president of the United States has the opportunity to select someone outside of the state department [U.S. Department of State] to be a part of his--the delegation and, so he might select someone from business, the arts, so Eleanor Roosevelt held this post.  Coretta Scott King held this post.  Valerie Biden [Valerie Biden Owens] now helds--holds the post this year.  And, so I had the opportunity.  I was selected to be a part of the delegation for the sixty-fifth General Assembly.
Speaker 1: That's quite an honor.
Speaker 2: It was a wonderful experience and physically moved to New York [New York], took a leave of absence from Hancock [John Hancock Financial Services Inc.].  Moved to New York.  Bernie [HistoryMaker C. Bernard Fulp] would come on the weekends, and it was an amazing experience.
Speaker 1: So this lasted for a year then (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It lasted for the--three months--
Speaker 1: The three months of--
Speaker 2: --which is the General Assem--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when the General Assembly meets, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what time of year is that normally?
Speaker 2: September through the end of December.
Story_ID: 666325
Speaker 1: Meanwhile at John Hancock [John Hancock Financial Services Inc.], you became a senior vice president at, I guess, in 2008, I guess, or was it 2008?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's when I asked them to combine--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 2: --the two areas, and they did, and I--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you--
Speaker 2: --became senior vice president.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In 2012, you left John Hancock, right?  And it becomes a pre- becomes president and CEO Partnership, Incorporated [The Partnership, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts].  Now is this an organization that existed before, or did you create this or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The organization existed before, and it really came out of the busing crisis here in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Of the 1970s, the--
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventies [1970s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the--yeah.
Speaker 2: There were two organizations, the Boston Corporation [ph.], the Boston Committee.  The mayor, Mayor White [Kevin White], at that time, formed a committee of the, of the cardinal [Humberto Sousa Medeiros], the publisher [William Davis Taylor] of The Globe [The Boston Globe], of the chairman [Richard D. Hill] of BankBoston [Bank of Boston Corporation; BankBoston], which is now Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation] to help him provide access for African Americans in corporate because he really felt that unless African Americans can move up in corporate in the highest, that highest industry of power, so to speak, they're not going to be successful, and simultaneously [HistoryMaker] Hubie Jones, dean of the School of Social Work at Boston University [Boston University School of Social Work, Boston, Massachusetts] created an organization, the Boston Corporation, to do similar work.  And ultimately those two organizations merged to form The Partnership.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thus the name.
Story_ID: 666326
Speaker 1: So the, The Partnership [The Partnership, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] was formed in roughly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eight- nineteen eighty-seven [1987].
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987], okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and we've expanded our offerings to provide access, not only for African Americans but for all people of color, so our mission is to really ensure the economic competitiveness of the region, and I say, "Well, there are lots of organizations that do that.  You have the chamber of commerce [Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce].  You have the New England Council, but at The Partnership, our focus is on providing leadership development, retaining, convening professionals, executives of color to ensure they reach their highest potential and then we also work with corporations to help them create climates where diverse professionals can thrive."
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what--is there a formula for how to do that?  I mean, to--
Speaker 2: Well, in terms of individuals of color, we have these unique leadership development programs, yearlong programs, monthly individuals come and we offer training, obviously on typical issues like negotiations, interpersonal skills but we also offer programming.  Those sessions include ethnicity, power, influence, the importance of social networks, and as individuals of difference, how do we navigate complex environments, so we're really helping to prepare and propel individuals.  And at the same time, in companies, we're help- helping managers understand the business imperative for diversity, the demographic shift that is occurring.  Today, you have more babies of color born in the U.S. than Caucasians.  Today, every month, you have fifty thousand Latinos turning eighteen.  Those are voters.  By the year 2042, the U.S. Census Bureau indicates there will be more people of color than Caucasians, so we ask, companies, "Are you ready?  That's the workforce that you'll have.  That's the marketplace that you're trying to sell to.  So do you have the people inside your companies who can provide the goods and service for these markets?"  So we try to approach it from a business perspective and including the fact that you have so many studies, the McKinsey study.  You have so many studies that indicate the more diverse your organization, the more profitable it is because it's diversity of thought that you have.  Not everybody is thinking the same.  You'll have all these different ideas and perspectives that are in your organization helping to reach the global market now.
Speaker 1: Well, I know the struggle you probably have when you say these things to some corporate people.  They would consider what you're saying to be frightening (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, just look at the climate now with Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump]--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and his campaign.
Speaker 2: Yes.  But it's about business.  And I'm just trying to tell you who the market, what the market's looking like.  No different than anyone else in your organization, and you want to get that market, and if you don't, your competitor will, so I try to frame it like that.  You want to penetrate that market.  It's a market.
Story_ID: 666327
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know in Chicago [Illinois], it's become big, and in my little hometown, in Dayton [Ohio], you know, I was in a leadership development class where people--they were learning the history of different parts of the city and meeting leaders in different fields and the political leaders, the cultural leaders and, you know, is this something that Boston [Massachusetts] pioneered, or is it--
Speaker 2: And we pioneered this model out of busing, so we realize the reputation Boston was having and that we've got all these educational institutions.  We have a healthy black population here and unless we are providing access, that talent is going to leave.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's a--yeah, the national reputation of Boston was suffering from that busing crisis (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: The people previously thought Boston's the home of the Kennedys and--
Speaker 2: Oh, liberal (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know, you've got this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --liberal enlightened--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Ed Brookes [sic. HistoryMaker Edward Brooke].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ed Brookes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ed Brookes.
Speaker 1: Black senator.  And he's Republican and, yet, he can, he has a balanced view of (laughter)--so I mean, people were looking at the busing crisis and like they got a flag, they're trying to, looks like they're trying to skewer Ted Landsmark [HistoryMaker Theodore C. Landsmark] with the flag.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all these images of screaming, shouting--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --angry faces and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, people are saying, "This is Boston?"  Yeah, so I don't know.  So that, so it's in response to that?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that was under Mayor White [Kevin White] and that was his response.  We have to help change the city.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.   And how do you think it's worked so far?
Speaker 2: I think it's working, but we have--it's a journey.  I look at diversity as not a destination.  It's a journey, and we're on the journey.  I think the current mayor [Marty Walsh] is very committed and I think all of us, you know, have to work together to advance people of color.  I think it is critical that we look at it from a business perspective and not a social justice perspective.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're currently, you're, you're still with Partnership [The Partnership, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts], though?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 666328
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today here in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: My concerns for the African American community overall is that we have to ensure we embrace technology because that's our future, and we need to ensure our kids have access to technology and understand that STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics], life sciences, those are opportunities for the future and we need to ensure that kids embrace science and math because many of the jobs are going to be in that arena and, so let's make it fun and let's engage you in these arenas so that you can have a greater job in the future.
Story_ID: 666329
Speaker 1: Does The Partnershop- ship, Incorporated [The Partnership, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] address the Black Lives Matter issue at all here in the city?
Speaker 2: What we choose to do, what we choose to do is to make sure we have forums and that our participants and our corporate partners are educated around the issue.  So as a result, at our annual meeting, we're having our chairman, who's the former district attorney of Suffolk County [Massachusetts], interview the Massachusetts attorney general [Maura Healey] on issues of race, race relations, social justice, blacks and criminals justice and, so that's an important forum that we have to have.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It seems, Boston [Massachusetts] seems to be a place that generates innovation in terms of ideas and dealing with some of the problems in the black community, and I'm thinking about--I mean, years ago, we read about Eugene Rivers [HistoryMaker Reverend Eugene Rivers] in Newsweek magazine and the Ten Point Coalition in Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts] and Bob Moses' [Robert Parris Moses] Algebra Project (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And, but are these--I mean, I don't know.  I don't even have a question.  I guess I just said this now (laughter).  But it does seem like a place--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) where there's--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --even the police department [Boston Police Department] seems to be a little more progressive than--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --some of the other cities in their response to some of these issues--
Speaker 2: Community policing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the streets.
Speaker 2: --is a critical component of our police department, but you're absolutely right in terms of innovation and, so what we have to do is make sure we engage the next generation in making sure they do whatever they can for our community.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think even Harvard Public Health [Harvard School of Public Health; Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts] had a program, yeah, you know about community sustained (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Disparities?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I forget the name of it, but it had a different--I have to think of it.  But that's--yeah.  There's always some innovation going on here.
Speaker 2: Right.  And you have the biosciences careers program [Biomedical Science Careers Program] which is getting kids--Harvard's [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] program to get kids engaged in life sciences.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, MIT's [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] black student union [Black Students' Union] has been really active, you know, with science programs for--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --school.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You--
Speaker 2: So we've got this educational and medical mecca of the world right here.  We have to leverage it to impact our community residents and make sure we bring everyone along and that's all of our responsibility.
Story_ID: 666330
Speaker 1: Do you have any children at all, do you--
Speaker 2: I don't have any children.  My husband [HistoryMaker C. Bernard Fulp] has three adult children.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now is your mother [Miriam Riley Nicholson] still with us?
Speaker 2: My mother is no longer with us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's really--in terms of blood relatives, it's my brother [Paris Nicholson III] and I.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is he still in the [U.S.] Virgin Islands or is he--
Speaker 2: No.  He actually moved from the Virgin Islands to Florida, so he's in Florida.
Story_ID: 666331
Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you we need to talk about before I ask my last couple questions?
Speaker 2: I think--oh, the one thing I wanted to tell you.  As I mentioned, the epilepsy was traumatic for me, and I thought I outgrew it.  When I divorced I had another--a couple of other seizures, but still the doctors didn't put me on medication, and I was fine.  And I was seizure free for thirteen years, I thought (gesture).  And then a few years ago, Bernie [HistoryMaker C. Bernard Fulp] and I were driving along in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], and I had a seizure.  And I'm now back on medication, but it's working.  I'm going to take the medication for the rest of my life, but through the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] campaign, I had the opportunity to meet David Axelrod and his wife, Susan [Susan Landau Axelrod], and Susan has started an organization called CURE, Citizens United to--for Research on Epilepsy [sic. Citizens United for Research in Epilepsy, Chicago, Illinois], and I'm now a member of their board and that's a big deal for me because for so many years, I found it's tough enough being black.  It's tough enough being a woman, but I have this illness, too.  And I have finally learned that the illness has given me a lot of strength and resilience and that it's okay to tell people about my illness.  I don't have to feel shame.  And, so I'm at the point where I am now helping and speaking about the illness and letting people know you can lead productive lives and, so for me, that's a break through moment to be able to own it and still do all the things I want to do in life.
Story_ID: 666332
Speaker 1: Now have you ever been--you've won so many civic awards, have you ever been tempted to take a job in government or to run for office?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But, you know, I rea- in terms of run for office, I really like being the producer.  I like being behind the scenes and, so, you know, I love the life my hu- husband [HistoryMaker C. Bernard Fulp] and I have built.  I know what it's like to be in office, and it's 24/7, and you sacrifice so much of your family life when you have that and, so I have had that experience having been married to it, having been the spouse of an elected official, so I like being a great supporter.  I love the work that we've done for President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and getting him in office and that's a good space for us.  But it was that experience with the Obama campaign, with the opportunity to be in government as a U.S. representative [at the United Nations General Assembly], but it was that opportunity, you come back, and you ask yourself, you ask yourself, well, what am I really called to do?  At this stage of life, how do I put it all together?  And what am I--why did God put me on earth?  And I think because I don't have any children, I think I'm called to help develop the next generation of leaders.  That's what I'm called to do because so many people invested in me and helped me along the way, and this is my opportunity to continue to pass the baton.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any people who are out here now that you consider yourself a mentor of, who are doing great things?
Speaker 2: I have a lot of young people who I, who I know will be running the city [Boston, Massachusetts] in a few more years and I love seeing them in different pockets, different industries, whether it be government, finance, public relations, and you can look at them--and what I try to do is connect them so that they then begin to know each other because I know these young people are going to be running the city in the future.
Story_ID: 666333
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point in life, is there anything major that you would do differently, if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: That's always a great question.  And I think, I think the way that I view it is that even the traumas or the sadness or the regrets, even all of the mistakes, it's made me a stronger person and, so the hard times made me stronger, and I remember my father [Paris Nicholson, Jr.] telling me, "It's not how many times you fall.  It's whether you can pick yourself up again," and, so I think back upon those young girls that I went to camp with [at International Summer Camp Montana, Crans-Montana, Switzerland], and they didn't have that kind of foundation to fall back on and got in all sorts of trouble and pushed all sorts of boundaries.  But I like the fact that, no matter what, if I make a mistake, I've learned at this stage of life, it's just a mistake.  It doesn't define who you are.  And when I was twenty, I didn't know that.  But having made mistakes and gone through them and come out on the other stide- side, you realize it's just a mistake and you learn from that mistake.
Story_ID: 666334
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think at the end of the day, it's developing the next generation of leaders, being a source for them, connecting them, giving myself for them and sharing the lessons that the Aunt Gertrudes [Fulp's paternal cousin, Gertrude Lockhart Melchior] of the world and the [HistoryMaker] Wayne Budds of the world have shared with me.  Passing on the legacies that so many others gave to me, the words of wisdom they gave to me.
Story_ID: 666335
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to the previous one but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I would like to be remembered as someone who was impacted by her aunt Gertrude [Fulp's paternal cousin, Gertrude Lockhart Melchior] and did all that she could to take that impact and to replicate it in her own world.
Story_ID: 666336
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you explain this pho- photo for us?
Speaker 2: I was at a fundraiser for Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and when it came time--we were in the photo line, and when it came time for me to take my photo with the president, he said, "Oh, she's got a dozen pictures.  Let's do something different.  Let's fist bump."  And, so there you have it.
Speaker 1: You got to see--did you see that cartoon from Newsweek with him doing a fist bump and his hair--head wrapped up like a Muslim.  (Unclear) we got another one.  There you go.  So who's that left to right, if you can guess?
Speaker 2: Left, you have my husband Bernie [HistoryMaker C. Bernard Fulp], me, my brother [Paris Nicholson III], who I told you I call Brother, and his wife Maureen [Maureen Nicholson].
Speaker 1: Okay.  About what year was that?
Speaker 2: This year.  Bernie, when would you say?
Speaker 1: (C. BERNARD FULP):  What--
Speaker 2: Duty free Kenya trip?
Speaker 1: (C. BERNARD FULP):  That's 2000.
Speaker 2: This is in 2000, our trip to Kenya, which inspired me to create the Boston Marathon Kenya Project when I was working for John Hancock [John Hancock Financial Services Inc.].  My husband shot a picture of me in front of the duty free shop.
Speaker 1: And I have the good fortune of being on the board of the John F. Kennedy library [John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston, Massachusetts] and here I am in front of the president's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] famed words.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And here I am with the matriarch of our family, my role model, Aunt Gertrude [Fulp's paternal cousin, Gertrude Lockhart Melchior].  Again she not only was a businesswoman, community leader, but was a great baker and also dressmaker, and here we are.
Speaker 2: Do you know what her last name is?
Speaker 1: Gertrude Dudley Melchior, Gertrude Lockhart Dudley Melchior.
Speaker 2: Melchior is spelled like the Wise Man, right, from the--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --Bible?  Okay.
Speaker 1: At another, another Obama event in Chicago [Illinois] where there was a huge women's event for Obama, and I had the good fortune of having my photo taken with First Lady Obama [Michelle Obama], Oprah Winfrey but always wanting to include the next generation.  This is my nephew Michael [ph.] from the [U.S.] Virgin Islands who came up for that event.
Speaker 2: And this is my husband, Bernie, and me, his son Cyrus [Cyrus Fulp, Jr.], his daughter, Rachael [Rachael Fulp Cooke], and next to Bernie is his eldest daughter, Deanna [Deanna Fulp], and this is at our wedding at my brother's home in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands].
Speaker 1: And again another photo of me at the John F. Kennedy library.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And then our wedding in St. Thomas at my brother's home.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my mother, who was bright and giving and dutiful.
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1: Miriam Nicholson [Miriam Riley Nicholson].
Speaker 2: On the, on the campaign trail, I created Massachusetts and U.S. Virgin Islands Women for Obama [ph.].  We went around the country campaigning on behalf of the president and here we are with Caroline Kennedy in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And we have--The Boston Globe did a piece on minority executives and the interest in ensuring that we're on corporate boards, and it talked about what we are doing at The Partnership [The Partnership, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts] to provide access.
Speaker 2: This is my favorite.  It's in a book called 'Boston, Inspirational Women' [Carol Beggy] and it's filmed down the street on the Commonwealth Mall [Commonwealth Avenue Mall, Boston, Massachusetts] with an amazing statue to Phillis Wheatley [Boston Women's Memorial], and I'm so fortunate that that's a part of my neighborhood.
Speaker 1: I love mentoring young women and connecting individuals of color with Caucasian people, and here is one of my mentees, Leslie Feinberg, who now has a host of friends who are people of color, and they're helping to lead this city.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And here when I returned from the United Nations, The Globe did a piece.  Indicating this whole experience, just enabled me to be so comfortably in my own zone.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us about this.
Speaker 2: (C. BERNARD FULP):  This a photo of my high school football team at Atkins High School [Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  The year is 1952.  I am seated, as I view the picture, on the far left, number thirty-three.  At this point, I played mostly defensive halfback for the Rompin' Stompin' Camels.
Speaker 1: The Rompin' Stompin' Camels (laughter).
Speaker 2: (C. BERNARD FULP):  The Rompin' Stompin' Camels.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Winston-Salem [North Carolina], Camels (unclear) (laughter).  (Unclear).  I didn't get that until now when you said Camels--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Camels--
Speaker 1: Camels, that's right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's a brand of cigarettes.
Speaker 1: (C. BERNARD FULP):  (Unclear) cigarettes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Did they provide you with cigarette samples (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (C. BERNARD FULP):  (Simultaneous) In the old days, they gave away lots of samples trying to get young people to start smoking.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.  We didn't get the description of this one.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: (C. BERNARD FULP):  Yeah.  This is me at a Christmas party having a brief chat with the president of the United States, Barack Obama.  That's not right.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: (C. BERNARD FULP):  Uh-oh.  The state dinner (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) State dinner, that was at the state dinner with the German chancellor.
Speaker 1: Angela Merkel.
Speaker 2: (C. BERNARD FULP):  Correction, that's--
Speaker 1: You have a tux on don't you?
Speaker 2: (C. BERNARD FULP):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (C. BERNARD FULP):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: That is Angela Merkel.
Speaker 2: (C. BERNARD FULP):  This is me at the state dinner for German Prime Minister Angela Merkel having a chat with the president of the United States Barack Obama before entering the Rose Garden.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: You can go ahead.
Speaker 1: (C. BERNARD FULP):  This me having a conversation with the attorney general of the United States Eric Holder [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.].  This was at an event at the John F. Kennedy Foundation [John F. Kennedy Library Foundation] here in Boston [Massachusetts].  We were actually discussing his coming summer vacation on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] when he said he'd be happy to return to the hood.
