Story_ID: 636360
Speaker 1: Could you just tell us your complete name and spell your name for us?
Speaker 2: Certainly, my name is [HistoryMaker] Fay Ferguson, F-A-Y, F-E-R-G-U-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you and Fay is spelled F-A-Y?
Speaker 2: F-A-Y.
Speaker 1: F-A-Y, okay.  I had two different versions (unclear) I wanted to make sure for the record.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Thank you and the date of birth, your date of birth please?
Speaker 2: December 6, 1951.
Speaker 1: Okay and your, where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born and raised in La Porte, Indiana and actually we initially stayed in a very small town called Kingsford Heights, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you and today's date is?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August 27, 2013.
Speaker 1: And we are being taped at what location or address?
Speaker 2: 1900 South Michigan [Avenue], third floor.
Speaker 1: And what is your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chicago.
Speaker 1: --Chicago, Illinois, thank you and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm co-CEO of Burrell Communications Group, which is a communications-advertising agency.
Speaker 1: And that's based here in--?
Speaker 2: Based here in Chicago, we also have a satellite office in the Los Angeles [California] area.
Story_ID: 636361
Speaker 1: Thank you, just to kind of get things going a little bit we have some, I, we call them People magazine questions, warm up questions.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, the first one is what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is green.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, earth and money and (laughter) all those good things.
Speaker 1: Good things associated with that nice color.  Thank you and your favorite food?
Speaker 2: That's a hard one.  My favorite food is probably chocolate cake though.
Speaker 1: Sounds delicious to me.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you and your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summertime is my favorite time of the year.  I just love being outdoors.  I love outdoor sports.  I'm very active.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation resort or resort area?  What do you--?
Speaker 2: My favorite area really is the Rancho Mirage [California], Palm Springs [California] area.  I love the mountains.  I love going hiking.  I love the smell of the desert; it's just really quite wonderful.
Speaker 1: And last but not least, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Actually I do and it's: if you don't have anything positive to say, shut up (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Got it.
Speaker 2: I, I kind of manipulated it.
Story_ID: 636362
Speaker 1: Next we're going to talk about family history.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And to start that off we--I'd like to know something about your mom, your mother.  So first of all, what was your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Eva Mae Holifield and then her married name is Holmes [Eva Mae Holifield Holmes].
Speaker 1: Right, and could you spell Holifield for us?
Speaker 2: H-O-L-I-F-I-E-L-D.
Speaker 1: Great, and Holmes that's as it's normally spelled?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, comes from a family of two fighters, Holmes and Holifield (laughter).
Speaker 1: --okay, we'll talk about that later (laughter) and where was she born?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Alabama.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the specific city or town?
Speaker 2: I believe it was Northfolk, Alabama [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you and do you remember what year about she was born?
Speaker 2: Yes, 1911.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the date of birth by chance?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Valentine's Day, February 14, 1911.
Speaker 1: Very good.  Can you tell us some things about your mother, what she was like as a person?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, my mother was a really interesting individual.  She had an eighth grade education and she lived with a lot of different families as she was growing up.  She married three times (laughter) and but she was someone who was always trying to better herself and so she moved around a lot.  She, well she wasn't educated.  She owned her own home.  She put all of--there were six kids, she put all of us through school.  So she was quite a remarkable person in her own right.  She often had us write letters for her and she was very strict, you know we were rewarded by given the job of scrubbing the kitchen floor (laughter). So definitely a very different time.
Speaker 1: Okay, in terms of growing up in Alabama--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in the town that she grew up in, did she ever talk about that very much, growing up down there?
Speaker 2: She didn't talk a lot about it and what was interesting is that her brothers and sisters and the folks she talked about all had these animal nicknames; Bear and Cat and things of--it was really quite hard to try to visualize what the person was like, but that's how they were referred to and there was one even called Hump, so it was a colorful upbringing if you will and I think she was the only girl.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she ever give any little stories just in general about what, what that time, what that area, was it real rural?  Was it rural?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, it was rural.  It was a, a farm.  I know they had chicken because I remember visiting one summer.  We all were packed into the car and drove to Alabama and I'd never seen live chickens before, especially ones running around while the head's on (laughter).  It was, it was traumatic, but she really didn't talk an awful lot about her upbringing and so a lot of that--and that's why a lot of it is unknown.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, did you know your, your grandparents growing up, her, her mom [Elizabeth Massey Holifield] and dad [James Holifield]?
Speaker 2: Didn't really know them, just from--probably only visited a couple of times because it was so far away, very kind, very loving.  I was shocked they all had--my grandmother had hair all the way down her back, very, very long hair and just lived off the land really, and but I don't really know much about her parents and I know even less about my father's parents, or even about him [John Holmes].
Speaker 1: So what--even if you have some stories from other family members or cousins, how far back could you tell us about your grandparents, or your great-grandparents, any history that we should know about?
Speaker 2: I, again, I know very little, but I remember my oldest sister [Geraldine Holmes Virgil] showed me this book that she had come across and it referenced one of the family members who had a still (laughter).  I'm sure there was a very colorful background there.
Speaker 1: Right, right, okay (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I do know that my mother's family owned a lot of land in the area where they were born and lived.
Story_ID: 636363
Speaker 1: Not to go too far with that, but was there anybody who told you about maybe back towards slavery times, anybody--mixed marriages or anything like that, any, any stories about that?
Speaker 2: The only story that I'm aware of and I wasn't aware of until recently actually, is that my [maternal] grandfather [James Holifield] was quote adopted by his parents, all, both of whom were slaves of course and that the slave owner's name was a Jack Kalb [ph.] and so I found that interesting and want to research it at some point myself.
Speaker 1: Well that's good genealogically to know about those things and I think that's an experience for a lot of African American families that, that there's someone usually a white male on some side--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --not necessarily all the way back to slavery times, but a great-grandparent and it's almost a hard stop--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know a name maybe and, and you want to research that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, absolutely.
Story_ID: 636364
Speaker 1: So that's--that's a sim- very similar experience for many, many families, including my own too.  So let's go to your, your dad's side of the family a bit.  What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: John Wesley Holmes [John Holmes].
Speaker 1: Solid name.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Very solid name.  John Wesley I think was a, a theologian if I remember correctly.  And do you remember when he was born?
Speaker 2: He was born in March of 2011.
Speaker 1: And what town was he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry 1911 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Nineteen eleven [1911], yes that's good to--you were about a century off (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Well we're going to get there, we'll get there, thank you and what, what town or what state was he--
Speaker 2: Mississippi, I think Greenfield or something like that Mississippi.
Speaker 1: That sounds like a pretty rural area--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --as far as you know--did, what was he like as a person, your father?
Speaker 2: I do know very little about my father because my parents were divorced when I was very, very young, but I--he worked for the South Shore railroad [South Shore Line], I do know that.  And he lived here in Chicago [Illinois] and he, he was tall and my parents were pretty much contrasting.  My father was tall and dark skinned, my mom [Eva Mae Holifield Holmes] was short and light skinned; and tall and strong and I think he was probably a pretty good looking gentleman (laughter).
Speaker 1: As, as daughters should remember their fathers, that's, that's good.  Did he ever--I'm not sure, well, did he ever talk about growing up in Greenfield, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, any family members, aunts, uncles, cousins ever say this was Greenfield back in the day?  Did you ever get any of those kinds of stories from anybody?
Speaker 2: I didn't, but then I was at the younger end of the spectrum.  I'm sure my older sisters and family members might have heard some stories, but I, I was a bit young.
Speaker 1: Did he ever--well, how did he ever, how did he get from Greenfield to Chicago?
Speaker 2: No clue (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you know how they met; any chance your mom and dad, how that came about?
Speaker 2: Actually I don't.  I'll have to ask my sister if she knows, but I don't know.
Story_ID: 636365
Speaker 1: You were born in La Porte--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Indiana which--where is, where is La Porte, Indiana compared to say Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: It is near Michigan City [Indiana], South Bend [Indiana], that area.
Speaker 1: Okay and what's your earliest childhood memory going back to, to whenever, what's your earliest memory?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I have a memory of sitting in my high chair and we had this dog, his name was Frosty and he was a big dog and I remember everybody else ran out of the room when he came in, left me in my high chair and he bit my finger (laughter), so that's my very early memories.
Speaker 1: I see, and that was in your high chair you said?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's pretty early, then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --okay, okay.
Speaker 2: It hurt (laughter).
Speaker 1: It hurt, that's why you remember it.
Story_ID: 636366
Speaker 1: Okay and growing up in La Porte, Indiana was--did you grow up in a house versus an apartment?
Speaker 2: A house.  I, I don't even know if they had apartments in that town and it was interesting because my family, my siblings, we all went to a Lutheran grade school, St. John's Evangelical Lutheran grade school [St. John's Lutheran School, La Porte, Indiana] and we were actually the only people of color in the entire school, so it was very different from my peers, if you will, I mean La Porte is one of those small towns that is very much segregated so black people lived across the railroad tracks and white folks lived on the other side.  We never lived in the black neighborhood although that's where our friends were and so in some regards I was very isolated growing up but in another regard the education that I received at that school was pretty outstanding.
Speaker 1: And you're, you're saying it's a Lutheran school like there're Catholic schools?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It had a, a Lutheran approach--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to your education. Do you remember the types of classes you were taking?
Speaker 2: Well the classes were all the normal classes, but in addition to that we, we had religion and so you studied actually the basis of all religions including the Lutheran religion and it was affiliated with the church, St. John's Evangelical Lutheran Church [La Porte, Indiana], which was also there and it was, it was pretty extraordinary, kindergarten through eighth grades, so all of the formative years were spent at that particular school.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any, any teachers that were of great importance to you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, absolutely, Mr. Almer [ph.], Mr. Hanna [ph.], somebody we called Mr. Bubbles (laughter).
Speaker 1: Who, was that his real name or--
Speaker 2: No, no it wasn't, but he was a younger teacher who had gone to Concordia College [Concordia University Chicago] in River Forest here in, in Illinois and most of the other teachers were older so he just kind of and he had a bubbly personality.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But it was a great time, it, it really was and I didn't feel, until I got into my teenage years the separation of, of not being around black people because truthfully, after school and weekends we were around black people, but during the school day it was, like I said, I was the only person of color in my class, my family were the only people of color in the entire school.
Story_ID: 636367
Speaker 1: And, how, how did that feel being the only African American basically in your class [at St. John's Lutheran School, La Porte, Indiana] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, because that was something that I experienced from the beginning I, it, it just never hit me until years later that it was different, but and so I had friendships on both sides of the fence so to speak and I did, and I really didn't understand how different that was until years later, you know, academically I competed equally, I never felt as though I was less than.  I never victimized, so in a way it was, it was really a very good way to get educated and to build self-esteem.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in some ways maybe you had one group of friends at school, another group of friends in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And the friendships at school were just like normal good friendships?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, they were and like I said, I never even thought about the race issue until later and even today if I were to fast forward when I got the call from Tom Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] to come interview for a position at Burrell Communications [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] I told him I didn't grow up black so, I know marketing, so if you are cool with that we can talk (laughter) because it seemed odd at the time that you have a person who did not go to a black church, you know, which is pretty foundational, did not go to a black school and you're going to go to work for a black agency, so it, it, and there too it was like, wow!  I know marketing I can--but I'm going to have to study our people to make sure (laughter).
Speaker 1: So to a certain extent though that's, that's true of multiculturalism--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to understand different cultures and backgrounds.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, so, but throughout my life it's been that sort of dichotomy for me, that I can sort of have an out of body experience and looking at: wow, this how I was raised and this is what I'm doing. So it's, it's been fascinating to me from that perspective.
Speaker 1: And this is still though with the fact that this is in the mid 19--I'm sorry, yeah, mid-1950s into the '60s [1960s] and you're talking basically in some ways a segregated town?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --now there's segregated and then there's racism and prejudice. How was La Porte [Indiana] back then, even if you didn't feel it, how was it say, if you were an adult?
Speaker 2: Oh, they felt it (laughter).  Yeah, it, it was very segregated, I mean you couldn't go to certain restaurants, so it was no different than any place in the South for example, but I think because within the confines of my small environment, where I was welcomed at school, welcomed at church [St. John's Evangelical Lutheran Church, La Porte, Indiana], welcomed in my friends' homes that I was isolated, insulated from that.
Story_ID: 636368
Speaker 1: In terms, in terms of your home environment--oh, by the way I meant to ask, you had siblings I know, I looked that up (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: What, what's their names, could you give them to us?
Speaker 2: Certainly, my youngest sister is Gale [Gale Holmes Norman] and then the sibling right above me is Donald [Donald Holmes] and we call him Donnie and then there's Sandra [Sandra Holmes Hannah] and then John [John Holmes] and Gerri [Geraldine Holmes Virgil] and interesting thing about my sister Gerri, not her real name and I didn't find out until my mom [Eva Mae Holifield Holmes] passed away what her real name was.  She actually hated it so much that she changed it legally herself while she was still in, a teenager and I found out because as we were going through my mom's belongings I came across this, this birth certificate and I was like, wow!  Was there a twin?  Maybe the twin passed away (laughter) or what!  So interesting little family tidbit.
Speaker 1: So what was, her name was Gerri, but it really was?
Speaker 2: I can't tell.
Speaker 1: Okay, can't tell.
Speaker 2: Sworn to secrecy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. Well okay, I'll try and may come back to that question and I'll try to sneak it in there, okay but you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But my family has a way of giving themselves other additional names.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My sister Sandra, she gave herself the middle initial K, that's not anywhere on her birth certificate (laughter).
Story_ID: 636369
Speaker 1: Did you ever have any nicknames yourself?
Speaker 2: I have nicknames, but they came about because of athletics.  I've been nicknamed Homer and also Fergie [HistoryMaker Fay Ferguson]. Well, Fergie came later in life though, but I was, as I was growing up my nickname was Homer.
Speaker 1: And what was, how did that, what was the importance or, or how did that relate to or where did it come from?
Speaker 2: Well, it came from my tennis playing.  I played tennis from elementary school all the way up through grad school [Indiana University School of Business; Kelley School of Business, Bloomington, Indiana] actually.  I was ranked in the State of Indiana and I could hit a pretty powerful ball back then and in fact when my ex [Ernie Ferguson] and I were first dating and he asked me to play tennis, I don't know why, he had seen my resume and so we spun the racket for service and I served and hit a hole through his racket, and said, "I think we're done."
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was impressive I'm sure to him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, Homer though, I, I have a little bit of history of playing tennis also going back not to that competitive level, but who, who was--Homer?
Speaker 2: It was, came off of Holmes.
Speaker 1: Holmes, okay, okay, thank you and Fergie, softball, baseball, I was going to say Ferguson Jenkins, that's the only Fergie I know, but where did that come from, by?  Do you have any idea?
Speaker 2: Well, off of Ferguson (laughter).
Speaker 1: Ferguson. Okay, all right, thank you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So in, in grade school you're, you're playing tennis--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, and you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tennis and track and gosh, just about--softball, I, I was very, very into sports.
Speaker 1: That's, that's good, back in, back in those days, I'm talking about the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] a lot of girls, a lot of women, girls, didn't have a lot of sports to go to.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: There might have been softball, I, I think a little bit of field hockey or something like that.  Did, did you have organized sports back at the, the Lutheran school [St. John's Lutheran School, La Porte, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: We did at, at the Lutheran school that I went to there is very much organized sports for both the girls and the boys and I seemed to excel especially in track and field and we, it was competitive so we went around to different schools and throughout the state, so it was, it was wonderful.  I love, love, love sports and I was a cheerleader too.
Speaker 1: Well, you did everything, you know, sports and cheerleading.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you think that the competitive side back in those days helped you as you grew up to test your skills, to know who you were as a person?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely I think that the athletics helped me in terms of being competitive, in terms of sizing up an individual or a situation, also in terms of being disciplined and instilling some patience and being strategic, I, I think sports is a great background for that.
Speaker 1: Right, do you remember any coach or teachers back in those days that, well we talked about some of the teachers, but any coaches that were, that influenced you?
Speaker 2: There was one but I cannot remember his name, but he kind of took me under his wing and to teach me the, the ropes in terms of playing tennis and I also remember my younger sister and I were quite good and we would get up at five a.m. before school to go and practice and to just really hone our, our skills.
Story_ID: 636370
Speaker 1: In terms of your home environment, you have five, five siblings--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and yourself--and was--in La Porte [Indiana], I'm, I'm not sure when your mom [Eva Mae Holifield Holmes] and dad [John Holmes] got divorced, but who, who was there besides you when your, your, your siblings and your mom, was your mom, was your dad there too at that time?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I think they got divorced probably when I was around two years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  So in the home environment it's, it's, it's your mom and the six kids, did you have any, any special times of the year or any, any day that you, you always remember the good times, or just how life, how, how, what was life like there in your home, that, let me put it that way?
Speaker 2: Well, there were lots of ups and downs.  Education was king, so after school you did your homework first before you did anything else.  My mom was an extraordinarily good cook.  She could make dirt taste good (laughter).  I remember going out each of us would be given a little pail or pot to get blackberries.  We would go blackberry picking and she would make the most wonderful blackberries and dumplings and we were poor and there were days when you would use your imagination and all you'd have was a boiled egg and that became turkey dinner in your mind (laughter) so I, I think that's also where I began to use my imagination for escape.
Speaker 1: And how would you do that?  What, what things would you do to escape?
Speaker 2: I would read a lot.  Books were my closest friend I think.  I would escape into whether it's comic books or the classics, just anything.  I, I, I read a lot.  I wrote stories.  I--because we did not watch much television to be perfectly honest and I would go to the library, I was a, I was a quiet child, my, everybody use to say you know, "Where's Fay [HistoryMaker Fay Ferguson], where's Fay?" And you'd find me in a corner reading a book (laughter).
Speaker 1: Any, any stories sort of stand out from back in your younger days, say, someone mentioned the other day like, 'Black Beauty' [Anna Sewell] or, or even fairy tells or any stories that, that kind of, you remember that come to mind?
Speaker 2: No, not really, not really.
Story_ID: 636371
Speaker 1: Your mom [Eva Mae Holifield Holmes] is a great cook and did everything she could for, for you and your siblings, did you go to church?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.
Speaker 1: Every--
Speaker 2: Every Sunday (laughter), every Sunday.
Speaker 1: And this was at St. John's--
Speaker 2: St. John's Evangelical Lutheran Church [La Porte, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay and what was that church like?
Speaker 2: In a Lutheran church it's very participatory and so the congregation sings, you don't just have the choir, but you do have a choir as well.  You--we went through catechism so that's where you're questioned about the Bible and at church and you have to give answers, so before you are accepted into the church, so when you go through communion so you do that in the Lutheran church at eighth grade.  You don't it earlier.
Speaker 1: So you had to memorize certain aspects of the Bible and certain like--I, I, I'm a Protestant but we never had to--Baptist, never had to go through that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But was that every on Sunday morning thing or did you have a time, time during, during the week you had to go to catechism school or class?
Speaker 2: It was taught, it was taught at school [St. John's Lutheran School, La Porte, Indiana]--
Speaker 1: At school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as part of the curriculum.
Story_ID: 636372
Speaker 1: And Sunday afternoons, was that a time for family get togethers?
Speaker 2: It was time for good food and eating and afterwards always either a kickball game or baseball or something that we would do as a group and because there were so many of us, we could be our own team, so to speak.
Speaker 1: Did you, you and your brothers and sisters get together and play a lot together?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely we were very close knit and all of us pretty athletic and competitive, so those times of playing in the backyard or even across the street, we lived across from a cemetery [in La Porte, Indiana] (laughter) we would just, wherever we could play we would.
Speaker 1: And going back a little bit to your mom [Eva Mae Holifield Holmes], you said that she was a bit of a disciplinarian about, "Get your homework done"?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you have chores too, things that you had to do?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, everything from being a babysitter to a papergirl, to even we would go, with my mom before school or on the weekends to people's houses because she, she was a domestic.  She cleaned white folk's houses and she worked at a radio station where she cleaned the radio station but she would always take us with her to help.
Story_ID: 636373
Speaker 1: Well before we get to junior high school [Central Junior High School; Paul F. Boston Middle School, La Porte, Indiana] I wanted to back up a bit.  We talked about I think some of the kids that you knew when you were at your Lutheran school [St. John's Lutheran School, La Porte, Indiana]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --now, your neighborhood--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you had your, you had your house, what were the, what was the makeup, like, predominately black or so in your neighborhood, or how was that?
Speaker 2: No my neighborhood, again, we were the only people of color in the neighborhood (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thank you, right you did say that--?
Speaker 2: We would go across the tracks so to speak to, to, to the black neighborhood to visit our other friends.
Speaker 1: And in your neighborhood you, you had a lot of good friends there that you hung out, that you played with or, or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) People that we played with, but we, you know, we were the type of family that was, kept to ourselves, but we did play with our neighbors and et cetera.
Speaker 1: Okay you mentioned that you had some friends who were African American--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and how did that work in terms of where they lived and where you lived, and how, how did you get together?
Speaker 2: We rode our bicycles.
Speaker 1: Oh, of course!
Speaker 2: Back in those days (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of course, of course, of course.
Speaker 2: Back in those days you either walked everywhere or you rode a bike, but, yeah, there were folks that my mom [Eva Mae Holifield Holmes] had, whose family she knew and she would take us with her whenever she went to visit you know, sometimes you hated going along, sometimes you loved it, but that's how it worked.
Speaker 1: Okay, well did you feel safe riding your, you bike over--
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, yeah, it was a small town that didn't have the kind of issues that unfortunately we have almost everywhere today.
Story_ID: 636374
Speaker 1: Okay, so let's go to junior high school.  What was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: Elston Junior High [sic. Central Junior High School; Paul F. Boston Middle School, La Porte, Indiana].
Speaker 1: And you had a nice smile on your face when you said that, so what was, was that a, was that a supportive, comforting place, or, what was it like at Elston?
Speaker 2: It was culture shock first because it was my first exposure to a high school--junior high, but my first exposure to a public school and literally the town was such that there was only one junior high and then one high school [LaPorte High School, La Porte, Indiana], so all of the kids that had gone to whether it was public, parochial, private fed into the junior high and then to the high school and to me it was huge and boisterous and like wow!  And then there were also, you know, boys (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And maybe it was a little bit more open because it was a public versus a Lutheran--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --school too.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh, and I, I meant to ask one more thing about the Lutheran school [St. John's Lutheran School, La Porte, Indiana], was since your mom [Eva Mae Holifield Holmes] probably had limited means, was this a, a--did she have to pay for you going to school there or was it--?
Speaker 2: Yes, each family was charged a certain amount in order to go to the school and somehow she made it work.
Speaker 1: Outstanding, that's six, six children, that, that was fantastic, thank you.  So you're in ninth grade.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I think that you mentioned off camera just one year--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of junior high school?  Besides the, the culture shock, what--and you were a shy person, I think, or said a little bit you know, quiet--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --did it, was, was it a good situation overall that one year?
Speaker 2: Oh it was wonderful.  I loved the transition.  I liked being lost in a crowd and so that kind of worked for me as well and it was the first time that you weren't with the same group of people that you had been with forever, so that was pretty exhilarating and then you know, the fellas kind of noticed me (laughter) so that was fun too.
Speaker 1: So, so how long did it take to wear off with the culture shock?
Speaker 2: I don't know if it ever wore off to be perfectly honest because every day was new and different and I, I'm the kind of person that will think things through in my head and like wow, (laughter) as opposed to letting people know that this is different for me.
Speaker 1: Right, right and you mentioned boys a couple of times so I have to ask you now--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --what, what did that mean to you all of a sudden discovering boys?
Speaker 2: Well, because obviously at my grade school you know, there were girls and boys, it was coed, but of course, this was as you said before the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] so there, there was not that between the races.  So in junior high though when I, you know, we were all together and the fellas wanted to know well, "Who is this chick?" (Laughter) And I had already kind of established a reputation for being kind of smart and athletic and so a couple of the fellas who were athletes as well, you know, baseball, track, football and so it was fun (laughter).
Speaker 1: So they discovered you too?
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Where you doing cheerleading in ninth grade?
Speaker 2: No, ninth grade was all about academics and I was also a candy striper so, at the local hospital and I continued my babysitting and all that other kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: And the subjects you were studying were the--what kind of subjects were you studying?
Speaker 2: We had science and math and you know, English and you know the normal high school subjects.
Speaker 1: Any class that you liked more than others, anything--?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, I loved math and I liked English a lot.  I liked writing, but those two I think I've loved throughout my school academic career.
Story_ID: 636375
Speaker 1: Okay, so then you go to high school in tenth grade, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what's, what's the name of the high school that you went to?
Speaker 2: LaPorte High School [La Porte, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Of course that makes sense and what was that transition like?
Speaker 2: That was easier because then all the kids from ninth grade [at Central Junior High School; Paul F. Boston Middle School, La Porte, Indiana] obviously came over to the high school, but also still a little different because you had to get to know your way around more, you know, it was the first time where you had to carry your books from class to class, know your schedule, make your own course schedule, do the college prep courses, all of those things; take a foreign language, just really get immersed in the school; get to know the teachers who were all different as well and my other siblings and, and my brother and older sister in particular had had many of the teachers that I had had and my brother was very smart and he--so when you'd go in the classroom there were certain expectations and I was like, I don't know if I can live up to this.  So it was a whole new wonderful world for me and I mean I, I do love the educational environment.
Speaker 1: So when, when you say you went to certain classes and there are certain, certain expectations, who set those expectations?
Speaker 2: Well, my brother excelled and so the teachers thought that I was going to excel as well (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, so I had a similar experience but maybe on the other side, so when you went to class the first day of school they hear, hear your name, Ferguson and they might say--
Speaker 2: Holmes.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, Holmes, I'm sorry Holmes--, "Miss Holmes [HistoryMaker Fay Ferguson], Miss Holmes do you happen to have a brother," or something like that and, and, and, and they, they thought, you're going to be just like your brother?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But I'm not as smart as him (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, but you, you worked hard?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now in high school were there any particular teachers that you remember, that inspired you in anyway?
Speaker 2: Oh you know I can envision, I can see them, their faces but I don't know that I can remember their names, but there was a calculus teacher in particular that really for the first time, helped me understand some of the practical uses of, of mathematics.  We would go out and survey a street and, and do measurements and say wow, this really has so practical use and then another person was the French teacher and he was someone I, I to this day I remember him.  He was joking but the other teachers around him didn't know he was joking when he said, "I'm make sure that you never make the honor roll." (Laughter) But he was joking and I knew that but, so I, I, I truly really had a very good time with most of my teachers, built a relationship and you know, just got into the books.
Speaker 1: I meant to ask about junior high school. Maybe it applies similarly to, to high school, but what was the, the ethnic makeup or demographics if you may, of those schools?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Just generally, just kind of numbers?
Speaker 2: Certainly, certainly, overwhelmingly Caucasian.  So I would say in terms of the black population probably about 10 to 15 percent at the most.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were you active with extracurricular again?
Speaker 2: Yes, National Honor Society, class officer, number of different clubs, yes, yes.  I, I, I maintained activities within the school, I mean it in; in a way it was my life.
Speaker 1: And your, your, your mother [Eva Mae Holifield Holmes] was probably quite active in terms of checking on each of you in terms of your, your homework still continuing that usual over, overview or, or how did that work?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I mean it was always an unwritten rule that you know, you did your homework, but obviously she could not help us because she had not, she had only reached an eighth grade educational level, but it, your report card was where she would know (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, and how did that, how did that look?  Would, I mean give, give me a little picture when you--did it come in the mail, or did you walk home with your, your report card, how did that--?
Speaker 2: Parent-teacher conferences and then also I don't think they came in the mail.  I think if there wasn't a parent-teacher conference then we would bring them home proudly (laughter).
Story_ID: 636376
Speaker 1: Now, about this time were you starting to think about college?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I also was thinking about getting as far away from La Porte, Indiana as I could (laughter), just to be perfectly honest.  There was a strong desire to me just to get out and see the world.
Speaker 1: And what was that based on?  Why, why, why did you want to get away from La Porte?
Speaker 2: I saw a lot of folks that were--grew up there, stayed there and I, I just knew that there was something else out there and I, again going back to reading books and having a very fertile imagination wanted to experience, have other experiences.
Speaker 1: Just wondering, how far had you traveled from La Porte, out- outside of La Porte growing up?
Speaker 2: We, we didn't travel much at all.  I'd been to Chicago [Illinois] a couple of times and you know, visit relatives in Alabama, but other than that, not at all except when I went out for athletic events.
Speaker 1: So what college did you end up going to?
Speaker 2: Undergrad I went to Concordia College which is also a Lutheran school and there are eleven Concordias, so the one I went to was in Moorhead, Minnesota, a place I'd never heard of before in life and truly at the end of the earth (laughter), but it was a new journey for me.  It was fascinating it, in a very, very cold climate and I remember--this was the first time for me being exposed to Norwegians and Swedes and even Native Americans that attended this particular school.  So even though it was back within that Lutheran environment it was also very different and the courses I will say were, were quite fascinating.
Speaker 1: Did you--had you traveled up there to visit the school?
Speaker 2: Not at all--sight unseen (laughter).  It was like (makes sound) that's where I'm going (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well let, let me kind of pursue this idea, you getting as far away as you can.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Which schools were--how far away did you, did you think, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] or University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] or down south, how far did you ever see in your mind you wanted to, to escape to?
Speaker 2: I was open (laughter).  I was open.  I never applied to Harvard or Stanford or anything like that to be very clear, but I did apply to some East Coast schools and, and was accepted and then I don't, I, I don't know why Concordia, but it was the right place and the right time.
Speaker 1: And, and why, why was it--you kind of touched on it, it was a good environment, but what was it about Concordia that worked for you?
Speaker 2: Well, one was the nurturing environment, but secondly it was at, it was incredibly challenging.  Here was a Lutheran school and one of their required courses was The Bible as a Myth and that was fascinating to me (laughter).
Speaker 1: That would be fascinating (laughter).  Did you have good discussions in class about (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, I mean and you, you can imagine like for most of the students, some kids were like, "What do you mean there's no Virgin Mary? What do you mean?"  So it really challenged you to think and ask questions, so I really liked that aspect of it and most of the teachers, professors, excuse me, let me make that transition and the courses made you think deeper than you had before and I really appreciated that and, and they challenged you, for example, I still remember one of the professors asking me point blank, would I ever date someone who wasn't black and I said, "Well, it seems to me you're asking me the, would I date someone on the basis of his color." And I said, "I don't think that's right," (laughter).  So, you know, it, it, you could then begin to hold your own when you had these types of conversations.
Speaker 1: And to give us a timeframe you're starting there when you're probably about eighteen or so?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So that would have been 1973 there- or thereabouts (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --thereabout.
Speaker 2: Nine- 1970.
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], okay thank you.
Story_ID: 636377
Speaker 1: Were you, in, in terms of the Ci- I'll put it, the Civil Rights Movement, the social consciousness, was, were, were you thinking about that in these late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, I had a huge Afro at one point (laughter).  People kept referring to me as [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis (laughter).  But, and I read voraciously.  I read every book that James Baldwin wrote.  I was, you know, I had campaigned for Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] in, in high school [LaPorte High School, La Porte, Indiana].  I, I was very aware and yet still I think, naive and wanted to make, wanted to put my own mark on things.  Many of the students at Concordia [Concordia College, Moorhead, Minnesota], meaning the students of color came from urban centers and had a very difficult time of fitting in because of this very small town environment, if you will, but I didn't have an adjustment problem in that regards and so I could then use my background to help others get themselves acclimated a little easier.
Speaker 1: Did you have some, a group of friends that you would get together with and maybe go off campus and do certain things or would you stay on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, both, you know all of the people of color got together, I mean because we also had some very traumatic experiences unfortunately that also make you grow up very quickly and I know you're going to ask me about those (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, you have an exemplary--you waited, and she's reading my mind, that's a (unclear) yes, absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well one of the young ladies that I went to Concordia with actually committed suicide.  She hung herself and then--and one of the guys who was a, a Native American Indian he was shot and killed on campus and so these were things that were just like totally shocking and unnerving and, and they happened at a time when a lot of unrest was going on, so it was, it added to my experiences in a way again, made me think and question just about everything actually.
Speaker 1: It sort of takes you out of your comfort zone from, from La Porte [Indiana] and, and growing up in a certain environment--when I was in college we had a lot of Native Americans, several Native American students, a couple of them were from Oklahoma and they, they just couldn't make the adjustment.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It was just too much for them.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the African American student population, it was challenging enough, but for the Native Americans it, it was too much of a shock to their system.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the bulk of them ended up leaving by their sophomore year, so I understand, but for you it sounds like you made a very good adjustment generally speaking from, from a small city up to Minnesota, so it worked for you?
Speaker 2: It worked for me and it also opened a lot of doors for me.  Again, I think crediting my mom [Eva Mae Holifield Holmes] just staying very focused on the end goal, if you will and actually because of that graduated early, so I graduated in three years and then started my first career (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 636378
Speaker 1: If I remember correctly reading your biography, make sure I got it right, magna cum laude?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Or (pronunciation) magna cum laude.  It's outstanding that you--in three years and, and at that high a level.  So you're finishing up at Concordia [Concordia College, Moorhead, Minnesota], what are you thinking about doing next?
Speaker 2: What most of us thought about back then, teaching (laughter), so I did my preparatory teaching at Concordia, at one of the schools there and got my teaching certificate and you know, at that time there was a glut of teachers when I came out in '73 [1973] and so I was very fortunate to get a job as a teacher at--oh man, now I'm wondering if I got the name wrong, it was when I taught at Elston Junior High [Elston Junior High School] (laughter) that's funny, in, in Michigan City, Indiana.
Speaker 1: What grade level was it?
Speaker 2: Eighth grade English, speech, drama--the course that everybody hates in the eighth grade (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I think in eighth grade there're a lot of courses, like math and English and maybe French and Spanish or whatever you had to take, there's also--or science, yeah so, everyone had a, a challenging subject.
Speaker 2: And I started midyear in January, so the teacher who preceded me could not control her class and so it was an eye opener to walk into that type of situation as well.
Speaker 1: Okay so how did you end up managing and controlling these, these kids, what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I am my mother's child.  I have a very healthy pair of lungs (laughter) and I used them to my advantage and I think also because I was young and looked like one of them and, and tiny at the time and so literally the first day of class they were throwing paper airplanes, hanging out the window, shouting, doing everything but the Pledge of Allegiance (laughter), but I let out one of my famous, "Sit down and shut up." And it was quiet.  I think they were shocked that such a loud booming voice came out of me and began to just get to know the students as, as people and to help them and it was, it was again, a really interesting time, time to grow up.  I had five kids in my class that were total non-readers and that was a heart breaker, so this, this was truly, you make that transition and you're thrown right in.
Speaker 1: Tell me more about that.  They were non-readers. What level were they reading at--this is the eighth grade now?
Speaker 2: This is eighth grade, at best, first grade level and I was not trained as a, as a--
Speaker 1: Remedial--
Speaker 2: --grade school teacher as at, at that--for the entry levels and so I talked--and, and, and not being from Michigan City didn't really know other folks, but I did talk to some grade school teachers to figure out, try to figure out what to do and so we settled on well, let's try comic books and so I would have these particular students aside and gave them comic books to read because they were more interested in that and that seemed to help and it, you know, we just took it a little at a time and it was probably the best experience I've ever had of feeling that, hey, I've actually been able to impact somebody's life in a positive way.
Speaker 1: Did you ever--just out of curiosity, did you ever see some of those kids later on in life?  Did they come back to thank you?
Speaker 2: I use to--for a while yes, yes that was and that was so gratifying because as you're teaching forty kids in a class and you're thinking that you're not getting through them and because remember back at that time English you were diagraming sentences, this was like (makes sound) (laughter) and so I would--to have students come back to me after they were in high school and to thank me, it was, it was pretty wonderful.
Speaker 1: As it should be, as it should be--that's a great sense of accomplishment when you see it directly like that.
Story_ID: 636379
Speaker 1: But at the same time you still had to handle the other twenty or so kids and things like that.  How, how was that overall as a teaching experience, this is the first year teaching--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --how was that?
Speaker 2: I think that one of the biggest challenges for me was that the kids had no help, hope.  They were third, fourth generation factory workers, if you will, their parents were and there's nothing wrong with that, but they weren't even thinking about going to college and trying to inspire them and motivate them to think a little larger is something that I took on.  I remember bringing to the school tennis lessons for the kids.  They had never even seen a tennis racket and being a chaperone for the games and just really getting, trying to get inside their heads in a different way and to break down some barriers, so it, it, it was very rewarding.
Speaker 1: And I meant to ask, the, the once again, the demographics, the makeup of this school?  Were they African American, Caucasian (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, this school [Elston Junior High School, La Porte, Indiana] was 90 percent black.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so third or fourth generation factory workers and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --hard working folks but still never been exposed enough.
Speaker 2: Never exposed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that explains it.  So you--how long did you teach junior high school, eighth grade English?
Speaker 2: I taught for two and a half years because in this particular school system you are required to get your master's degree within five years and it could be in any field, so at the time the M.B.A. was very popular so I said, "I want one of those," (laughter) and so I applied to grad school at Indiana University [Indiana University School of Business; Kelley School of Business, Bloomington, Indiana] and was accepted and started my next journey.
Story_ID: 636380
Speaker 1: Did you, did you go to Indiana University business school [Indiana University School of Business; Kelley School of Business, Bloomington, Indiana] full time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how was, how was that experience?
Speaker 2: Wow, Indiana University, huge campus, so another shockwave, (laughter) although when you're in the B school you have your own little confined territory if you will, but, and, and you're very focused because then, then you're on a mission and business school was very different for me, so remember I didn't have a business background at all, and but I just knew that this degree would open new doors for me, so once again I was determined to make sure that I got through this in a, in a good way.
Speaker 1: You're--business school is a two year program, full time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So first year, what was that, how was that transition, I know it was difficult, but give me an idea of what classes were like and how much work you had to put in--
Speaker 2: Certainly--
Speaker 1: --just to get--?
Speaker 2: --math, calculus, economics, it was, it was very steeped in the disciplines that was research that would help give you the background that you needed in order to be a successful businessperson, but all very different for me. Accounting I'd never had these courses before in life (laughter) and so, I got some of the fellas to help me (laughter).  There's a theme here (laughter).
Speaker 1: Any particular classes that you actually started, even started to enjoy the first year?
Speaker 2: I did enjoy the math courses and the research courses.  I loved being able to begin to think about how research could be applied in everyday life and when I got an internship to Xerox [Xerox Corporation] that even took me to the next level, so, it, it, you know, it wasn't all academics in grad school.  We had a lot of fun, we were a very, very close knit group, the friendships that I have to this day even and I still played tennis.
Speaker 1: Excellent--you had time to play a little tennis?
Speaker 2: On, on the, on the college team--
Speaker 1: Oh, excellent--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --good, very good.  So at Indiana U- University did you concentrate, what was your concentration in your second year?  What, what areas, what area did you focus in on?
Speaker 2: On marketing--
Speaker 1: Marketing--
Speaker 2: --so, because the M.B.A. is a generalized degree, but marketing because my passion and it's something that again, helped me get to where I am today.  I do recall at the--towards the end of the second year when all the companies come to campus to recruit students and I was recruited by a young lady--Carol Singer, who worked at Leo Burnett [Leo Burnett Company Inc.] and again, I knew nothing about the field of advertising, so just that, hey, they do commercials.  (Laughter) And so again, I thought this is interesting and so you know, it was just, another world was opening up to me.
Speaker 1: So what was it, if you can tell us, what was it that captured your interest in advertising by this representative from Leo Burnett?
Speaker 2: Certainly, okay so by that time obviously I'm watching television, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And commercials are fascinating and they're, and they're short but they get a message across and they're exciting and sometimes they use animated characters, other times they use celebrities.  It seemed like a very glamorous world, a very glamorous occupation and then beyond that, hey, you get to change people's behavior.  You get to persuade them to buy this product, that's, that's pretty cool.
Speaker 1: Sounds exciting, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Had, had you ever heard of Leo Burnett?
Speaker 2: Nope (laughter) I knew nothing about advertising.
Speaker 1: Oh, if I can back up to the, I think you said you had did an internship at Xerox?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What--when was that?
Speaker 2: That was the summer between the first and second year of grad school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay and what did you do as an intern at Xerox?
Speaker 2: I, I was, I was at Rochester, New York at their headquarters and I did regression analysis and I couldn't tell you today exactly what that means (laughter).
Speaker 1: It has a lot to do with statistics.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was very good at the time (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you had good math skills?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 636381
Speaker 1: Well, you know, let's kind of touch, touch base a little bit on Xerox [Xerox Corporation].  Off camera you just mentioned the environment and I think you mentioned something about it being a--
Speaker 2: It was an all male environment as far as the professional careers and there were female secretaries, but in terms of any managers they were all white men and Xerox was a household name and so I was very gratified to be able to get an internship with them and to be able to I thought, contribute, who knows what interns are actually are able to do, but they gave me real world assignments as opposed to just make work, so that, that was really great.  I had my own little apartment.  It was, it was, it was wonderful.
Speaker 1: How as Rochester [New York] overall?
Speaker 2: Rochester, nothing to it (laughter).
Speaker 1: But it was nice to have your own place, have enough cash?
Speaker 2: Yes and could, could walk to work so it, it was, it was all very good.
Speaker 1: That was a summer internship?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you, so let's go to Leo Burnett [Leo Burnett Company Inc.].  What was the woman's name again, Judy--?
Speaker 2: Carol Singer.
Speaker 1: Carol Singer, I'm sorry, I don't know where Judy came from, Carol Singer.  How did you end up getting a position with Leo Burnett, I mean she came recruited, how, how did you get the job?
Speaker 2: And so then once Carol went back to the headquarters in Chicago [Illinois] at Burnett, obviously they get together and talk about all the different candidates that they've seen and then you're invited up for an interview and so I came up to Chicago to interview with a number of individuals and then I was invited back again for another follow up interview and then made a job offer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and time wise, this is when about, late '70s [1970s] or so?
Speaker 2: Yes, '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Thanks and you got an offer to, to join Leo Burnett as, in what capacity?  What was your position?
Speaker 2: Trainee (laughter).  Back in those days we lovingly called the entrance level position as working in the pit, and that's because you went, when you went to work it was dark, when you left work it was dark and you were amongst your peers learning the ropes.  You, you were put into different positions, whether it was research, spot buying, writing so that you learned a little bit about every discipline within advertising, which was really quite great because many companies don't do that now because they've become specialists, but I, I was able to be exposed to virtually every position and that's helped me as I worked my way up the ladder so to speak.  My first assignment was on Kelloggs [Kellogg Company] and after I left the pit (laughter) and there I had ninety spot TV markets that I analyzed and purchased media for and then after that I went into account management on the Pillsbury account [Pillsbury Company, LLC] where you get into more of the strategic arm, of, of marketing.
Story_ID: 636382
Speaker 1: As a trainee, I'm sure not everyone got through the training program, was, was there a--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --failure rate, or a number of people--so how, tell me about that.  How long was the training period?  How tough was it?
Speaker 2: Yes, the training period at Burnett [Leo Burnett Company Inc.] at that time was about eighteen months, so it was very, very rigorous and it, it, you do get worn out because it's a lot of long hours.  There was also a culture at the time, and I don't know, you know, maybe you, that's the way ad agencies just were back then, but you really didn't start work until after five [o'clock] (laughter).  Before five you're going around chitchatting with people, networking, doing the three martini lunches and having a good old time, but after five you better get your butt to work (laughter).
Speaker 1: And so were there other women or African Americans in your program, the training program?
Speaker 2: There were--yes, there was one other African American woman in my class and it, like I said it was high pressure, high burn out and about 50 percent of the people that I started with actually made it through the program.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty high washout rate I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Any--and in terms of also--how many trainees were in the program, ballpark, with a ballpark number do you think, in your class?
Speaker 2: A small number because again, this is grad school level so probably maybe about ten or so, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay thank you for that perspective.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you make it through the training after eighteen months and you're out of the, the pit, great--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and what's your next position?
Speaker 2: My next position was as an assistant account executive on the Pillsbury account [Pillsbury Company, LLC] and so then I got to travel and to meet the clients and to do presentations and to go to shoots and that's where everything really came alive and so you had that side of the business, and then, and again, this is going back ages ago to the world of advertising where it was truly a different world.  People came to work in evening gowns or just any kind of getup.  It was a very creative, exciting environment and I, and I loved it.  I loved it and then when you would go on a shoot and be with celebrities or learn you know, the number of frames it takes to make it all happen and all that you can pack into thirty seconds.  It was, it was, it was so much more to it than you really think about when you're on the other side just watching the television. An awful lot goes into that shoot, but just think about all the prep time leading up to it.  If you're on a packaged goods client it can take as much as six months before you even get to that point, whereas if you're on retail then everything is much faster pace, it's, you know you're doing something different every month, so I just loved the pace and the fact that it was high energy and the people you were around just seemed to know so much and they, they were always willing to teach, but it was also cutthroat.  It was cutthroat.  I remember people coming back from vacation and someone else would be in their office (laughter).  It was, it's, it's a business that's not for the faint of heart.
Speaker 1: Would anybody get a little bit of advance notice that you're in trouble or you'd just come back (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sometimes, but not always.  It was that kind of world.
Speaker 1: Was that driven to a large extent because the client would, would grumble or how--?
Speaker 2: It could be the client; it could be somebody high up in the organization, you just never know.
Speaker 1: So I guess, you probably were on your toes all the time?
Speaker 2: You try to be (laughter), you try to--and you try to make friends with the right people and have mentors in high places.
Story_ID: 636383
Speaker 1: So you're an assistant account executive.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did, did you have a, a direct report that, or, or teams that you had to, to work with at Leo Burnett [Leo Burnett Company Inc.]?  How did that work?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, within the account management structure there is an assistant AE, an account executive, an account supervisor, managing directors, so there's a lot of hierarchy and but, you also work with the media team that also has that same hierarchy and you work with the research team so, all that on your particular brand and my brand was Pillsbury [Pillsbury Company, LLC].
Speaker 1: And when you traveled you, you would travel--what, to the home office of Pillsbury or wherever?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, which was in St. Paul, Minnesota.
Speaker 1: And how, how was it to work in that kind of team environment?  You had multiple, like sounds like vertical and, and horizontal but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --how did, how did that work for you?  How did that feel?
Speaker 2: That was good because the account person is really at the hub and so they kind of direct the traffic so to speak and so you get knowledge from each of the other resources and at a large agency like a Burnett you have a ton of resources that you can rely on to make your business case, so that was really the start of really learning how to put together a persuasive argument to a client or even internally before you got to a client in terms of leading them strategically that this is the way to go, this is how this should be marketed, this is who the target should be, this is the world they live in, this is what's going to get you that head nod and motivate that particular consumer.
Speaker 1: I'm going to break this up into two components, one a presentation within Leo Burnett--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and the presentation at Pillsbury.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you describe maybe early on what that felt like?  What, what, what you had to do to get ready to get ready for the presentation at Leo Burnett?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Internally at Leo Burnett it was nerve racking (laughter).  It was sweating bullets because you knew you were going to get questions fired at you left and right to make sure you were prepared by the time you got to the client and so you would spend a lot of time with your research people.  You'd go to--you'd conduct research with focus groups or ethnographies.  You would spend time with your media people making sure you really understood the media plan that they had developed because many times the media folks wouldn't travel with you to the client presentation, so you needed to be a jack of all trades, but you were put on a firing range so to speak to make sure that you were ready and they took no prisoners.  You wrote everything I think in many, in some regards.  This was probably before the advent of the computers as we know it and you, you really--they looked at every word and, and questioned to make sure you could think on your feet and that you wouldn't be rattled if somebody asked you a question.  So it was very good preparation, but it was hell (laughter).
Speaker 1: And maybe the first time you did it, do you remember that time that, that you had to do it and how well you felt afterwards?
Speaker 2: Oh I felt terrible (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, this was the big leagues truly and it was like, I better go back and do my homework (laughter).  But I'm very grateful again, for having such a wonderful training program.
Speaker 1: And did you have a, a mentor or someone who would afterwards would sit you down and say, "Fay [HistoryMaker Fay Ferguson], you, you did good or you've got to--," (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure it was normally the person--I wouldn't say a mentor, but it was a person that you reported to because you know, they get judged by how well they're able to groom you, and so part of their paycheck depends on you doing as well as you can.
Story_ID: 636384
Speaker 1: So now we're going to shift to Pillsbury [Pillsbury Company, LLC]--your, that's your account and you go out, you have to make your presentation to the, to the client and persuade them in some ways, how was that, how was that pitch in terms of the emotion and train- (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you're, you're very charged up at that point, but I will tell you my first trip to the client I actually missed my flight (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh my gosh (laughter).
Speaker 2: I was like all righty then, but--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --but--
Speaker 1: You said more pressure!
Speaker 2: --but I was--thankfully I got on the next flight out and we had planned it such that we, we would have gotten there early, but, so mind you now I'm by myself and so had to find my way to their offices and to the right--and so got there ahead of time, not by much, so I was literally sweating bullets.  Here I am with that added pressure on myself, but once you get up there it seems like you're at ease because you are prepared and the client wants you to succeed as well, so it was a good experience except for missing that flight and never did that again (laughter).
Speaker 1: So afterwards you, you go back to your hotel or wherever it was, so how did you feel?  How did you feel after that?
Speaker 2: Relieved, relieved, I was like, hey, got the first one under my belt. Do the pros and cons, what went right and what went wrong and what we will never do again (laughter), but total relief and, and, and happy you know, and, and in little ways proud that you actually not only got through it but you were able to sell something and to a client.
Story_ID: 636385
Speaker 1: So what happens next at Leo Burnett [Leo Burnett Company Inc.], did you--how long did you stay there, how long did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, I was probably at Burnett three or four years.  I went from assistant AE [account executive] to AE and then I was recruited by Lee King and Partners which became Bozell and Jacobs [Bozell and Jacobs, Inc.; Bozell].
Speaker 1: Okay, and I know--I've heard that name Bozell and Jacobs a little bit.  Can you tell us about that company, just--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know where, where it fit within the community, advertising community at that time?
Speaker 2: Certainly, Bozell and Jacobs at that time was a midsize agency whereas Burnett was a mega agency with a particular client that I was recruited to work on was Alberto Culver [Alberto Culver Company; Unilever], which had quite a reputation of being very difficult and kind of chewing people up and spitting them out (laughter), but again I viewed this as a chance to be more self-reliant because at Burnett you have a ton of resources, so now you're going from large to midsize, where you have to be more resourceful and draw back on some of those things actually, that I learned as a teacher in terms of thinking on your feet, in terms of being confident in your own knowledge and in terms of having the patience of Job (laughter).
Speaker 1: And I, I, I guess I want to draw a little bit more of a picture, I, I meant to do this about Leo Burnett.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Leo Burnett was how big within the advertising community when you joined them?
Speaker 2: Oh, Leo Burnett was the number one, the agency to work for.  If you can think about their storied career in terms of Kellogg [Kellogg Company] and all the characters that were invented there, or Pillsbury [Pillsbury Company, LLC] and the Pillsbury dough man--doughboy, or Marlboro, I mean just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.]?
Speaker 2: On and on and on, they are just a tremendous agency.
Speaker 1: Can, can we kind of digress in that area because most people think when you think about advertising, they think maybe in the future a little bit later on, California because that's where the studios were, but New York (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) New York.
Speaker 1: --New York City [New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what was it about Chicago [Illinois] you think that, that you know, Leo Burnett or, just enlighten me at least about--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --about how in the world that got to be such a major company out of the Midwest?
Speaker 2: I think that the charm of Burnett had a lot to do with being in the Midwest, of having the work ethic of midwesterners, never stopping until you get it done and get it done right; of being easy to work with.  Many New York agencies have a reputation of being difficult, not that they're not good, but just very different from the Midwest and, and you see that even in the culture and in the people, so the types of accounts that are attracted to an agency in this part of the world, I mean think about McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] and that was a huge account at, at Leo Burnett, United Airlines at the time another huge account.  They are, they were just the epitome of all this great advertising under one roof.  I even remember from 'Saturday Night Live,' Father Sarducci [Father Guido Sarducci].  He came out of Leo Burnett (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh is that right?
Speaker 2: --and he was there when I first started, I mean it's just this magical world that was truly fascinating and energizing and I think clients felt that.  The creativity and innovation was just off the chart.
Speaker 1: So it sounds like to some extent whether it's Leo Burnett or any agency you have to have strong client skills and maybe a certain, I'll use the term, authenticity--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --about yourself at Leo Burnett.  Were there, were there certain kind--oh, could you talk about that--
Speaker 2: And I'd also say that you'd need to be very comfortable with numbers because you need to be able to help the client understand why this will work, how it will draw consumers to purchase their brand because at the end of the day it is all about selling a product or service.
Speaker 1: Right, sort of the client's return on investment.  It's not just generally you're going to get more customers, but--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --but you are all I or all we and things like that.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Absolutely.
Story_ID: 636386
Speaker 1: At Leo Burnett [Leo Burnett Company Inc.] was that, I'm not sure if I have the right term, sensitivity or focus on, on the, the client, was that nurtured, developed, how, and was it just unwritten how you did certain things at Leo Burnett?
Speaker 2: There is certainly a Burnett way and some people are better at it than others, you know, that's something that I've always had to work at because of being shy and introverted, so the, the client dinners or wining and dining and taking them out, that was hard for me, you know trying to figure out okay, what kind of conversation are we going to get into (laughter), but it, it's something that is absolutely critical in this industry, but I, I do think that if you can learn to relax and be yourself as, as trite as that might sound, you can get better at it and you will, if you're comfortable, other people will be comfortable.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, thank you.  One thing I learned when I did, I've done sales before is that you're, you're really not, you are selling the product, but you're selling yourself--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and that's, I just think it sure sounds like maybe in the advertising industry too.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're at Bozell and Jacobs [Bozell and Jacobs, Inc.; Bozell]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and what, who were the, the client or clients that you supported?
Speaker 2: Alberto Culver [Alberto Culver Company; Unilever] was my main client and I can tell you about one of these meetings that I went to.  I was the account supervisor and really the managing director on the account should have gone, but Lee King came by and grabbed me and he grabbed this other creative person and we went to this meeting and we were at this huge conference table, so one end of the conference table was Lee King and at the other end was Leonard Lavin [Leonard H. Lavin], the owner of Alberto Culver and then we sat in the middle (laughter) and I was shocked, you know, when Leonard Lavin actually turned to me and asked me a question.  I don't remember my answer, but I do know I spoke up (laughter) and so that too it, it was like being in a meeting with two godfathers and they were sparring back and forth and so, fascinating.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you, you were just hoping you were having a nice dinner. You could enjoy your glass of wine and sit on the sidelines a bit.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was like, just leave me alone, you all, you all enjoy each other (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you did well?
Speaker 2: I did well.
Speaker 1: Okay, good, good and that was one of your main clients was Alberto Culver?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Any other clients that you remember of major significance that you had to work on?
Speaker 2: At that agency, that was the only client that I worked on.
Speaker 1: Okay and how did--what did you do in terms of travel and meeting the client similar to (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, they were located in the suburbs so my travel was up and down the Eisenhower [Eisenhower Expressway] (laughter) other than when we went to shoot.  Alberto Culver was famous for VO5 and shampoos and hairdressing and that type of stuff, so very, very old brand that we were charged with bringing back to life.
Story_ID: 636387
Speaker 1: Now at, at a shoot I'm, just, just wondering what would you do to add value to, to the shoot?  Were you always just sitting off the side or did you step in the middle, what, what do you, what would you do?
Speaker 2: No, the account person's role at a shoot is first of all to make sure that the agency delivers what you sold to the client, it's to help the talent feel comfortable, it's to, if you have to go on a different direction, it's to make sure that you contact the client and get their buy in before you spend their dollars and it's to make sure that everything is done on time, so you're actively involved.
Speaker 1: What if a shoot was going badly, would you ever, would you step in, you, how, how would you make--how would, at the shoot itself?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, you would have a sidebar with the head creative and also the director and producer to figure out solutions because once you booked a production company you're going to pay them regardless, so you need to figure out solutions to make things work.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have to--
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), yes.
Speaker 1: Without naming names could you describe what that looked like?
Speaker 2: Obviously very stressful, but it is a time when everybody jumps in and truly works as a team because while you're there many times the, the client that makes the decision isn't there, there will be a client representative, but you're going to have to go above the head of the person that's there and talk to them long distance and get them to understand how this new way of, of working through the commercial will actually benefit them and then hopefully they buy into what you're saying or they might have some suggestions as well and so it's also very important to be flexible and not just stick to your guns and to truly try to work things through.
Speaker 1: Right, it's still a team effort.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right--maybe kind of back--still going to that line, to that vein, do you have a story?  I know you just kind of generally told me how it worked, but a situation where it just broke down, like I say, without naming names?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how you specifically, you know, a specific situation it happened in, if there were--
Speaker 2: Not at the moment, I might come up with something, something.
Speaker 1: Okay, like I said, and no doubt without naming names.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's an industry where you keep--
Speaker 2: Yes, you do.
Speaker 1: --keep--you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes you do, you keep them buried (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you keep, you keep relationships too (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 636388
Speaker 1: So Bozell and Jacobs [Bozell and Jacobs, Inc.; Bozell], how long were, were you there with Bozell and Jacobs?
Speaker 2: Probably two, three years and while I was there I got a call from Tom Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] and I told Tom that of course I'd be very happy to come over and talk to him, but I also told him I was very happy where I was and so we set up the time for me to go over to Burrell [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] and I talked to Tom for six hours and of course that was another turning point in my life because at that particular time in the history of Burrell they did not have what I'll call professional marketers.  They would--their account folks tended to be ex-sales people or teachers or from a variety of different disciplines, but no one that had truly gone through the discipline of, of a training program such as I had gone through or marketing the way I had learned it and so I was, I realized at that point that you know, this is so right for me because now this is my chance to give back and to really put my thumb print on African Americans and how they're portrayed and that was really important to me.
Speaker 1: We're going to talk about that in a few minutes, but six, six and a half hour conversation with Tom Burrell (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lord only knows what we talked about (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well if we could find out a little bit more information it would be nice--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --but did you know Tom all ready?
Speaker 2: I did not.  We had never met.  He said he had heard about me and wanted to know if I would come--he, he had just won Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company], Crest toothpaste account.  The first time Procter had ever awarded a minority agency one of its products and so Tom wanted to find the right person to lead it.
Speaker 1: So this was about what time, what year was this when you joined Burrell Communications (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's see, probably around '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Without--if you can share just maybe without going too far down, but right around that time, what was it about Mr. Burrell that impressed you, about--?
Speaker 2: Gosh, Tom was incredible I mean here, here you have a man who started an agency that literally changed the face of America.  The work he did was the first of its kind.  He developed the first national television advertising featuring African Americans.  He had a long history with McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] and Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] which had some of the best black advertising that existed and he had fun (laughter); you know if you can't have fun with your work it's probably not the right type of job for you.  He was extremely passionate about what he did and just a creative genius and so that, it, it was infusive.  It was fascinating listening to him.  It was interesting that--and I was flattered that he was even interested in me coming to work for the agency and really felt that I could make a, a contribution.
Story_ID: 636389
Speaker 1: So your--you had a good--great conversation with Tom Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you, you, you're thinking I'm gonna go to this--and work for this great company, great individual.  Once again, I'm just wondering did he, did he have, did he talk much about the, the changes over time since he, he was at I believe, at Leo Burnett [Leo Burnett Company Inc.] earlier on if I remember correctly, but, but from where he was back in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] and where we were going in terms of marketing tours, diverse consumers, African Americans, did he--
Speaker 2: Tom actually started out in the mailroom at an agency called Wade Advertising [Wade Advertising Agency] and that's how he was discovered by one of the copywriters and he also worked internationally which was very unusual for a person of color, but in terms of what he did in 1971, which was when he opened the doors to his agency [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] was, was groundbreaking because he was able to in very short order bring on two national clients that are household names, McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] and Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] and that really put Tom on the map and his hold philosophy which is that black people are not dark skinned white people really resonated, so he recognized very early on that there were cultural differences and that those cultural differences were the way to motivate this particular consumer to purchase a client's goods or service and that's where the marketing comes in and really where things begin get truly exciting because you then start to learn to ask questions that can really help you get that head nod from the consumer so that when they're watching that commercial that the creatives have done and you've written that strategy to help direct them it hits them right in the heart and Tom very much believed in pulling some type of emotional chord whether it was laughter, whether it was tears, whatever, you've got to appeal to the emotions and it, it brought it all together for me from the very beginning in terms of, of being fascinated by people and cultures and really trying to understand what makes them tick; how do you change behavior because that's a very difficult thing to change; how do you figure out what's that right thing to say and that's truly the job of the creatives, I want to be very clear about that, but my job at that time was to develop the strategy to help guide the creatives.  Tom's work was legendary and coming to the agency was very different, fewer resources, so you truly had to take a lot of initiative and to use the resources that you had and the contacts that you had made along the way to help you market to this particular consumer because as I said I knew I had the marketing skills and, and even, I told Tom, but I didn't grow up black so I want to study this consumer the same way I'd study anyone else and that's where the magic will start to happen.
Speaker 1: So it sounds like Tom being the visionary that he was, first of all to, to start his own agency, but to take it into a different direction for the African American community was incredible.
Speaker 2: Absolutely and to add on top of that, Tom was legally blind so at the age of fourteen he, he was, became legally blind so he really couldn't see all that well, and so it was incumbent upon us to help him as he reviewed either the strategic work or the creative work as well and to really have a discussion about the work and to make sure it fit in with a client's character, tonality and, and of course the bottom line was is this going to be enough to help us sell product.
Story_ID: 636390
Speaker 1: So you added--well maybe being the visionary and team leader-manager that he was he saw certain skills in you and, and I'll comment and maybe you can comment.  My comment that because you had a multicultural background you saw the African American market in a different way--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --as you described and he probably tapped into that.
Speaker 2: I think he did.  Tom [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] often would say to me in front of other folks, "Fay [HistoryMaker Fay Ferguson] is not afraid to give the minority point of view." And whether that is in front of a Caucasian audience or a black audience because I, my upbringing, the environments I, I was in gave me maybe, maybe too much, but a head full of self-esteem and confidence.  So again, going back to--I never felt victimized.  I never felt less than, I always felt that what I had to say and what I thought was as important as anyone else and, and I think Tom got that from me.
Speaker 1: Right, but also because, maybe you already touched on it, because you're looking at African Americans you're not--in a different way, you're not assuming--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --certain things.
Speaker 2: Right, right, truly if you're going to study a segment do it the same way as you would--and, and don't just rely upon your background, you know, the, the age old, while they're truisms, you know, black folks have Sunday dinners, they go to church, they value education, all true but dig deeper than that and, and when you dig deeper that's when you can really help creatives develop communications that will absolutely resonate with the segment.
Speaker 1: So in looking at--with those kinds of insights did you have meetings where you might challenge someone in the meeting and they, they might say something and you would say, well, let's think about that?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely because we all fall trap to just going to some surface things--well, we like this, we like that and, and in particular you know, those things are easy to replicate so everybody knows black people have incredible faith, but why?  Yeah, going back to even my days at Concordia [Concordia College, Moorhead, Minnesota] where the Bible was taught, why, being able to question and you know, and not just put something in a piece of communications because it happens to be something we do, for example, during that timeframe so many agencies fell into the trap of showing black people playing basketball, showing black people rapping, you know, all these stereotypes that might be true, but how do you take that to another level and I think that was the challenge that we at Burrell [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois], because we truly were leading the rest of the pack, it was, it was our obligation, our duty to make sure that we went further.
Story_ID: 636391
Speaker 1: And you also had to prove to the clients, Colgate [Colgate Palmolive Company], or those other accounts, you've got these accounts--what are you going to do with them--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and if you go traditional, oh, you all play basketball, we eat whatever--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --they might say, well this is a typical advertising (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely and I will say that it was Crest toothpaste that the--
Speaker 1: Crest excuse me--
Speaker 2: --that the, the first campaign that we came out with was so groundbreaking, but, and yet so simple at the same time.  First of all the father was integral in our commercials and that hadn't been done for black folks before and we told the story from his point of view.  I still remember one of the commercials was called, Concert, and was about this little boy and all he'd had at his concert was one little note on his cymbals and you see the dad, who was a professional, okay, so he was a businessman and you see him trying his best to get to that concert on time just so he can see that little cymbal and the pride that you see in the son's eyes when he sees his father walk in the door.  Those types of things, situations that are very true, but, but, but engender deeper emotions really began to, to set Burrell [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] on the map and in fact that year, Tom [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] was named advertising person of the year and, and the campaigns that we did for Procter [Procter and Gamble Company] had a lot to do with that.
Speaker 1: Excellent and how did that, how did it--when those, that kind of accomplishment came through, how did, how did you feel?  You're an account supervisor at the time? Was that, was that one of your accounts?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was recruited specifically to work on Procter and Gamble.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so how did that feel?
Speaker 2: It felt great and all--it was also I will say that we had terrific clients that allowed us to stretch, that was very engaged and that, that was different too because so often, I shouldn't say so often, but, it is not entirely unusual to have a client that truly doesn't care about the segment, even though they might be spending some money on it, but they truly cared and wanted to make sure that we got everything just right, so it was, it was truly a wonderful dream team.
Story_ID: 636392
Speaker 1: So you're initially starting out as an account supervisor, and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm and from there I progressed to managing director, managing partner and eventually to co-CEO.
Speaker 1: Okay, well just a moment--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: This is the 1980s--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I, I guess I'm trying to look at the chronologically, history of it, advertising to diverse consumers.  Was this sort of a new day, a new phase?
Speaker 2: Well during the '80s [1980s] we were still kind of an anomaly.  We were still kind of a mystery to the general population, if you will, but as you got truly into the '90s [1990s] and late '90s [1990s] and 2000 that all changed because that all changed because what you find is that it was very easy for other agencies to replicate what we did and also what you will find is that while as a segment we tended to be very innovative, as the years went by the innovation was, was copied so quickly that it began to blur the lines between, well, did our ethnic agency do that work or was it the general agency, because the general agencies became very masterful at truly copying what the, the black agencies were doing and they were able to do it in some regards as well, if not better because they had larger budgets as well.
Speaker 1: Right, right, so you, you, you're getting into the 1990s, how has Burrell Communications [Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] grown in terms of clients. How's, how's that looking in terms of clients--how's, how's that looking?
Speaker 2: Oh that was Burrell's heyday.  We truly had a number of clients that were just icons and able to work with some of the best in best in the industry in terms of talent.  I remember going on a shoot with Lena Horne, oh my god, that was fabulous.  The things that Burrell did for Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company], for Sprint [Sprint Corporation], in particular, of Kid 'n Play and gosh, any number of different artists just truly took that brand from a distant number three to number one.  The--Verizon [Verizon Wireless; Verizon Communications, Inc.] became a client in the, in the '90s [1990s] and that was a whole other arena in terms of communications.  It, it was truly a time when the agency could really feel as though they had made it even though there was a lot more to be done and but by the time 2000 rolled around and this whole digital age was ushered in, and social media, everything began to change.
Story_ID: 636393
Speaker 1: Before we get to the 2000s, so you're, you're, you're moving up the, the ladder very nicely, senior vice president in the early 1990s, executive vice president.  What was your role within the agency [Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] and with the clients at those kinds of levels?  What was that like?
Speaker 2: I was actually the director of client services, so I was over all of the accounts in the agency, but being a small agency--so I've gone from large to midsize to small, my job was not--I didn't, I had direct accounts that I worked on, but then I had accounts that I may not be directly involved with, but I was also charged with mentoring and nurturing the account directors to help them grow in their roles and also took on more of a role in terms of financial accountability and profitably for the agency, again the numbers are important on the agency side as well (laughter).
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely, and you had some major clients, beside McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] you had Exxon Mobil [Exxon Mobil Corporation], Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], Kellogg [Kellogg Company], Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company], Nation- Nationwide Insurance group [Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company], P and G [Procter and Gamble Company], did you, were you accountable with client services that if something is going awry you, you have to step in?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes and in fact--
Speaker 1: Not that it ever did.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No we all have our challenges.
Speaker 1: You have your challenges, thank you.
Speaker 2: So in fact, there was a point and time when the McDonald's account was going through a number of issues and I was not working day to day on the account at the time and so Tom [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] tapped me on my shoulder and said, "Hey, we need you over here." (Laughter) And I was like, "Oh god, no." (Laughter) Because it was interesting that the McDonald's folks were always busy, they're always running around, it was--I said, "I don't get that.  What's going on?" (Laughter) I soon found out, it's a retail account, so it was one of the agency's busiest accounts because we were literally doing every month what it took most of the other accounts six months to a year to do, so we were in production every month of the year, which, and we were at client meetings all the time, so it was a totally different environment and it was, it was fascinating in a very different way.  I never thought that I could go from a slow, steady, steady pace on a packaged goods client, like a Procter or a General Mills [General Mills Inc.] to a McDonald's, but once I was there it took about, you know, a little bit, six months before I accepted it (laughter), but once I was there I was like wow, this is really what it's about and I, I don't know that I could ever go back, that, that pace, that energy, that excitement, it's, there's, there's  exhilaration, there's nothing like it.
Story_ID: 636394
Speaker 1: And in the agency [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] itself, it's, it's growing, it's doing very well.  How, how was the environment?  How was the environment there?
Speaker 2: It, it was, it was fun.  It was fun.  I got to tell you, here you have a small group of very talented, smart, intelligent black folks all working together, you know, that in and of itself busted a lot of stereotypes, like how did they get it done and on smaller budgets than the general agencies generally received.  We worked together as a unit even when we disagreed and we had disagreements.  I still remember one incident particularly on P and G [Procter and Gamble Company] where we had shot a commercial, worked through everything and Tom [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] wanted to change something and we were supposed to be at the client's the next day and I remember going into Tom's office I said, "You can't change this, we have to go to the client." And he looked at me like I had three heads (laughter) but it was, it was--that also marked a turning point for him in realizing, hey, this truly is big business. So, it, but it was, it was great.  I'd never been around a group of folks that are so intense and all focused on one thing and that is being excellent in what you do and really strutting your stuff because the clients were just giddy when they knew you had it right.
Speaker 1: Was, was it an environment sort of, work hard and play hard a little bit?  How did that play out?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, it was both.  I mean it, it was exceedingly long hours but you liked the people you were working with.  You liked your job.  You liked the client.  It was just great, but it was tough at the same time because it's still a cutthroat business and you're, you're--challenges came from the general agencies who are always trying to take the business away from you and they had the client's ear because they had stronger relationships with clients, so, but for me in particular and my right hand person, who at the time was [HistoryMaker] Alisa Starks, we truly thrived on figuring out, well, how do we work this one?  What do we say; how are we going to do this, this show if you will, and so that became our motivator; how are we going to beat the general market at their own game.
Story_ID: 636395
Speaker 1: And you're getting more and more competition I'm sure after they, once they see back in the '80s [1980s] that Burrell Communications [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] is doing great, did the competition from the minority, more minority agencies and maybe the general agencies is that (unclear)--
Speaker 2: The general agencies competition truly came more into play in the '90s [1990s] and 2000.  Their challenges came into play more in the '80s [1980s] in that they were always trying to poke at the--yeah, but did they do this, did they do that, you know, always having the client's ear.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so we're getting to about, well, we're getting to, to early 2000s and you're the managing director of marketing operations.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That, that sounds different than client services.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was, what was that all about?
Speaker 2: Well in addition to client service I took on a heightened role in terms of the finances (laughter), again going back to the numbers--
Speaker 1: The numbers.
Speaker 2: --and making sure that the accounts that I worked on directly as well as those that reported into me knew how to, to read a P and L [profit and loss] statement and knew what to do to self-correct because for us it's as bad as being over your profit margin as it is as being under because if you're over a client is going to take it back, if you're under they're not going to make it up (laughter).  So very strict adherence to making sure you knew how your business was doing because we were in truth mini entrepreneurs.
Speaker 1: Right, and at this juncture it sounds like Burrell Communications is the largest, maybe, I'll use the word most profitable, hopefully, African American advertising agency--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in the United States maybe, if not the world I, I assume, but things are going pretty well.
Speaker 2: Things are going very well.
Speaker 1: That, that was good, that's good. Two thousand four [2004]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I think--could you talk about what was going on around that time in your life?
Speaker 2: Certainly, 2004 was the year that Tom [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell]--he had, he had been leading up to this, but he had officially decided that it was time for him to step down and previously back in 1999 he had made a strategic alliance with Publicis [Publicis Groupe], which is, which at that time was the third largest advertising conglomerate in the world, today it's the first, the number one, but, and so he had sold a minority stake in the company and he was, he had made it known that hey, he wanted to go on into other things and so I set up a meeting with Tom and essentially to ask for his blessing for me to make an appointment with the folks from Publicis to purchase Tom's shares (laughter) and so I in essence orchestrated a management buyout of the company.  My first meeting, it was just me and about twenty of them (laughter), I was like, "I need help," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Publicis?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Also they had their lawyers, their marketers, their accountants all firing questions and I'm like, hm (laughter) so I got my act together and, and we bought, and asked my--who is my partner now, McGhee Osse [McGhee Williams Osse], if she wanted to come in with me and also we contacted a leading accounting firm as well as lawyers to be our representatives to help us through this and it took a while but we were able to come to some agreements.  It took probably a good twelve to eighteen months before all was said and done so that we could still make sure we maintained our minority status, which was very, very important to us and to our clients and then to let the clients know, so that there wouldn't be any uneasiness because there was also the fear that you know, when Tom stepped down everybody else would leave, but the great thing is that between McGhee and myself, we had literally worked on every piece of business in the agency, so we had developed relationships with all of the clients and everybody stayed.
Speaker 1: Excellent, so your staff stayed intact and it was almost, I use the word, seamless hopefully?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, staff stayed intact and clients--
Speaker 1: And clients (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) stayed, stayed intact (laughter).
Speaker 1: Both very important--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --very, very important, operation and the clients, of course.
Story_ID: 636396
Speaker 1: If you can share with us, you knew Tom [HistoryMakers Thomas J. Burrell] was talking about retiring and moving on.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: From going to a senior officer level to owning a major company like this, I say major, it's a major size company.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: When did you start thinking about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, day one (laughter) and I can also tell you that at one point I had approached Tom about becoming president of the agency, but he didn't think I was right for the job (laughter), so when this opportunity came up I didn't know how he would react, but obviously over the years the work I had done as well as McGhee [McGhee Williams Osse] had made an impact so he had, he did a 360, but no, I, that is something I truly wanted to do from joining the company from the outset, probably did not verbalize it of course, but we all know we have to have some type of succession at some point and this was mine (laughter).
Speaker 1: Kind of stepping back a bit, you, you're, you, you got your M.B.A., 1978 or thereabouts--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --my memory is trying to get that right.  At that point in time you liked marketing and advertising, but did you say to yourself back then one day I want to be president of or own, president of or own a company?  Did you see that back then?
Speaker 2: I don't--no, I did not have the vision back then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was truly making that transition to a Burrell [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] and really being passionate about something that was my DNA.
Story_ID: 636397
Speaker 1: One area which I meant to touch on and I kind of just got some much into how you were doing some fantastically in the world of advertising is, we all have different parts of our lives, so I note that you got married sometime?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980], thank you, brought it back a little bit, and what was your husband's name?
Speaker 2: Ernie [Ernie Ferguson].
Speaker 1: Ernie okay and when did you meet, I'm sorry where did you meet?
Speaker 2: My husband and I met in grad school [Indiana University School of Business; Kelley School of Business, Bloomington, Indiana] and he was actually my big brother so to speak, so every second year student was assigned to a first year student and so he was assigned to me.
Speaker 1: Okay and, and what was he, he, he was also going for his M.B.A., so what was his specialty?
Speaker 2: His specialty was finance, so I don't know why he got with a marketing person (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well, I think--
Speaker 2: --but he, he, he out of grad school for him, he went to Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.], so he was on Wall Street and you know, another just really different career for people of color.
Speaker 1: Right, right, well it's that yin and the yang, marketing, finance thing or whatever, but so he, he worked for Goldman Sachs in New York [New York], or?
Speaker 2: In New York and then he came to Chicago [Illinois] later.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I think you mentioned the term ex--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes I did.
Speaker 1: --so at some point in time you went in different directions?
Speaker 2: Oh, well we were married for almost twenty-five years, so it was a very long marriage and, and, and, and a good one (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, good.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And any children?
Speaker 2: Yes, one son who is the pride and joy of my life, Eric Wesley Ferguson [Eric Ferguson] and Eric is, he's in the United States Navy, lieutenant junior grade and he's stationed in Japan and he's had quite an interesting journey himself, out of--he went to Embry Riddle Aeronautic [Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Daytona Beach, Florida] undergrad and became a pilot and flew for Continental Connection and then our wonderful economy hit (laughter) and so he bummed around for a while and then he applied to OCS [Officer Candidate School] and was accepted and went through the training program in Rhode Island and then eventually worked his way to Japan.
Speaker 1: And what, what is he--is he a pilot now, or, or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, he navigates the ship now, yes.
Speaker 1: What type of vessel?
Speaker 2: It's a minesweeper.  A USS Defender, defending us from Korea.
Speaker 1: Oh, very good.  Well there are some issues going on right now over there so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes there are.
Story_ID: 636398
Speaker 1: So, you end up taking, taking on a co, a, a co-owner position--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --with Burrell Communications [Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois].  What is your title now?
Speaker 2: Co-CEO and owner and my partner McGhee Osse [McGhee Williams Osse] obviously same title, so Burrell now is not only minority business enterprise certified, but we're also women owned, so we're able to operate in both arenas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and we'll touch on that in, in a few minutes a little bit, but I was off camera just asking you the world of marketing to diverse consumers, has that changed from the 1980s, 1990s to 2000?
Speaker 2: It's a totally different industry today.  The term that people are using now is multicultural, transcultural, mainstream, but you know what's interesting, it all ladders back to the same thing.  It is about understanding consumers and being respectful of consumers and their culture, but this new world has really become a huge challenge for black advertising agencies in particular because clients unfortunately are less enamored, you know, they see black folks as assimilating, which absolutely is not the case and they tend not to see as many differences because they, they tend to point to their kids who might have gone to school with, you know, a person of color and they forget that that doesn't represent the masses.  The masses of African Americans don't get the opportunity to go on to higher education and the masses of African Americans really are the folks to whom you are marketing your products and services towards and so there are still very distinct differences culturally that are very important when you develop your strategies but it's very different now, lots more encroachment from the general market agencies many, several black agencies have just ceased to be, they've had to close their doors because of this lack of attention to this particular consumer segment and I personally think it's a great loss for the clients in particular because being different isn't bad and in fact, if you could relate it to foods for example, don't we all love to go to a Mexican restaurant, to an Italian restaurant, to a soul food restaurant and we celebrate these differences and I think that culturally the same thing should be true and I think that we're losing something good and honest and wonderful when we are, when we try to make everybody cookie cutter.
Speaker 1: Right. There is this idea of; I mean, had it in business school, segmented marketing, I think because it maybe, is that a challenge also because you have the African American community, you have urban, you, you have millennials and Generation X and Y and Z and whatever--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --you have folks with sexual, different sexual orientations, so is that a challenge?
Speaker 2: It's a challenge from a budget standpoint and that's really where many clients are coming from. The dollars aren't there to stretch across all of these different groups so the important thing to, to uncover is who's most important for us to target and unfortunately with the last census, you know, Hispanics have taken priority over African Americans.  Asians are now growing as well, but if folks were to look at, look beyond the census numbers into who is influencing, who has the most influence, who are the trendsetters, that's where African Americans rise to the top again, and that's where we try to make our business case, if you will.
Story_ID: 636399
Speaker 1: Within the advertising industry have you seen a number of other African American women rising to the executive ranks? Or has, has, has that, has that been a good movement or much movement over past twenty-three years?
Speaker 2: There's been some, I mean you certainly have some folks who are more of the entrepreneurial bent that many of them who came out of a Burrell [Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] that have since gone on to form their own companies, such as Michelle Flowers [Michelle Flowers Welch] and Flowers Communications [Flowers Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] and Esther Franklin [HistoryMaker Esther "E.T." Franklin] who is a senior vice president at Leo Burnett [Leo Burnett Company Inc.], actually on the Starcom [Starcom Mediavest Group, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] side of the business and to consumer insights.  At one point there was Ann Fudge [Ann M. Fudge], you know, so there are a number of individuals, but not a lot, not a lot and that's true whether it happens to be African American, Asian or Hispanic.  Women of color have not made it into the upper echelon as much as they should have because there are some very, very talented individuals.
Story_ID: 636400
Speaker 1: So you were talking about those are some, you know, significant losses within the advertising community, some of the companies are no longer there, could you talk about that a little bit more, yeah?
Speaker 2: Certainly, as marketers have determined that there's of course, finite numbers of dollars available to target and there are within any segment a number of different sub-segments, so how do you make your dollars stretch the most, so over times we've had several agencies go out of business such as Mingo-Jones [Mingo-Jones Advertising] or and, and agencies that aren't doing so well in this day and age.  You don't hear very much out of an R.J. Dale [R.J. Dale Advertising and Public Relations, Chicago, Illinois] anymore or any of the old names, Proctor and Gardner [Proctor and Gardner Advertising] seized to exist and I could go on and on, but these are names that stood side by side with a Burrell [Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] so to speak and because the business isn't there anymore and I think partly because we as a people, we are silent.  We, we, we don't make the noise that we use to.
Speaker 1: And who's we?
Speaker 2: People in general, I mean when you look at the Hispanic market in contrast with the African American market, Hispanics are out there whether its talking about immigration reform or they're, that the fact of the census numbers which they will tout to get a bigger piece of the pie so to speak, they're, they're, they're making their business case and, and, and because there is a language difference, it's far easier for clients to buy into that.  There isn't a language barrier here you know, we're opposite--we all speak English, don't we and again, going back to the fact that so many marketers' children have gone to school with a person of color then they say well, I don't see any difference.  They like, they all like the same thing.  Again, going back to the fact that they're not really looking at the masses of African Americans who do, who do not have the privilege of going on to higher education and that's truly a huge market that they're selling their products to.  When you think about a Procter [Procter and Gamble Company] or a General Mills [General Mills Inc.] or any other major consumer package goods company, we all have to use toothpaste, we all have use deodorant, we have to use soap, these are their targets.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  And by the nature of competition in the world--any market that you, you're going to have fallout, there just, especially with the shrinking economy and more competition.  You are going to lose unfortunately, a few other players.
Speaker 2: You are going to lose them and I truly do believe that that the strongest will survive, but I think there are some strategies that we also need to start to look at very seriously, I mean, just recently Publicis [Publicis Groupe] and Omnicom [Omnicom Group, Inc.] merged together to form the largest conglomerate in the world.  They were archenemies; well why couldn't two major African American agencies join together?  It's that type of thing that we have to start thinking about more seriously.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, have to be more strategic.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In terms of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For survival.
Speaker 1: For survival, for survival.
Story_ID: 636401
Speaker 1: Okay, looking at Burrell Communications [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] post 2004, you and bear with me a second here--co-CEO take on the company.  Did, did the structure of, of, of Burrell Communications change--like you said, your, your staff basically stayed, the clients stayed, but did you do any restructuring internally?  Did you --
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  We changed because the industry changed, meaning digital is far more important today and didn't even exist back, back in the, the '80s [1980s] and '70s [1970s], so we needed to make sure that we had that particular discipline to offer our clients as well, so digital, social media take on a heightened role, but as a business I will say that we're one of the few entities that have both tradition, non-traditional and media all under one roof because right now you have so many specialized companies, specialized media companies, separate digital companies, separate creative boutiques, whereas Burrell still does have everything under one roof and that's very different, but it also allows, allows the client to do one stop shopping so to speak, so that everything can be done under one roof and, and you have people that can talk to each other and figure things out; so if you have a digital agency and a creative agency, the two are often at odds and so I think we still have something that's very unique and very special.
Speaker 1: Could, could you enlighten me a little bit about being a digital agency. What is, what is, what does that really look like or what does that mean?
Speaker 2: So, a digital agency will have all of the different facets under one roof that's important to that particular discipline and I'm not going to pretend to be an expert at it because I'm not, but you have content developers, you have flash developers, you have digital creatives, you have digital producers, you have the back of the room operations in terms of the coding, so all of those disciplines exist within a digital agency.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you, so it sounds like you had to, because this is the 2000s, you have to become a, a, a multidisciplinary agency and you've got to anticipate, you've got to be a visionary now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.  You either have to have that digital and social media capability, capability, or you need to partner with somebody that you can truly trust to bring those sensibilities to your agency and we are, we've had digital as a discipline for, for several years, but we still lack the depth that's really required to make the type of impact that we'd like to be able to do.
Story_ID: 636402
Speaker 1: If I may, could I, I wanted to ask you about the structure of a co-CEO, if, if I may, if you're comfortable with that, what, what was the rationale and behind that?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Well actually, and there were lots of bets out there, trust me about two black women, is that going to last (laughter), but initially it was quite easy because McGhee [McGhee Williams Osse] and I always worked on different accounts, so those accounts that she was affiliated with, she, report into her, those that I'm affiliated with, report into me.  Now, overtime there, there--we've had to make some shifts because of, of clients leaving, clients coming on, but right now I have reporting into me McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation], Toyota [Toyota Motor Corporation], General Mills [General Mills Inc.], Comcast [Comcast Corporation], we just recently won the regional business from McDonald's, Baltimore [Maryland], Washington [D.C.] region, so I have, the majority of the clients report into me right now, but there is still an awful lot of work to be done and we both come out of account management type of backgrounds so we have similar skill sets, but yet we are very different in our, our approaches.  I think McGhee is probably a bit more creative; I'm a bit more numbers (laughter).
Speaker 1: And in terms of running Burrell Communications [Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] who takes on--how does that work, you get to, you, how does that work?
Speaker 2: It's a collaborative effort.  McGhee and I meet regularly and we also of course, involve our CFO and the, the chief creative officers, so there is the executive committee, if you will, and we also involve our HR [human resources] director within that particular type of structure and so we all come together at least bimonthly to discuss issues, challenges, what the profit looks like, where are things that we need to shore up; is there something that we need to let go because that's equally important as well.
Speaker 1: Do you have a COO?
Speaker 2: We do not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We do not.
Speaker 1: That's shared to a certain extent by the co-CEOs?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 636403
Speaker 1: And I'll ask this question and you don't have to answer it, but it, it seems like it's working so far?
Speaker 2: Well, we'll always make sure that that's the visible part (laughter).
Speaker 1: Absolutely, very good.  I know it's, we know it's working.  We've got a few minutes left and I'm going to ask you one or two more questions and then some legacy questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Where do you see your industry in your niche world, or larger, where do you see things going to survive?
Speaker 2: That's an excellent question and it's really tough right now because right now most clients are trying to have their general agency and their ethnic agencies co-create, co-everything, come up with the media plan, the strategy, everything, so and the clients are leading that in an effort to help their general agencies become better at targeting ethnic agencies because obviously they've read all the statistics and African American, Asian and Hispanic segments are, are very quickly becoming the majority and so I believe from a client standpoint it's a way of helping the general agencies be ready for that day, but that's also a huge signal to the ethnic agencies and so what happens once they learn everything that we know, and we've said that to clients [of Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois], so we are truly looking to get deeper into digital and social in particular, because those are the areas where we can still carve out certain niches that will be very important from a cultural standpoint.  The social media networks that we use online are very different from the ones that general consumers, yeah everybody's going to go to a Facebook, but then we have certain ones that we tend to gravitate to to learn about us, to interact with our, with each other and, and then engagement marketing is another arena, so events, on the ground activities, so we have to figure out how to carve out those places where our people congregate and, and want to do so in almost in an exclusive way or in a majority way, those avenues are still important to us.
Speaker 1: And you have the challenge in technology in this digital age of trends happening so fast.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It used to be ten, twenty years, now it's months, years. It used to be Facebook [Facebook, Inc.], now it's tweeting [Twitter Inc.]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and it's something else.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That must be tough?
Speaker 2: It's, it's very tough and it's tough on clients as well because now they're exposed and if they don't respond to a consumer that might tweet something negative, then that's worse than, it's worse to not say something at all, it's worse not to engage, so you have to have that two way engagement, but for diversity agencies it's tough, it's tougher to get into those areas because for the most part the folks that are truly talented want to be in a digital agency, want to be in an agency dedicated to social media, so attracting the right talent once again, is a huge challenge for diversity agencies.
Speaker 1: On the other hand for someone who's done so many things within this industry and accomplished so much, do you enjoy that challenge?
Speaker 2: I do, but I'm also looking for, you know, who's going to be my successor because I do think we also have to be realistic about that and let's face it, the person behind me grew up with that technology, so they're going to really know it, understand it, live it, breathe it and it's really important for us to bring those folks along quickly because as you said, this, this whole digital world, technology, it changes in a, in the blink of an eye.
Story_ID: 636404
Speaker 1: I've got a couple of legacy questions and, and one of them is, you said when you joined Burrell Communications [Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communication Group, Chicago, Illinois], I think it was in 1984--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you saw this as an opportunity to do, I would describe it as great things with, for yourself and within the African American community--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --do you think you've accomplished some of those things that you wanted to see?
Speaker 2: I, I do in, in particular as I've been able to work my way up the ladder, I've, I've been able to mentor and nurture people of color and women of color in particular and that's been very gratifying.  I think it, for us, it's always important to look back and give back and so that's one of the things I truly enjoy doing.  I always take calls.  I will make time to do breakfast, lunch, dinner, what have you, arrange for folks to spend time at the agency if they're college students that want to learn more about advertising because exposure is so important and it's, it's far more than writing a check, you've got to be able to give of yourself and engage, and those are the kinds of things that I truly enjoy.
Story_ID: 636405
Speaker 1: If you could l- if you could look back to, to your childhood or teenage-hood, or whatever, or whenever, is there anything that you wish, you'd say, wish I could do over again, or are you, yeah, wish I could do over again, any, any regrets?
Speaker 2: You know what, that's one of the interview questions I asked (laughter) and I said I should have been prepared.  Yeah, I wish that I would have gotten into this business sooner for one thing and I truly wish that with some of these clients that I would have taken them to task a little bit more because I think we have an obligation to help clients understand both the good and the bad and so often my industry is guilty of trying to be overly positive and I think they need to know a good sampling of what's real and so in today's environment that's what I try to do.  A little push back is good so that you really get that hey, this consumer segment is truly very, very important to your bottom line (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 636406
Speaker 1: You may have touched on this a little bit before, but going forward now to the future--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what do you, what would you like to accomplish before you retire or, or move on?  What, what would you like to accomplish?
Speaker 2: Actually I'd like to start a blog (laughter) and it would be to help other folks who have diabetes, so it's not necessarily within the advertising industry, but unfortunately, black people are twice as likely to get diabetes as well as other disease states and I'm diabetic and I, and I've been through a journey and I'd like to help other folks.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's good, that's good.  We're running kind of close to you know, your timeframe and before--I have another question.  I want to give you a question.  Is there anything that you'd like to say that maybe I haven't asked you about?  Is anything--pause for a moment, look back and--
Speaker 2: I think the one thing I'd like to say is that you never know what door is going to open when one has closed, so as I went from a Burnett [Leo Burnett Company Inc.] to Bozell [Bozell and Jacobs, Inc.; Bozell] to Bozell [sic. Burrell Advertising Agency; Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] it was a really great journey for me.  Now there were, there was a lot of downside as well and a lot of stress, but you, if you learn to adapt and be flexible and to truly take advantage of and leverage each moment I think you're, you're in a great position.  I'd also like to say out of all this, being a mom is what I cherish the most, you know, careers are great, but family is what's truly important and I Skype with my son [Eric Ferguson], I just truly, truly enjoy his wisdom.  I learn from him.  I, I miss him because he use to tell me about all these little techy things and now I don't know them (laughter) but, and that's one thing, you know, it saddens me that the African American community has disintegrated so much and I would hope that my, not just my generation, but my peers would try to do something to help turn that around, whether it's as simple and as difficult as moving back into the community so that role models can once again exist, so that people are there that can help make a difference, but the whole disintegration of the black community truly does concern me.
Speaker 1: In terms of role models, if there were a few words or phrases in terms of values that you, you would impart upon someone, what personal values would you say are critical for anyone to be a good person, to be successful?
Speaker 2: I go back to the good book (laughter) you know, treat others as you would like to be treated yourself. I think that's really important and so easy to forget, especially in, in today's environment and to always try to walk in somebody else's shoes because they're too--when I think about the masses of folks in particularly of black folks, the situation that we're in today is, is pretty dire with the huge unemployment and underemployment and the whole lack of education because education is truly transformative.  There's so much that I think we can do.  I, I, I don't buy into, oh I can't do anymore, my, my plate is full, I used to say those things (laughter), but you'll find that the simplest things make the biggest difference.
Story_ID: 636407
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to add before you close out?
Speaker 2: Wow! You know what? There is one little thing and then, and then again this is non-advertising, but a few years--well I gained a ton of weight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, and so this is the other thing I want to blog about because I had gotten up to about 175 pounds and so I went to the Biggest Losers weight loss camp ['The Biggest Loser'] for one week and that got me started on my journey so I lost seven and a half pounds in one week and then I continued on from there and so--I'm not going to give my real weight right now but, (laughter)--
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Speaker 2: --paying attention to our health, so again, as a people we don't do enough of that because it's what we do and what we eat and so that's another area that I'm keenly interested in especially as it relates to people of color because we do tend to be overweight, we tend to be obese, our agency [Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] has done a number of things with the first lady, Michelle Obama and her Let's Move! program, in fact, we were the only African American agency chosen to help with that particular effort and I just think it's so important for each of us to try to get our people moving again and to eating a little bit better, that's about it.
Speaker 1: Sounds very good.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, it's been an honor and a pleasure to meet with you and interview with you today and hope it's been helpful to you also.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's been great.  I've learned a lot about myself (laughter).  I'm like who is this?  Wow (laughter)!
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
