Story_ID: 33187
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewing with the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Mathew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Lillian Elaine Fishburne, L-I-L-L-I-A-N, E-L-A-I-N-E, F-I-S-H-B-U-R-N-E.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind your name, or any parts of your name that you know of?
Speaker 2: Well Lillian, I'm named after my maternal grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her name was Lillian Beatrice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The family's always called me Lynn or E.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 25th, 1949, Patuxent River, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a retired Rear Admiral, one star.  I was in the United States Navy for 28 and a half years.
Speaker 1: And you were in communications, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  They--before it merged with the, the Links were merged with the computers and became information, information technology.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 28th of March, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You want the address?
Speaker 1: Not necessarily.
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: Okay, and I think we're in the office of Skadden Arps Attorneys.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In the conference room.
Story_ID: 33188
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is it?
Speaker 2: My favorite is good old North Carolina barbecue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Eastern Carolina chopped barbecue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would say pink.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I have many.  I guess the, the, the main one is there's a reason for everything.  We may not know why at the time, but there is a reason.
Story_ID: 33189
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's side, but, but separately so we don't get them mixed up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So first of all, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Ethel, E-T-H-E-L, Mae, M-A-E, McFarland, M-C-F-A-R-L-A-N-D, Fishburne.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August the 5th, 1923, in Rocky Point, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Rocky Point, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and are there any stories about what they were doing?
Speaker 2: My mother's parents were farm laborers.  Our grandfather was a land owner in a place up near Rocky Point, North Carolina called--they used to call it Moore, Mooretown.  Or as they pronounce it, Motown.
Speaker 1: In Morris County?
Speaker 2: Mooretown.
Speaker 1: Mooretown, okay, okay, Mooretown.  M-O-O--
Speaker 2: M-O-O-R-E town, but they just pronounce Motown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather had passed before I was born.  My grandmother passed when I was about, when I was about six, six years old and I remember she used to like Juicy Fruit chewing gum.  And so she would ask me to, you know, she'd give--tell me to take money off of the table beside her bed and run up to the corner store and get her some chewing gum.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now you said that they were farm laborers.  I mean did they farm the land that your great-grandfather owned?
Speaker 2: No, they did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They did not.  Those were like the, the strawberry fields, blueberry fields.  My first cousins told me a story of how when she and my other first cousin were very young kids, that my grandmother would take them with her to the fields and she said that the owner told my grandmother not, not to bring the girl back anymore because she had blueberry stains all around, all around her lips.  So it was quite evident she did more eating than picking.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, all right so, so do you know what happened to your great-grandfather's land?
Speaker 2: It was sold in the mid-'70's [1970's] I believe they sold it.
Speaker 1: Okay, were other family members living on that land while your--
Speaker 2: No, most, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Okay, now are there any stories that go back any further than your, your great-grandfather in the land?  And is there a story about how he got the land or anything?
Speaker 2: No.  My mother used to say that her great-grandfather was a teacher on the Indian reservations.  And that, that's all I know about that.
Speaker 1: So this would be your great-great-grandfather, okay.  Taught on--what, what reservation would that be?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: I know there are Cherokees up that way, and---
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: North Carolina, I don't know who all else.
Story_ID: 33190
Speaker 1: So that was--I had started, started researching, but I got waylaid and I'm going to get back to it and, and try to, to trace all those roots as far back as I can.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well okay, so can, can you give us your grandparents' names?
Speaker 1: My mother's mother was Lillian Beatrice Moore McFarland, and her--she married Robert McFarland.  He was from--he was born in southern, South Carolina, somewhere around the Latta, L-A-T-T-A, South Carolina area.
Speaker 2: Okay, now was it your grandmother's father that owned the land?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So he was a Moore?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And, and he was living in Moore, Mooretown?  Okay, all right.  Now had that been a big like plantation or something?  Or, or farm at one time or something?  Or was it just where a lot of people named Moore lived, or--
Speaker 1: There you go.
Speaker 2: Okay, these are all African Americans?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  All right, now did your mother talk about what it was like growing up there?
Speaker 1: Her father passed when she was--I think she was about nine I believe she said when her father passed.  And they lived--she was raised in the city.  Well, East Wilmington, which became a part of Wilmington, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Okay so she was, she was nine years old when her parents passed?
Speaker 1: When her, when her father passed.
Speaker 2: Her father passed, okay, her dad, okay.
Speaker 1: So my grandmother raised four girls and, and one boy.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right, now did your mother get a chance to finish school?
Speaker 1: Yes, she finished high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, she did.
Speaker 2: You know which one she went to?
Speaker 1: Williston High School in Wilmington, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: It's, I'm sorry, Wills?
Speaker 1: Williston, W-I-L-L-I-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay, now did she have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 1: No, she did not go to college.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So did your mother--now what did she wind, wind up doing for a living or did she work at all?
Speaker 1: She was a, she was a, a domestic engineer.  She was a house, housewife.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, all right.  Did, did she talk about any other aspirations she had, you know, maybe she--
Speaker 1: Yeah, she probably would have liked to have been a designer.
Speaker 2: Clothes?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  She was a good seamstress?
Speaker 1: She--at one time she was a good seamstress.  She loved decorating, interior decorating.  Loved making and wearing hats.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So she's into millinery.
Story_ID: 33191
Speaker 1: So well I'm going to stop here with her and go to your father's side, then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: I-S-A-A-C, Isaac Ernest, E-R-N-E-S-T, Fishburne.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That's a interesting one.  He said the 11th of November, 1917.  His Navy records say November 12th, 1917.  His birth certificate says December 11th, 1917.
Speaker 1: Okay, well it's pretty close.  The consistent probably '17, 1917.
Speaker 2: I think maybe they might have transposed the numbers on the copy of his birth certificate.
Speaker 1: Yeah, these are the things that happen in records.
Speaker 2: But he said that his birthday was the 11th of November because his oldest sister was born on the same day, the 11th of November.  So you know, you don't know--might have been recorded late, which they did in those days, you just don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so and he was born where?
Speaker 2: Georgetown, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Georgetown, okay.
Speaker 2: South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Now where is Georgetown, South Carolina in relationship to say Charleston or--
Speaker 2: Thirty five, about thirty miles south of Myrtle Beach.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what are the stories on your father's side?  How far back can you trace them and--
Speaker 2: Again, my father's father was deceased by the time I was born.  His mother, she had six, six children who survived, two sisters, four boys.  But during my visits with my grandmother during the summers, I learned from her that she actually had thirteen children.  She bore thirteen.  And from what my father says, his father used to work on the dredge boat, boats between Georgetown and Savannah, so they would dredge the trenches.
Speaker 1: So they would dredge the--
Speaker 2: Channels.
Speaker 1: Channels to make sure that the ship would, okay.  Okay, so any, any stories that go beyond your grandfather to--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No stories about the Emancipation or going back to slavery days or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, her name was Florence Maria. Florence Maria Legare And Mariah is M-R--
Speaker 1: M-A-R, M-A-R-I-A.
Speaker 2: I-A.
Speaker 1: But she pronounced it Mariah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And her maiden name was Legare, L-E-G-A-R-E.
Speaker 2: Legare, okay.
Speaker 1: Fishburne.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my father's--my grandfather's name was Isaac Ernest Fisbhurne as well.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Okay, so, okay so your, your, your father was a junior?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Although he wasn't the first born.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, so, so your father then he grew up in Georgetown?
Speaker 1: Yes he did, yes he did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 33192
Speaker 1: And did he [Isaac Ernest Fishburne, Jr.] talk about what it was like in Georgetown [South Carolina]?  What kind of town it was and--
Speaker 2: No, not really, not really.
Speaker 1: Now did they live in, in the town itself?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, that land is, is still in the family.  It's just about a little over an acre, acre of land in the city.
Speaker 1: Do they grow vegetables on the land and everything?
Speaker 2: No, no the land now, the old homestead had been cleared off and it's just a vacant lot.
Speaker 1: Yeah but back, back in those days.
Speaker 2: Back in the day.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My, yeah, my mother [Ethel Mae Fischburne]--yeah.  Well they didn't farm, but what, what they did, my, my grandmother [Florence Maria Legare Fishburne] had a grape farm, and then they did the little light farming, you know vegetables for the house, that type of thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I was thinking.  With a, with an acre you probably would use it for that.  Especially since they were coming along during the [Great] Depression and everything, you know you think, you would think--and I don't know where he grew up; if he grew up in the same house or what, but--
Speaker 2: I, I haven't done that research yet to see exactly when, when it was purchased.  But my understanding is that it was purchased while they were married, and that my grandfather put the deed in his name and heirs; put his heir property.  My father said one of the reasons was that my grandmother couldn't read nor write, so it's protection.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your father serve in the, in the armed forces at all?  He's the generation would serve in World War II.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes he did.  After graduating from high school--well he was actually offered a scholarship to college.  But he said that my grandmother said that she didn't accept charity.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yes, she considered it charity.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: So he went to New York, worked as--
Speaker 1: Do you know where he had a scholarship to?
Speaker 2: For some reason, I, I'm thinking that it, it was Allen for some reason, but I'm not sure.  But it was a school there, one of the, the church related schools there in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  That's the first time I've heard that, you know.  That people, you know, I've heard people say they don't accept charity, but to see a scholarship is that--
Speaker 2: You got to realize my, my grandmother didn't know how to read nor write, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And none of her other children had gone to college.
Story_ID: 33193
Speaker 1: Okay, so your father went to New York.
Speaker 2: Yes, and he went as a cook on the railroad.
Speaker 1: Cook on the railroad, okay.
Speaker 2: And he got drafted.  He went into the Navy.  Wanted to be a cook in the Navy, but I guess they had a quota for hospital corpsman, so he became a hospital corpsman.
Speaker 1: And that's, that's interesting cause here's a cook.  Most people we interview that served in the war, that, that were drafted into the Navy, they're made a cook.  You know Doreen Miller who won Congressional Medals was a cook.  He came out of the galley and shot that plane.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So he's a cook and they make him a, a--
Speaker 2: Well yes, he's a, he said well it, it was kind of cute, the story he told.  He said that the recruiter officer had pictures of the various insignia, or symbols for each one of the specialties.  And it was, you know the, the pestle and mortar for, you know, hospital corpsmen.  They had another one for CD [Carderock Division], so he said he wanted to be that and his recruiter said no, no, no.  You're going to be this one.  And of course his first choice was--whatever it was for the cook, and he pointed at that one at first.  Then he said, no you're gonna be this one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did he have any stories from his, his service?
Speaker 2: He, he served in a couple of tours with the Marines.  Matter of fact during one of his tours is when he met my mother down at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina, that's in Jacksonville.  And so he had stories of some of the more, you know, the Marines, some of the, the more--the historical figures such as, you know I think his name was Hashmark Johnson and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Now, now he himself was not a Marine, right?  But--
Speaker 2: No, but the Navy provides medical support to the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay so the Marines were--and I don't know how they are considered now, but they were considered part of the Navy then, right?  Are they still considered part of the Navy, or--
Speaker 2: Yes, the Department of the Navy.  But they're a separate branch.
Speaker 1: Okay, Godfrey Point, yes the famous Sergeant Hashmark Johnson, everybody talks about him.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes my father knew him.
Speaker 1: What, what did he think of him?
Speaker 2: Well you know that--the other guys, they just had a ball.  And I remember my father taking me and he had a, another Marine buddy who had a daughter.  And they took--first time I ever went fishing, they took us fishing.  So I always remember that.
Speaker 1: So did you, did you, did you ever meet Hashmark Johnson?
Speaker 2: If I did, I wouldn't know it.  I was very young at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  There are so many stories about him and so, now Hashmark had actually, Hashmark Johnson had actually served in the Navy and the Army I believe.  That's why they called him Hashmark, he had all the, the signia from all these different services.  So did your father serve overseas during the war?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was, he was on the ships.  He--and he also deployed with, with, with the Marines.  It's kind of interesting; I was doing some, doing some research and I just, you know, put his name in there and googled him in.  I looked at the, the what is it--the Marine Corps Mustard Book I think they call it, from like 1944 to 1958, 1958.  And there his name is, is listed several times.
Speaker 1: So did, did, did he serve in the Pa--Pacific?
Speaker 2: Yes, Pacific.
Story_ID: 33194
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay, did he [Isaac Ernest Fishburne, Jr.] have any stories about service over there?
Speaker 2: Not during the war.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was very--he would--he was newly--very junior at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So how long did your father stay in the service?
Speaker 2: He stayed in 22 and a half, bout 22 and a half years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay so he more than likely I guess he came out like in the--what do they--what they call the top, the equivalent of a top sergeant?
Speaker 2: He came out as an E7, a Chief Petty Officer, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Matter of fact, I helped him study for that exam.  He'd been taking it for a long time.  His first class a long time, and so I said well daddy let me help you study for the test.  He says you can't help me, you can't pronounce these words.  I said but I can spell them for you and you can pronounce them.  And so we did it.  He made it.
Speaker 1: All right, now how old were you when, when he made it?
Speaker 2: He took the test I believe it was in '59 [1959], so that made me ten, eleven [years old].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, 1959, okay.  Now is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't know what the--well let my father tell it, my mother [Ethel Mae Fishburne] fell in love with this dashing young Navy corpsman who wore a different uniform.  Cause he wore his stripes in a different direction than the regular Marine Corps did.  They would dress in their uniforms with the stripes in different, the chevron would be in a different position.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she said, he said that you know, she was just fascinated.
Speaker 1: Where they'd meet at a social function--
Speaker 2: I, I, I, I don't, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my father used to say, he said when I first met your mother, even with two books in her pocket and if she was soaking wet, she didn't weigh 100 pounds.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now did they meet in--do you know where they met?
Speaker 2: I'm assuming it was in Wilmington [North Carolina].
Story_ID: 33195
Speaker 1: Okay, well when you--so your mo--your, your parents [Ethel Mae Fischburne and Isaac Ernest Fishburne, Jr.].  Now do you know the year that they got married?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, now are you the oldest, oldest of the children?
Speaker 2: No, I'm the youngest.  I, I have, have a brother who was born severely mentally retarded.  So he stayed at home with my parents until he was about thirty years old.  And then due to his physical disabilities, it was just too much for them as older, older parents.  So he was, he was put into one of the homes in Maryland which was within about twenty minutes of the house so that my mother, you know my parents could go visit.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was just the two of you, or--
Speaker 2: Just the two of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were born in '49 [1949], so did your parents meet like after the war?  Was that when they met, after World War II, around '45 [1945] or '46 [1946]?
Speaker 2: I think it was, I think--I don't know when they met, when they met.  I really don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  [OFF TOPIC DISCUSSION].  Okay, so you were born in 1949 and, and your brother's how, how much older than you?
Speaker 2: My mother, brother was born in '44 [1944].
Speaker 1: Forty-four [1944], okay.  So they met before, you know before that I guess.  All right.  So when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their temperaments, how they walk and talked, how they looked, you know, what they were interested in, you know.  Who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now why would you say that?
Speaker 2: Cause my mother kept telling me that.  Yeah.  My father was, he was pretty easy going, very gen--gentle, so generous, hard working, really hard working except for the three years we were in Taiwan.  He, he'd always worked two jobs because my mother couldn't work, you know with my--you know taking care of my brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So growing up you spent some time overseas with the family then, right?
Speaker 2: From 1960 to 1963, we spent in Tibet, Taiwan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now so when you were born, they were living in--
Speaker 2: My father was stationed at Patuxent River Naval Air Station at the Dispensary there.
Story_ID: 33196
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest would be probably when I was about four or five years old.  My father [Isaac Ernest Fishburne, Jr.]--they stayed for a while in, in Patuxent River, then he got--went to Saint Albans up in New York.  Somewhere in the early '50's [1950's], my mother's mother [Lillian Beatrice Moore McFarland] took ill and so she moved back to Wilmington to take care of her.  And so, so my earliest memories are in the, the Wilmington, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Area.
Speaker 1: Do you have a, a--okay.
Speaker 2: And so, you know, some of my--they, you know, I remember what an outhouse is, you know.  Because in East Wilmington, they didn't have indoor plumbing during that time.  In Georgetown [South Carolina] when I'd go and visit my grandmother [Florence Maria Legare Fishburne], you know, she didn't have indoor plumbing you know, in, in the, in the '50's [1950's].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well so you moved around quite a bit I guess growing up.  You know, you know, you know--but we always ask this question, so just think of all the places I guess when we, when I ask it.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Smells.  Going to visit my grandmother.  Georgetown has or had a paper mill.  And so as soon as you crossed the ridge going across the, I think it was called the PD River and going into Georgetown, you could smell the paper mill.
Speaker 1: Sights?
Speaker 2: Sights I think were Taiwan because it was so different.
Speaker 1: I supposed it was more crowded than, or I would guess.
Speaker 2: Now it is.  At that time it wasn't quite as crowded.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sights, sounds, smells.
Speaker 2: Smell, bacon.  My mother used to say that some mornings it was very difficult for me to get up to go to school, you know.  She said when she started cooking that bacon, I was up.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, any sounds that you remember growing up?
Speaker 2: Used to take the train down to Wilmington and that was during the '50's [1950's] and the '60's [1960's] started driving, but you know the sound of the train.  That reminds me of those trips.
Story_ID: 33197
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now you started off in--so, so you--as a little kid, you were in Wilmington [North Carolina] a lot, right?
Speaker 2: In Wilmington up until about 1957.  I went first grade and second grade there.
Speaker 1: In Wilmington?
Speaker 2: In Wilmington.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the name of your school in Wilmington?  Do, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I think it was William H. Blunt Elementary in East Wilmington, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and now did you like school growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I--yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Was there any particular subject that you liked the best?
Speaker 2: I used to like reading.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You have favorite books in those days?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or stories, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Now this is Wilmington, North Carolina, so I, I assume it was a all black school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was--East Wilmington, all black school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were your teachers black too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so all right.  So, okay, so did you have a favorite teacher or any, any--
Speaker 2: I remember my first teacher, Mrs. Isabelle McGowan, that was my first grade teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so, so you were in Wilmington for the first two years of school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, this would be like 1955/'56 [1956] I guess, okay.  All right, so and, and you moved in fif, fif--in '57 [1957]?
Speaker 2: I think it was '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Moved to--'57/'58 [1957/1958], moved to Rockville [Maryland] for the first time.
Speaker 1: Okay, Rockville.  Now where'd you go to school there?
Speaker 2: Rock Terrace Elementary School in Rockville.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was it hard to adjust to, to these moves, you know, you did a lot of moving, so you go from--
Speaker 2: I, I--probably--the, the move from East Wilmington, from Wilmington to Rockville was probably the greatest transition that, that first move because I was used to, you know, you know, East Wilmington was your typical, you know little southern place with the dirt road and the houses and all, so you know.  I, I had more freedom there.  And plus you had, you know, more greenery.  There was more rural.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was greener than Rockville.
Speaker 2: Yes, but I give, I give Rockville the credit.  They had the plumb--indoor plumbing.
Speaker 1: All right, so, so Rockville--
Speaker 2: You can get used to that indoor plumbing real quick.
Story_ID: 33198
Speaker 1: So you were there for third grade and--
Speaker 2: Third, fourth and I don't--I'm trying to remember.  I--might have been fifth too.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now did you go to Taiwan next?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, so you were at, at Rock Terrace when you helped your father with his exam, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was stationed out at the Navy Medical Research Institute, which is out there at the, the new Walter Reid [National Military Medical Center].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And he used to take me in with him on weekends when he would have to check on the cultures and stuff, cause he was a Lab Tech.  And so I would play around with the typewriter and play around microscopes.  I used to like going.
Speaker 1: Okay, that sounds like that would be fun.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: In those days, and something that's unusual.  Okay, so in 1960 the family moved to Tai--Taiwan.
Speaker 2: Taiwan, and we were there form '60 [1960], 1960 to 1963.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you go to school on the base there?
Speaker 2: There, there was a Type A American School, they call it Type A American School, but I was in the--kind of jun--junior high school, if you will, elementary junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is--
Speaker 2: But it was a DOD [Department of Defense], it was a DOD school, Department of Defense school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So this is an integrated situation.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At that time.
Speaker 2: For the first time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were all your teachers white, or were there some black ones?
Speaker 2: There were some black ones there, but mine were white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is your first time in a predominantly white school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Setting, okay.  And so how did you--did Tai--Taiwan--how did it, how did you like Taiwan?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it.  It, it was, it was very different, it was very different.  You got a lot of exposure to different things, different culture, you know, language, food, all, all of the above.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you pretty much enjoyed the experience?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did and plus we went over by--they used to have transport ships, so we went over by ship, and it was twenty-one days.  We stopped in Honolulu, Japan, Okinawa before we got there.  And we left out of San Francisco.
Speaker 1: This is quite a education that a lot of kids in the black community don't get in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, a trip like this.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know where you go to, you go to Honolulu, you go to, you know Japan, and then you know spend time in Taipei, Taiwan rather.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So this is a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were becoming a worldly sort of--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Seriously, cause a lot of people never get out of their neighborhood.  And--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I know myself, I didn't have Chinese food until I was an adult.  So this is--and we're the same age exactly.  So I know, you know, I know about the time period.
Speaker 2: Yeah, learned how to cook, I learned how to cook Chinese rice over there, fried rice.
Speaker 1: So you were, you were learning some things a lot of people do not know.  And did you--were you kind, kind of aware of that I mean at the time?
Speaker 2: No, no, not at all.  It, it was just, it was something new, it was something different, it was very exciting.  It was new, you know, learning a different language.  You know, had to read and write a different language.  I haven't retained much of it, though.
Speaker 1: So did they teach, they teach you some Chinese?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes how to read and write, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you can read some Chinese?
Speaker 2: Not anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's interesting.  So can, can you speak any?
Speaker 2: All I can say is "Ni Hao Ma".  How are you?
Speaker 1: Okay, and you have to do, now, now there's, there's tonal quality there too.
Speaker 2: Yes there is, yes.
Speaker 1: Pronounce a certain way.
Speaker 2: Most definitely, yeah.
Story_ID: 33199
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's, that's something.  So you were there for the, I guess the ninth and--nine, ninth grade through the eighth grade?  Not ninth, I'm sorry, the--
Speaker 2: I went, went through the eighth grade there, yeah.  And ended up coming back to Maryland for ninth.
Speaker 1: Okay, fifth through the eighth grade, okay.  All right, now you all were there, now [President] John [F.] Kennedy was elected in '60 [1960], so I know a lot of kids your age became aware of politics around that time.  You know, I don't know did, did--were you aware of, of political situations at all?
Speaker 2: I, I, I think we, we probably became more aware of it when he was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you, were you still in Taiwan?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in junior high at Julius West Junior High School in ninth grade.  At that time, you know--
Speaker 1: Now this, this is in Rockville?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had moved back to Rockville.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of the school again?
Speaker 2: Julius West.
Speaker 1: Julius West, okay.  This a junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us about the assassination that you--how you heard about it, and--
Speaker 2: Well actually we were if I recall correctively, correctly, we were in physical ed. class and we were out on the field playing hockey, field hockey when the announcement came.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, did his assassination have a special impact on Navy people?  Cause I know he was a Navy--
Speaker 2: I wouldn't know because again, you know we weren't on a base; we were living out in a community, so--and that's a big, kind of a big difference.
Speaker 1: Did the adults around you expressed a lot of emotion about it or--
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So okay back in Rockville.  Now, now where did you live in Rockville?  Was this in a black community in Rockville?
Speaker 2: Yes, Lincoln Park.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33200
Speaker 1: Now Lincoln Park.  Okay now did you, were, were your parents--did they keep up with the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Only what they kind of read in the paper cause my father worked two jobs and my mother had a full time, full time job taking care of my brother, and, and me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wondered if you were back when the March on Washington took place.  That'd have been August of '63 [1963], you know.
Speaker 2: No if we were back, we were, we were barely back.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, now, now in junior high school did you have a, a, an idea that you would join the Navy at one point, or did you ever--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did you ever think about that?
Speaker 2: No, not at all, not at all.
Speaker 1: Well what did you want--what did you have--did, did you have any occupation in mind?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a pediatrician.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have a, did you know a pediatrician, or did you have one, one as a role model?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have a black pediatrician, no.
Speaker 1: So, so you have any idea how that idea--
Speaker 2: My mother [Ethel Mae Fischburne].  My mother, because she said it was difficult to find a black pediatrician.
Speaker 1: Okay so if she had you, she could find you.
Speaker 2: She felt that she needed to, to help alleviate the shortage.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So were there any black doctors in Rockville?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there were some people--
Speaker 2: There was one.
Speaker 1: That you could, you know.
Speaker 2: There was one, Dr. Williams.
Speaker 1: All right, so now with all this moving, how, how were your grades in school?
Speaker 2: Pretty good, pretty good, above average.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and at this time, in junior high school, did you have a favorite subject in junior high school?
Speaker 2: I started leaning toward, more towards the math.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what about teachers during this period of time?  Was there any favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: Let's see, that was--no.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you a part of any, like band or anything or did you--
Speaker 2: Not in junior high.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not in junior high.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Went to high school.  I was part of the pompom squad.  Used to--worked on the school newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Richard Montgomery High School
Speaker 1: Richard Montgomery.  And was it named after a, a black educator or some personality?
Speaker 2: No, no, named after General Richard Montgomery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's in Rockville.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is this a, like a, a, a all black high school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was integrated.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, from junior high on up were all integrated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Okay so you were on the pompom squad, school newspaper.
Speaker 2: National Honor Society.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's hard to get on.
Speaker 2: What else?  A lot of different things.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So you, so you were leaning towards math in these days.
Speaker 2: Math, science, yes.
Speaker 1: Now in high school were there any special teachers or advisors or--
Speaker 2: I can't, I can't really think of anybody that really, really bonded with.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 33201
Speaker 1: So now was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So where, where, where did you go to church, where do you consider your--
Speaker 2: Well when I was in Wilmington, North Carolina visiting, I would go to First Baptist Church with my aunt and uncle.  In Rockville [Maryland] I started going to Mount Calvary Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did, did you, you know did you participate in youth active--activities in church growing up and--
Speaker 2: No, Sunday School, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Easter plays, that type of stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay, cause I know the youth choir, or Baptist Training--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  That's one thing I cannot do, I cannot carry a tune.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, okay, so now were you in Girl Scouts or Campfire Girls or any of those kind of organizations?
Speaker 2: Brownies in elementary school.  Junior high, Girl Scout.  When I was in Taiwan, I was Girl Scout.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but you didn't, you didn't--when you came back, you, you weren't involved in--
Speaker 2: When I came back, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  You were, yeah you--eighth grade by then.
Speaker 2: Ninth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever go to Girl Scout camp and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes, when I was in Taiwan, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That was a lot of fun, that was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now let's see.  Were there any, any stories of your high school experience that you remember that you'd like to relate?  Cause you, you graduated at '67 [1967], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So this is the age of, you know, Motown music, the Beatles came out, the--Malcolm X was assassinated.  A whole lot of things are going--
Speaker 2: I, I, I know, that a whole lot of things that, that went on, but--
Speaker 1: Vietnam War is going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Going to school, you know, doing rehearsals for poms, going to the ballgames, you know, football game, basketball games.
Speaker 2: For school.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Was there a pretty good team there?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, let's see, what my junior year I think they were the Triple A champions in basketball.  I think my senior year they got it in football.  I'm not sure, vice versa, but you know--
Speaker 2: Okay.  So what were you--
Speaker 1: High school was pretty non-eventful, I mean you know, you know you did your homework and you know you participated in your, you know your extracurricular activities.
Speaker 2: Okay, so what did you like to do in high school for fun?
Speaker 1: That was poms.
Speaker 2: Did, now did you do any athletic stuff in high school other than pompoms?
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  Used to do track when I was in junior high, but--and of course loved basketball, but was too short.  So no there weren't, there weren't any sports activities, intramural sports.
Story_ID: 33202
Speaker 1: All right, so, so when you were in--a senior in high school, what were your career aspirations, what did you see yourself doing?  Were you still thinking about becoming a doctor?
Speaker 2: Something about becoming a pediatrician, I was in the academic or college prep tract in high school.  After graduation, well I actually I had had a scholarship to Temple University.  My mother [Ethel Mae Fischburne] had an uncle that lived in north Philadelphia and I don't know, something happened.  She ended up going to north Philadelphia during the same time that I was making my college selections and the only thing with the Temple thing was I--they didn't have any room for me on campus.  And so when she went up there, she says no, you're not going.  If you can't live on campus, you're not going.  So I ended up going to Dickinson College.
Speaker 1: Okay, which one?
Speaker 2: Dickinson.
Speaker 1: Dickinson, okay.
Speaker 2: D-I-C-K-I-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: That's in the Carolinas?
Speaker 2: Carlisle, PA [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Carlisle, okay.  Okay Carlisle, Pennsylvania, okay so was your major there, pre-med?
Speaker 2: Yes, basically pre-med, but--
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was Dickinson like?
Speaker 2: It was different, it was my first time away from home for that extended period.  You know, absolutely living away from home, from not having the parents and all that.  It was, it was a difficult adjustment for me.
Speaker 1: So did you have really strict par--parents at home?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, I mean you know, I could go out, but you know of course I had to be in at a certain hour and they had to know exactly who I was going with, where I was going and all this, that, the other.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, now you're in Carlisle, Pennsylvania without any parents.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So how did you handle it?
Speaker 2: Not very well.  So I ended up spending a, a year there and all of a sudden even though I'd had advanced biology, biology and I wasn't getting along at all.  So I went to--ended up going to Lincoln University in PA.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Took a sociology course there and kind of, really liked it, you know.
Speaker 1: Who was your instructor?  I mean do you remember?  Or was it because of the instructor or because of the subject matter?
Speaker 2: Subject matter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Subject matter.  And--
Speaker 1: Now this would be 1968, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, '68 [1968], '69 [1969], '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay, '69 [1969], okay.
Story_ID: 33203
Speaker 1: So you liked sociology.  What, what did you like about sociology?
Speaker 2: Because again, you study, well you study people of different cultures and, you know you get to study people and you know, how they act.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you like the people orientation?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And plus again this was the '70's [1970's], so everybody thinks they can, they can--you know we all thought we could go out there and make a difference.
Speaker 1: Now through, throughout your high school and college life so far, had, had, you take, taken any ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so, so you're, you're in sociology at Lincoln and were there any, any special teachers there, or, or mentors at, at Lincoln that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well a couple of, couple of people I, I remember would be Dean McCray who was Dean of Students.  Very gracious, very nice gentleman and Dr. Alfred Farrell.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Dean McCray and--
Speaker 2: And I was surprised that he remembered me.
Speaker 1: This is Dr. Alfred Burr-
Speaker 2: Farrell.
Speaker 1: Verrell?
Speaker 2: Fa, Farrell.
Speaker 1: Farrell, okay.
Speaker 2: And I was surprised he remembered me.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about him.  You know, and why would you think he'd be surprised?
Speaker 2: Well actually because Lincoln was a predominantly male campus.  So the, so I guess you know, you consider, you know 50 women, you know, you know who they were.
Speaker 1: Yes, that, that--I was gonna say that--
Speaker 2: The numbers were small, numbers were small on campus.
Speaker 1: --remember the women better than the men.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In a situation like that, you know.  So, so now did Dr. Farrell teach sociology?  Was he, was he in the so, so, social department?
Speaker 2: I forgot what he, I forgot what he taught because I did take some more science classes and just took a mixture of different things, kind of what interested me.
Story_ID: 33204
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did, did they have a series of speakers come into campus to talk to the students?
Speaker 2: I don't, not, not at that time.  I think the big, the, the, the, the big speakers, you know, they normally came at commencement.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Commencement ceremonies.
Speaker 1: Lincoln's one of the oldest black colleges.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Like they claim to be the oldest along with Wilberforce [University] and another school that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All three of them claim to be the oldest one.
Speaker 2: Right, right, absolutely.
Speaker 1: But all found around 1856 or seven [1856].  So, so did they have a convocation like every--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Every, yeah, usually speakers come in for those.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I forgot about the convocation, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did anybody of in--interest come through as far as you're concerned?
Speaker 2: Well Roscoe Brown was the speaker for my ceremony.
Speaker 1: Now this is Roscoe Brown the--
Speaker 2: Actor.
Speaker 1: Actor, okay, Roscoe Brown, okay.  Okay.  He had been a track star I think at one time and was an actor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, anybody else?
Speaker 2: I'd say one of the individuals on campus at that time was, who was a student at that time was Gil Scott Heron, he was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know him?
Speaker 2: During one time.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what'd you think about Gil Scott Heron?
Speaker 2: Brilliant mind.  Matter of fact, he let me read the draft of his first novel, but he wouldn't give me the last chapter.  He said I'm not gonna give you the last chapter.
Speaker 1: Now this is something that I was surprised to find out.  I didn't realize he was a novelist.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I saw his novels in a bookstore, I can't think what city I was in.  I was in a, a--some city and there was a, there were some copies of his--he wrote, he wrote two novels at age 20, 19 or 20.  So that's before he became famous as a poet and a musician.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, so was there a--now this is a time where a lot of schools had black student organizations, even the black schools, you know.  So was there a black student organization on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean you know you had, yes, several.
Speaker 1: So were you, you a part of any of them?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, any literary organizations, or--did you share a class with Gil Scott Heron?
Speaker 2: No, no we used to, I used to see Gil over in the Student Union.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you must, you must have been special to him that--for him to give you your--you a copy of his book to read.
Speaker 2: We used to play pinochle every now and then.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Let's see, an, anybody else there that we would, that, that, that's important to you or that people would know?
Speaker 2: That people would know.  There was a--Linda Cook was there at that time, Sam Cook's daughter.  She was in one, one--I think she was a freshman the year that I graduated.  Who else?  That's all I can think of right now.
Story_ID: 33205
Speaker 1: Okay.  One thing I didn't ask you about which will probably take us back to Dickinson [College] was, is the assassination of Dr. King.  That occurred in the Spring of '68 [1968], April 4th, 1968.  So were, were you at Dickinson then or at Lincoln [University]?
Speaker 2: Spring of six, Spring of '68 [1968], Dickinson, Dickinson.
Speaker 1: So do you remember what--did--
Speaker 2: I, I, I, I just--
Speaker 1: I know cause some schools commemorated it, some schools or--
Speaker 2: I really, I really can't, I really can't remember.  Those were challenging times for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So and Lincoln, all right so, all right so you graduated in '71 [1971].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: From, from Lincoln.  Were there--did you graduate with any special honors or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: All right, so it was a, a--but your degree was in sociology?
Speaker 2: Yes, my, my degree was in sociology.  Came home that summer my brother took ill, so I was supporting my mother [Ethel Mae Fischburne] during that time, also looking for jobs.  But what I found out was that you needed a master's degree.  Nobody wanted to give anybody a start with a, just a B.A. [Bachelor of Arts] without experience in the field.  You had to have a master's.
Speaker 1: Now was your father [Isaac Ernest Fishburne, Jr.] at home then?
Speaker 2: My father was home too, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was still working.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you need, you needed a--you had a choice to make about going to graduate school?
Speaker 2: I guess I didn't really realize until I'd gotten out there and tested the waters, that I didn't understand that you know, to work with private agencies, you need to have that master's, or some experience.  So I applied to the state of Maryland to become a certified social worker through the state of Maryland.  Went and took their test and didn't hear anything back.  It took, it took almost a year before I finally got called up from the state of Maryland to go and interview for jobs.  And by that time, I had already signed on the dotted line to go into the Navy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33206
Speaker 1: So tell us the evolution of that idea.  Did you just kind of--you'd been around the Navy your whole life.
Speaker 2: Yes, and it's a way of life that you kind of get used to because you know, even though we lived out in the community, my mom [Ethel Mae Fischburne] still went to, you know, used the naval hospital for medical.  We still used the commissary to go grocery shopping.  We used the exchange, etc., etc.  So you still had that part of life, that way of life.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So you know and I, I looked at it and you know I saw what an opportunity it gave my father [Isaac Ernest Fishburne, Jr.].
Speaker 1: So did it, I mean in what sense?
Speaker 2: First of all, to make a live--make a viable living.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To learn a skill.  Got paid, and all the benefits that went with it, you know.  So I just had gone and taken some tests for something and I stopped in at the recruiter and just started talking and next thing I knew, I was talking to the Navy officer recruiter.  As a matter of fact, my recruiter and I are still in contact to this day.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Thirty years later.
Speaker 1: Now so you, you signed up with the idea that you would go to women's officer's school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You already had a bachelor's degree, right and so--
Speaker 2: Yes, and, and you had to have a, a four year degree, three or four year at that time, to go into the women's officer's program.  That time training was separate.  Women officer's training was separate from the men, male officer training.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I spent sixteen weeks in Newport, Rhode Island, from October of '72 [1972] to February of '73 [1973].  And I'll tell you what, I have never, ever been as cold in my entire life because that, that cold, that wind that whips off of the Narragansett Bay is cold.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It's cold.
Speaker 1: So you were right out there on the--near, near the water.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 33207
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what was the training like?  What did, what did you have to learn?  I know it's management centered, right?
Speaker 2: Navy customs, tradition, procedures, legal--you know a little about the legal, administration, protocol, you know how you wear uniform, physical training.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so they gave you physical training too.  Like, like, like a boot camp sort of in that sense?
Speaker 2: Well I think we kind of thought of it as a more of a charm school rather than boot camp.  But we did have physical requirements, yes.
Speaker 1: Now did they give you specific--I mean what, what were the physical requirements that you had, first of all, and then what were the charm school requirements?
Speaker 2: Let me say, you know, yeah you're on a, on a--you had to do the third class surv--swimmer's survival thing, had to pass that.  You had--we had to do drills.  We had to run.  Just had to do I believe sit-ups and stuff.
Speaker 1: So you already knew how to swim, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Really?  Now that's surprising.  A Navy--
Speaker 2: I spent a lot of, I spent a lot of time in extra instruction for swimming.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so you had to learn how to swim and did you have to learn how to rescue some, someone else in the water, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was part, yes that was part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now so now what about the, what you call the charm school par--part of it?
Speaker 2: That's the etiquette, etiquette part, you know.  Place settings of the table, calling cards, all sorts of things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had a, they had a standard that they wanted Navy women to do in terms of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --how they conducted themselves as, as representatives.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Most definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And now when you look back on this training from the vantage point of today, of 2013, how have things changed from that time to, to now in terms of how women are, are treated?
Speaker 2: Well now the, the, the training is combined, it's, it's combined training, co-ed training with women as, you know, as battalion leaders, you know, as leaders.  So it's changed quite a bit.  And you got to remember when I, you know when I graduated from school, women weren't, weren't, weren't allowed to go to the, the service academies.  So that, you know I've seen a lot of changes, you know through the years.
Story_ID: 33208
Speaker 1: So there were no women officers in the Navy that had gone to Annapolis [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Yes, there are now.
Speaker 1: I mean, I mean then.  We're talking about then.
Speaker 2: Then, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this hadn't started up, okay.  Cause I remember some of the--a "60 Minutes" program about the first group of women going through Annapolis and some of the--now the Navy people say that--we've interviewed, can be very, very tough on minorities and women.  So you're a minority woman.  So was--so how did things go for you trying to go through, I mean go, going through training?  Did you have any difficulty?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have any problem, I didn't have any problem in training, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So I'm sure there are probably two dynamics working, correct me if I'm wrong.  One would be that the Navy was desirous of having minority women, and women, more women officers then.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  My class--there were 100, I think the figure was 102, 103 were accepted and showed up, 95 graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ninety five were commissioned.
Speaker 1: All right, and I would guess that the Navy was, would be--was trying to be as helpful as possible to make sure that people were commissioned.  So then the other side of the coin is that traditional Navy culture, you know, as described by folks I've talked to in terms of treating minorities and women, is horrible.  You know I mean when you hit the rank and file and the stuff that people were used to doing, you know, I don't know if you would say that or not, but some--some are still--
Speaker 2: You know as I would say, you know yeah, position depends upon where you sit.  You know we basically have, you know, we all--all the services like to say that we, you know, we, we, we've got a higher cut of people, you know, in the, you know in our services.  But you know, you know we also have--we, we're just a cross, a cross-cultural type, type organization.  So I mean--
Speaker 1: Cross-section of the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, cross-section, and so yes, there, there are issues.  Are they better than they used to be?  I would hope so.  Is it an ideal situation?  No.  Is there room for improvement?  Yes.  And when you are particularly a double minority and you have to look at things and, and, and a lot of times you have to go deep inside.  You know, is it because of, is it because of my color or my sex?  Because that's the first thing, two things you say.  And that's not gone change, you can't hide it, it's patently obvious.  And then you have to look deep within and say okay, is it that, is A, B or C, combination of all the above, A or B, you know and, and you just have to search within yourself and, and, and you know hopefully you, you come up with the right answer.  And sometimes no, you don't like the answers.  Especially if they deal with yourself, you know, you open your eyes and say okay, this is a learning experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then there are other things you just can't do anything about it.  I mean you can't change.  You can change people's actions, yes you can but you can't change what's in there.
Story_ID: 33209
Speaker 1: Now were there any special instructors or, or officers when you went through training that you remember that were particularly helpful?
Speaker 2: I thought that Lieutenant Francia [ph.] at that time, and Kathy O'Brien, they were very helpful, very helpful.
Speaker 1: Now how, how many other black women went, went through the training?  Well how big was the group and how many black women?
Speaker 2: As I said, it was 102, 103, 95 graduated.  And in the original class that came in, there were three of us.
Speaker 1: How many made it?
Speaker 2: All three.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay that's pretty good.  Three out of 100--that's, you know that's maybe a third of the--
Speaker 2: Three percent.
Speaker 1: population--percentage of the population of the country.  It does, you know, so it doesn't really represent the black pop, pop, population of the country.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You know, at all.  But so had you met any black women officers before you enlisted?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Had you heard about any?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you prob--you probably knew there were--
Speaker 2: Yes, I'd seen nurses, I'd seen--I take that back.  There were nurses, yes, yes, there were nurses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all right, so--
Speaker 2: That I'd seen in the hospital.
Speaker 1: So were, were you trained as an ensign in a specialty or anything?  Anything you were gonna specialize in?
Speaker 2: As, as an ensign--
Speaker 1: Or was it just like basically a general training and then you would go to a more specific job description, training later?
Speaker 2: Later.  As an ensign I, I was a personnel/legal officer.  So you know basically I, I, I handled the, the records for the military, military personnel.  And I also--any legal, legal assistance that they required.  Did have to convene a special, a special court martial, that was one of my first duties.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was also the communications officer.  As a junior officer, you get a lot of collateral duties that, that you have and mostly I, I went if there were, you know, classified messages above the confidential level, level, then I would have to go and sign for them and maintain them and safeguard them and stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I kind of always wanted to know what they did behind the little window, behind the bars.
Speaker 1: All right.  So your first assignment was in '74 [1974], right to the Naval Air Test facility in Lakehurst.
Speaker 2: Lakehurst, New Jersey, yes.
Story_ID: 33210
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So all right so your first assignment in, at the Naval Air Test Facility in Lakehurst.  So you're, you're a personnel and legal officer.  So, so what--tell us about it.  How, how your first assignment went.
Speaker 2: It, it was a nice assignment for an ensign, really, really because I had to do a lot of things.  We tested arresting gear and catapult gear, you know when you see on the carriers when they shoot the plane off of the carrier deck and when the plane lands, this, this wire, it traps this wire.  Well that's, that's what we did.  We tested those systems.  So I got to--during down time when it wasn't very busy, the pilot would say hey, Elaine, you wanna go up for a ride?  So I'd get to, to go up and do cat shots and arresting gear, you know, traps, as an ensign.  But first of all I had to come to Pax River [Patuxent River, Maryland].  So they flew me in our little old prop plane, they flew me to Pax River and I got my seat check, this cord which permit--I, I go--that was the first time I'd been back to Pax River since I was there at that dispensary.  And so when I got back, I got to you know, go on the, go on the, the airplane trips.  So that, that was fun.  The other part was that I was there when the Blue Angels crashed.  You remember that crash in Lakehurst?  The--traditionally when you know they visit a base, they do a, they do a flyover prior to landing.  And so we were having a picnic after, after a baseball game I believe it was, and the command was having this.  And so some of my shipmates were explaining the patterns and all that were, you know that they were flying and they explained the whole, whole tradition to me.  And--
Speaker 1: Of the Blue Angels and the--what they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, about they're doing the flyover.
Speaker 1: And they're, they're like--for those who are watching this and don't understand, the Blue Angels are a special Navy group of--
Speaker 2: Acro--flight acrobatic team, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so flight, yeah acrobatic team.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, so you know they were explaining, that was the fleur-de-lis and they were explaining the different, the different patterns to me.  And then one plane kind of--the wing kind of flipped up and got into another one and they said uh-oh.  And we were some of the first to arrive at the, at the crash site even before the emergency people got there.
Speaker 1: So this, this is in, this is in--in '74 [1974] '75 [1975], '76, [1976]?
Speaker 2: I believe that was '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974].  Okay I mean it, it can be checked out by anybody watching this, but just to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974], okay.  That must have been a horr--well--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we went out to the crash site and once the, you know, we were looking for survivors and once the emergency personnel came there, they, you know, they made everybody leave and you know--when I got back to the base, you know actually the bottom, of, of, of, of my shoes were, they were just burned.
Speaker 1: So it was hot still?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now did everybody die in that crash?  All, all the Blue Angels?
Speaker 2: No, not all of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, just a couple planes.
Speaker 2: The planes that crashed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, were the pilots well known there at the--
Speaker 2: I, I don't, I don't know if they were well known there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  National tragedy, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 33211
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you were there from '74 [1974] to '77 [1977] I guess, right?
Speaker 2: No, from '73 [1973] through '74 [1974].  Seventy-four [1974], that summer I went to Miami [Florida] for three years of recruiting duty.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did you like that aspect of the service, recruiting?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you typically go to high schools and--
Speaker 2: To the colleges, career fairs, I was also the minority recruiting officer.  So that involved my going to high schools, junior high schools as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you, you live--so you lived in Miami for--
Speaker 2: For years, yes.
Speaker 1: Now that wasn't too bad, was it?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973].  I mean this is '74 [1974] through--
Speaker 2: Yes lived in south, lived in south Miami.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was going on--
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974] to '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: There's got to be a story from Miami, Miami '74 [1974] to '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: Not really, I, I guess I must lead a dull life.  It was just, it was just kind of strange you know.  I remember my mother [Ethel Mae Fischburne]--I was talking to her, it was nearing Christmas and I think that Christmas I remained in Miami.  And so I was saying it just doesn't feel like Christmas.  It doesn't feel like Christmas.  And my mother was saying but it is Christmas, you can't feel the spirit?  I said there's no snow, it's not cold, you know.  It just didn't seem like Christmas.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right now--so nothing, there's not a story from Miami?  There's no, no stories from Miami?
Speaker 2: No, not, not, not really, no, no.  I think--go to work, work hard.
Speaker 1: Well they--in '77 [1977] you got enough cold probably cause they sent you to Great Lakes, right?  So--
Speaker 2: Yes, that was payback.
Speaker 1: So, so you went there as the officer in charge of telecommunications?
Speaker 2: Center there, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have to have special training to be the officer?
Speaker 2: I did go to communications school and, and also school to learn the safe handling, safeguarding of classified material.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you have to learn exact--how to, how to handle classified materials--there's a safe procedure.
Speaker 2: Yes, safeguarding of it, etc.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So yeah, so that your job involved defense message system coordination.
Speaker 2: Well what I--we provided communications messaging support to subscribers, our customers, shore-based customers in the--well it was in the com--Commando Ninth Naval District region.  So we would provide over-the-counter service.  They would come in to our window and pick up their messages, naval messages.  We also--I was also to the Commander of the na--naval district as, as the communications officer.  So I was responsible for, for the communications plans and also safeguarding their highly classified material.
Story_ID: 33212
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now are there any stories from this tour of service, of duty?
Speaker 2: That one, that, that was a turning point.  I knew I had to develop a subspecialty, you know specialize in some area, and I chose communications.  And so this job was my foray into that.  So I said well, let's see what it's like, what the real deal is like.  Yeah, and if I like it, then I'll continue going forward with it.  So that was a very interesting job because for the first time, you know, I got to budget you know.  Have, have to, you know balance the budget, etc., etc.  And actually got down, sat at a--you remember the old Western Union teletype machines?  Well that's what we used to use back then, similar.  And I wanted to go on leave, so I typed my own message to my boss because my boss was here in Washington [D.C.], and the operator sat with me and we got it on out there.  And so then when my little ticker tape came off, you remember the red, little yellow ticket--and then they call it, they would call it the butter flying it.  It's like a figure eight.  You put the tape into a figure eight, wrap it all around and then tie it up and hang it.  So that was, that was, that was really, that was really a lot of fun.  And I learned something too.  Great Lakes, that's where I got accepted to the naval graduate school.  It's also where I met my husband and we got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well tell us about that.  Now how did you meet him?
Speaker 2: It was a, it was a friend of ours that introduced us.  Cause we, we had--
Speaker 1: Was he in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, no, he, he, he, he was stationed there at Great Lakes.  He was at the Recruit Training Center.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now so where, where was he from originally?
Speaker 2: Daytona Beach, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right so, so you all met and, and fell in love and got married.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's about it.
Speaker 1: So, so this--you got married in--is it, was it prior to 1980?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-two.
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-two, okay.
Speaker 2: No it was, I'm sorry, 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty.
Speaker 1: Now you were going to graduate school at the time, right?
Speaker 2: I left--we got married June of '80 [1980], I left in August of '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay, to go to graduate school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So, so you went to Webster State College?
Speaker 2: No, I, I did Webster off-duty, taking courses at Fort Sheridan Army base [Illionis].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so you went to school, I mean, all right so you--
Speaker 2: At the Army base.  And so I got that master's in '80 [1980], and then went out to the post-graduate school in August of 1980 and graduated in June of 1982.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the telecommunications masters was done at Fort Sheridan?
Speaker 2: No, at the Naval post-graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Going to Webster College at Fort Sheridan, I got the em, master's in management.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Okay, all right, so you got the mas--the master's degree in management first.  Okay and, okay and then, then the--you went straight on to get the second one?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In telecommunications.  So you had a plan how you was gone do this.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was this a plan that the Navy had--this is what we want, you know if you're going to do X, Y, Z, it's best to have this, or--
Speaker 2: I was, I would--every time I would get a biography of a, of a, of a senior officer, I, I would look to see the types of jobs that they had done; what type of education they had, etc.  And so I just kind of developed my own plan.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Cause I knew I had to have leadership.  I knew I had to have post-graduate education.
Story_ID: 33213
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so, so any stories about school?  Any special instructors or teachers or, or things learned that was profound, or--
Speaker 2: I, I don't know that, that, that they're so profound.  But you know to a sociology major suddenly turning in a MS--taking double E courses for the first time, etc.  So there were many nights I was on my hands and knees in my living room tracing circuits.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And using Radio Shack.  One of my friends let me use the Radio Shack series books, so I'd go through, pour through that.
Speaker 1: So telecommunications is highly technical training.
Speaker 2: Yes, because I was working with communications, communicate--I was working with the links, you know, how to, how to--the signals, the signals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Monterey was also--my--the daughter was born there in Monterey.
Speaker 1: This is Monterey--
Speaker 2: California.
Speaker 1: California.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now this is--
Speaker 2: She was born in February of '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was at the Naval post-graduate school, all right.  Okay, so, so was there anything surprising about the training, about the telecomm--telecommunications training?
Speaker 2: No, nothing surprising, surprising.  I thought it was exciting, I liked you know that the--particularly the courses on satellites and satellite signals.  That was extremely interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what did you--where were you in--
Speaker 2: I know the other--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The old--you'll remember this.  You remember when the computers first came out and you had to keypunch your cards, and then you had to stack them and run them through.  Well that's--I was in those computer courses.
Speaker 1: Okay, now COBOL or Fortran.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Fortran.
Speaker 1: Fortran.
Speaker 2: Fortran, yeah, so you know, you know--and then you, you run the whole batch through and then your program prints out and so you know the first mistake that it comes to, that's when it stops.  And so you correct that card and you try to see if there's anything else in there and then you run it through again.  And then it gives you your next mistake.  It's a--that was just a tedious process.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's hard to imagine that now.
Speaker 2: Yes it is.
Speaker 1: Sit down and--
Speaker 2: My goodness, don't, don't mistype anything, goodness.
Story_ID: 33214
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, now were you in 1983?
Speaker 2: Let's see 1983, at--here in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were you doing, were you work, working for the Defense Department or--
Speaker 2: Working, yes working for--still part of the Navy, working a special project.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I spent about three and a half years with that project.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now I don't know if this is correct or not.  Well it can't be completely right.  We have you in '84 [1984] being in Japan, is that true?  Is that, is that--
Speaker 2: Japan was--I think it was something like December of '84 [1984], you know but it was more like '85 [1985]/'87 [1987].
Speaker 1: Okay, now you working on the same project during this period in Japan?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, okay.  Okay, so--
Speaker 2: So it was, so it would have been '85 [1985]/'87 [1987].
Speaker 1: So it was a special project, something classified or something that you were working on?  Okay.  So I won't ask any more questions.  But, okay so in '85 [1985], you were the Assistant Head of the Joint Allied Command and Control Matters Branch in--Executive Officer in--
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, you're right, you're right.  After that I went to Japan.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--
Speaker 2: So when I came from Monterey [California], that was the, was the joint C3, worked at the Pentagon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Worked on joint and allied, meaning NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] those, you know, command and control requirements.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Communications requirements.
Speaker 1: So this was almost like a train--this is a training I guess.  This is for further tr--training in--
Speaker 2: This was--there you, you--when you're at the, at the Pentagon, you know in the CNO's [Chief Naval Officer] office, there you're in, into more like the policy and the procedures and validation of requirements for the war fighters.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So then, so then in '84 [1984], then you do go to Japan and after--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, it's after that.
Speaker 1: All right.  So now this is your first trip to the Far East since you were nine or ten I guess so.  How, how did you like being stationed in Japan?
Speaker 2: I loved it, I loved it, I loved it.  We lived about five miles from the base because we lived out in town for about a year and a half before we got on--we received on-base housing.  So there was a commute back and forth and it, it was a 45 minute commute.  Only about five miles, though, so in time--so in Japan you measure every distance in time rather than miles.
Speaker 1: So it was very crowded.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes congested.
Speaker 1: Hard to get through the traffic.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Let's see, so, so what are some of the high, the highlights of your stay in Japan?
Speaker 2: Culturally, I got to do a lot of things.  Living out on the--in the community, we got to participate in some of the local festivals.  Getting to travel to other places, you know, I did get to Korea while I was there.  Got up to Hokkaido for the ice festival.  So it was just a very enriching cultural experience, and plus that was my first time being--working so close with, with the seagoing aspect of the Navy.  I'd been with, with the aviators and in, in Lakehurst [New Jersey], but now I was with the surface Navy and at a base where there were ships and boats. (Unclear) submarines.
Story_ID: 33215
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so and you were there till 1987 you say, or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Then the special projects job in D.C. [District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: Right, okay so this is the special projects job.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And this is--where you served the Command, Control and Communications Director as the Chief of Naval Operations, okay.  So this sounds pretty, pretty big.  You're really--and it sounds like a really important job, so okay.  So what's your rank at this point?
Speaker 2: I think I was, I was Lieutenant Commander and was promoted to Commander in that job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so, so that's '87 [1987].  Now this is with classified materials and information and that sort of thing.  So, and you were--were you work, working in the Pentagon at this point?
Speaker 2: Working for the people in the Pentagon.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right so--
Speaker 2: I'm going to tell you like, like my assignment officer told me.  She said, I said where am I getting orders to?  Can't tell you that.  Where?  Well where is the place, is it in the Pentagon?  Can't tell you that.  I said what can you tell me?
Speaker 1: There's a--I think this is nine--this is just, I just popped in my head, but in 1987 there's a movie called "No Way Out" about where Kevin Costner played a, some kind of a special communications officer in the Navy, in the Pentagon and they--through most of the movie they chase him through the Pentagon.  He was running all, all the way through the Pentagon.  He's a naval officer living in Maryland with some secret assignment and he's supposed to be a Russian spy at the time.  Any rate, that was a--same time that you're, you know, there.  Okay, so you were there for about three years on this assignment?
Speaker 2: Three, three and a half, almost three and a half years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33216
Speaker 1: And I sprang for command and went to Key West, Florida.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is 1990.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You're the Commanding Officer for Naval Computer and Telecommunications stationed in Key West.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: All right, so well tell us about that job.  Now this is a--same time as Desert Shield or almost the same time when the, when the--
Speaker 1: No, just before.
Speaker 2: Just before, okay well tell us about this.
Speaker 1: This was when the--they started out with the Joint Task Force for the, the, for drugs.  That, that, that was, that was pretty interesting.  Again, you provide the communications, you know Naval messaging, to the, you know, your shore base of subscribers.  And we also at that time Navy had squadron hydrofoils there at Key West, and they were with the drug interdiction.  And so we used to support them as well.  The--what we did there was we, we, we turned ourselves into a test bed for, for automated message handling system for computer, computerizing naval messaging system.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well one thing we discussed when we were going over the outline was that people were saying well what's the significance of naval intelligence?  And I was saying from what I remember from school and what--is that naval intelligence is the senior intelligence component of the U.S. government.  Basically, naval intelligence was the original intelligence I guess department for the government.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: That probably is the most--
Speaker 1: You know everything's kind of melding together, but we haven't gotten--it hasn't quite gotten there yet.  But what, what, what we, what I do, did as a communicator and with the information technology, we, we are not concerned about the content coming over from the aspect of analyzing the information contained in whatever media form.  Whereas I would say the intelligence part of this, the house, naval intelligence, they're, they're concerned from that aspect.  We're, we're, we're, we're different.
Speaker 2: So you were more concerned about the acquisition of the information rather than the analysis of it.
Speaker 1: Right, right, we weren't concerned with the analysis of the information.  We just processed the information to make sure it gets from Point A to Point B in a timely manner.
Story_ID: 33217
Speaker 1: Okay, so all right, so you were in Key West [Florida] you were working closely with the war on drugs and--
Speaker 2: Supporting their, supporting them, communications support, yes.
Speaker 1: Was it George, George, H. W. Bush was President.  Now did you--did, did you have anything, any work at all to do with, with when Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in the--did you have any, any role to play in that?
Speaker 2: We--once going, okay after Key West, let me see where was I?  Went back to the Pentagon.  Let's see what was that--and that was on the Joint Staff.  Yes, we validated the requirements, the water fire's requirements, yes, what their requirements were.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Were there any stories from that era that you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You can shake your head about 50 times in a second.  Never seen that before.  Is that a Navy--
Speaker 2: That's something.
Speaker 1: Now let's see--
Speaker 2: One thing about working on the what I found working on the Joint Staff, I got to really appreciate the cultures of the other services and you know, how they, how they do business.  We each have our own little quirks.  But I learned a lot from them and they learned from me.  So it was a--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A real rich, rich, rich and energy environment to work in.
Speaker 1: Okay, it gives you a sense of the big picture.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah, and how you know, we pull together and make one effort.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right now let's see.  In '93 [1993], well I guess between nine--now you go to the Industrial College of the Armed Forces at Fort McNair [Washington, D.C.], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So and you graduate form that in 1993.
Speaker 2: This was Joint Staff.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And all right, so you, you were at the Joint Chief of Staffs until '98 [1998]?  Or is that--
Speaker 2: Until, no until '95 [1995].
Story_ID: 33218
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what happened in 1995?
Speaker 2: Ninety-five [1995], spring for major command.  Went out to Hawaii and assumed command of the naval computer, telecommunications station, Eastern Pacific.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which eventually became Pacific.  And basically we provided communication support to shore and fleet customers from the west coast of the U.S. to and including Diego Garcia, so almost half the world.  Basically the Ma Bell of the Pacific.
Speaker 1: How, how many ships does the U.S. typically have, say in the Pa, Pa, Pacific?
Speaker 2: I don't know what that number is right, I can't call up.
Speaker 1: Cause you had to deal with the bases and all the ships too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And all that.
Speaker 2: Yes.  We had various activities that fell under my headquarters.  We had the facility in Guam, we had facilities in Japan, Diego Garcia, Okinawa.  On the west coast we had up in you know, upstate Washington, San Diego, all down the east coast.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So was your, your--were you responsible for communications between all those entities out there in the Pacific?
Speaker 2: Well the, the ones that, that, that we owned basically, I, I was you know, I was their next reporting senior.  So you know we divvied out--we got the pot and then we divvied the pot out to them.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right, so in '98 [1998] you were promoted, promoted to rear admiral.  Now, now, now this is--now are you close to being one of the first women to be a rear admiral in the navy?
Speaker 2: Not of the women, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, and in terms of African American women--
Speaker 2: The first.
Story_ID: 33219
Speaker 1: The first, okay, all right.  So you were the first, okay.  Now I looked online, I, I saw a picture of the first woman that became a rear admiral and I, I'm trying to--I forget when it was now, but it was--I think it was in, around 1970 or something?
Speaker 2: Nurse Corp.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right, right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Admiral [Bradley R.] Gehrke.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now how was your promotion--did, did you get publicity and were you in "Jet" [Magazine], or--
Speaker 2: I was in "Ebony" [Magazine].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: It was kind of high profile, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But yeah, no, I, I could still walk the streets.  But interesting, different.
Speaker 1: I think it's, it's, it's the kind of notoriety where, where people find out who you are, they, you know, but they don't necessarily know you.  You know.
Speaker 2: Well if I was walking around in the uniform, you know, they knew and some people--you know people would just stop me on the street and, you know--I'm so proud of you.  I'm so proud.  Congratulations, congratulations.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were your parents still alive when you were promoted?
Speaker 2: My father [Isaac Ernest Fishburne, Jr.] passed, he got to see me take command at Key West [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was a very, very proud moment for him.  And he passed about six months after that.  My mother [Ethel Mae Fishburne] was there, yes she was there for--to see me get my star, and to help at the ceremony.
Speaker 1: Was she satisfied that you weren't a pediatrician?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was, yes she was satisfied.  Her only other, her only other thing was after--she said you still got to work on your, on your doctorate, you still got to work on your doctorate.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's something.  So all right, okay so this is 1998.  Now what were your--now this is the latter part of the Clinton administration.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Just as a frame of reference.  But, so what were your duties after you were pro--promoted to rear admiral?
Speaker 2: God, working on, working on a staff there.  I used to do the programming and the budgeting for the communications systems, including you know, the, the space systems.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were working in the, in the--did you work in the pentagon or--
Speaker 2: Yes, well actually Pentagon was undergoing renovation and we were over in Crystal City [Arlington, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But our boss sat at the Pentagon, but the rest of us were over at Crystal City.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Trek back and forth.
Story_ID: 33220
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so where, what, what were--did the Navy--and in the year 2000, sort of where did the Navy stand in terms of making progress in terms of black officers?  How was it--how were things going?
Speaker 2: They were making prog--they were making progress.  I mean we had several, several you know, high ranking naval officers, people were making it particularly, especially the women finally, in the enlisted ranks who were used to us started seeing, you know, African Americans, females at the E9 level in, in some numbers.  As long as you make progress, you know, until we get to that ideal situation you know, where every, everybody's colorblind, gender blind, etc., etc., it's not gone be enough progress.  So you know we, we got to keep pushing on, we got to--those that have made it, have got to mentor those that are upcoming.  I think that especially with the, the future generation, some of them have a sense of entitlement.  They don't know how things were.  At least we have that low thread that we can pull back, look back and say oh, yeah, I remember when.  I remember when, you know, I had to use a separate bathroom.  I remember when I had to, to drink at a separate water fountain, you know.
Speaker 1: You mean as a black person.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, African American, that's what I'm talking about.  You can search back and, and you, and you know what it was like.  But nowadays, you know these kids they don't, they don't have that experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're suggesting that they, they would, they may encounter the same kind of racism without the frame of reference to deal with it.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Or how to deal with it.  And so, you know, particularly those of us who have been out in the work environment.  You know the younger ones coming in, we really need to mentor them.
Story_ID: 33221
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now what were some of the challenges I guess for women in the Navy, you know, as--that you've seen over the years?  You're someone that, that kind of crashed through some barriers, you know you, you went through a couple, couple of ceilings to become a rear admiral.  But, but what were some of the obstacles and maybe challenges for a woman in the, in the services as an officer in the Navy?
Speaker 2: Some of the, some of the challenges were for a while we were not permitted to, to, to serve on combatant vessels and not even commanding a vessel, combatant vessel.  There are certain specialties that, that were not open to us.  And so you know every time you take--you know there's a limit put on there as to what you can do, then that says hey, that decreases your chances for promotion.  The numbers are not going to be there.  The base number is, it's just not going to be there.  So you know, you kind of look for, you kind of look for that niche.  I found that niche in you know, communications where I could be "in direct support" of the operating forces.  And you look at all the other things, you know, you know what have other people done?  What's the background of those getting promoted?  And, and, and you know, you, you got to work a plan and you also have to for me, I always wanted to have an option, you know.  When I originally came in, I could sign up for three or four years.  I signed up for three years because if I didn't like it, that fourth year would seem awfully long.  So I sort of set a timeframe.  I said okay, if I'm in five years, I'll shoot for twenty.  But I always try to keep my options open that I could walk any time that I, that I was unhappy.
Speaker 1: Was there ever a time when you thought you might not, you know, you might want to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there, there were times, of course.  I, I preferred being out in the field, working out at the activities, you know, providing that operational support.  I you know, I, I, I--if I had my druthers, I, I, I you know but headquarters has its, you know because then that gave me the big picture.  But I just didn't like staff work.  It wasn't my favorite.  So there were times when I said I'm going, you know, it's time to pull the plug.  And my husband said when it's time for you to quit or retire, you'll know it because you won't talk about it, you'll just do it.
Story_ID: 33222
Speaker 1: Now did your husband stay in the, in the, in the Navy?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was in for thirty-two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what, what rank did he attain?
Speaker 2: E9.
Speaker 1: E9, okay, okay.  So, so you both had career, you know, complete careers in the Navy.  Did, did they keep you together on assignments?
Speaker 2: We only had--we met at Great Lakes.  We only had one assignment, and that was when we went to Japan.  He was at the ships repair facility and I was at the communications station.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And then, let's see, he retired after Japan, so that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did that make it hard to keep the family together?
Speaker 2: Yes, it, it--yes very.  It, it was difficult, but we made a conscious decision when we got married that his was winding down, mine was you know, about mid-phase.  So that, you know, whatever I needed to do, then we would do it.  I was very fortunate.  My daughter only had two babysitters other than my mother [Ethel Mae Fishburne] and father [Isaac Ernest Fishburne, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was in Japan and in Key West [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But other than that, my parents were there.  My mother went with me when I went to Hawaii for the two years there, she was there with me because my husband stayed at home because he had his job in--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now 2001 you retired, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, now did you retire before 911, or--
Speaker 2: Just before.
Speaker 1: Just before, okay.
Speaker 2: Just before 9/11, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I retired in March, about six months before.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so had you--did you have something lined up to do after you retired?
Speaker 2: My goal, my plan was to take a year off, decompress, start getting things together because we had--you know we had like three sets of stuff because stuff that I, you know, the furnishings I would take with me and, and the household goods.  Come back to Maryland, and then my parents had, you know, taken their stuff and moved in with me so they could watch over you know, my daughter.  And so it was just, I just needed to clean house.  So I was gonna take a year to decompress and get some things done, then go to work.  But it didn't happen that way.
Story_ID: 33223
Speaker 1: So what happened?
Speaker 2: I became ill, had an operation in 2002.  Recovered from the operation and then my mother [Ethel Mae Fishburne] had open heart, she had to have a aortic valve replaced.  And so after that it was, it was basically taking care of her because her, you know, after, after the operation her health started declining and so I, I never got back to work.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So do you--are you engaged in--or do you have the time to be engaged in any voluntary activities, that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Now--I will in the future.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Past year has been cleaning out, cleaning out and cataloging stuff and I just--it's been a little over a year since she was buried, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now--
Speaker 2: And trying to decide what is that next chapter for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what, what, what are you leaning towards today?
Speaker 2: I really want to, want to do something with children because that's where our future lies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In their hands.
Speaker 1: Something educational, or--
Speaker 2: A combination of education and, and talks with the--a couple of, of friends and colleagues in the last several months, there are I guess I--because I've been kind of isolated.  I didn't understand that so many children are just trying to find out--find where their next meal is gonna come from.  They're worried about where their next meal is gonna come from, not that homework assignment due.  When, when am I going to eat next?  And I, I, I just, you know the--a sign of the times because of the economic situation, you know, that's going on that something's got to be done.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Another friend--she was a--was telling me about a backpack program where, you know there's--give kids food to take home over the weekend so that they can have something to eat.  I, I, my eyes were opened.  I just didn't understand how really bad it is.  And you can't--and my mother always said you can't learn on an empty stomach.
Story_ID: 33224
Speaker 1: That's true, that's true.  I think the last time we faced this kind of crisis was when the Black Panthers started a food program and then the federal government picked up and started doing, doing the same thing.  Tell me, this is a good time to ask this, this question which we always ask.  And that is what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I--the, the--given my background, you know, in the IT [informational technology] field that I just don't want to see the digital divide widen for the African American community.  And when it come to a choice between something to eat and an Internet connectivity, what's gonna give?  I, I remember doing homework with my daughter when she was in elementary school, and I've had calculus, algebra two, and I sat down to--I would sit down to help her with her homework.  And I would have to read the chapter because they changed the names of some of the terms, and so you know I have to bring myself--but and I, and I would say to myself.  I said I don't know how people can help their kids with math homework if they're getting this type of homework at this age and a mother or a father has not completed high school.  Or gone through high school, which some of them did, without one math course.
Speaker 1: So you think like STEM [science, technology, engineering and math] education is really needed to--we need some help on how, how to deliver that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And you know the, the Internet, okay.  They have the homework hotlines and you can go on the Internet and you get help with your homework, all of this.  These are, these are valuable tools that aren't available to kids who do not have access to the Internet.
Story_ID: 33225
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there are some things that would change.  I, I, I could not seem to get--I don't know whether there is a right balance, or the balance depends upon the individual.  That balance between you know, that spiritual balance, that work balance, that family balance, that how bout you, you also need you know, to take care of yourself.  And I never got that balance right.  Or right so that it really fitted my situation to the optimum.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And since you've been retired, have you, have you, have you been able to strike more of a balance?
Speaker 2: More of a balance, yes, yes.  Yes because it all was kind of--it depends upon the situation.  So some, some situations require more effort than others.  So that now I you know, I can, I can focus on myself and, and see what's the next chapter and what do I need to do to get to that chapter.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this question I always ask too is that when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what, what would be your le--legacy in your career?
Speaker 2: Probably the first with many more to follow.  You know you, you have to sacrifice and we, we did sacrifice.  But I wasn't the only one that sacrificed.  The people that, that I worked with sacrificed.  They, you know, they were dedicated, hard working young men and women.  Put in extra hours to make sure that, that you know, we got things right or we got things corrected without grumbling; did it willingly.  I, I just think you know, dedicated, caring and believed that life was a continual learning process.
Story_ID: 33226
Speaker 1: All right, now tell us about your family.  Now you have children, right?  And-- Yes.
Speaker 2: You just have the one daughter, or--
Speaker 1: My husband and I have the, have one daughter, Cherise born in 1982.  And my husband has two daughters by a previous, had two daughters by a previous marriage, Tracy and Kim.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay, you want to tell us anything about them?
Speaker 1: Let's see.  Tracy, she's the oldest, she served time in the Army.  She's married to a fellow that she met in the Army, and they have two sons.  Kimberly had one son, she passed in 2009, automobile accident.  But she worked in domestic violence and abuse.  So every year there's an annual program on her behalf.
Speaker 2: Okay, in, in--
Speaker 1: In Youngstown, Ohio.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And Tracy lives, lives here in the area.  She and her family reside in the area, you know in the Maryland area.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And she had one son, he's a young--my daughter is, our daughter, she's in Houston, Texas working as a veterinarian for a shelter, providing shelter medicine.
Speaker 2: Okay, well you got close to being a pediatrician, but not--
Speaker 1: Well her grandmother lived to see that, so--see her become a doctor, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 1: I can't, I, I can't--if, if I do, I, I'll, I'll fly to Chicago and, and, and visit you all and let you know.
Speaker 2: There's one thing that came to mind.  There's one thing that did come to mind didn't ask about.  I didn't ask specifically about and I, I should because it's so, it's a really integral to what you've done all your life.  But what's your philosophy about managing people?
Speaker 1: The first thing is one, treat people like you want to be treated.  My father always said, he said, he told me you're a naval officer now.  "What you do can impact the lives of other people.  You'll have power, but have mercy as well."  I felt that my job as a manager was, or a leader, was to provide my people with the equipment, the training, the quality of life, whatever's needed, to get our mission accomplished.  And I always encourage, always encourage all of the people I work with to further their training and their education because it makes them more valuable to the Navy, and it helps them, you know, once they decide to leave, you know, to retire and go pursue another job or other interests.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Now, now last que, question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Though I think you answered it as if I was asking this one.  But we'll, we'll do it again.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 1: As a caring, compassionate person; fair.  That's basically it.  Like my mother [Ethel Mae Fishburne] said, you're like your father [Isaac Ernest Fishburne, Jr.].  Because my father was quiet too.  There was a--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Well thank you so much for sharing with us.
Story_ID: 33227
Speaker 1: That was while I was XO [Executive Officer] at the--Executive Officer at the Naval Communications Station, Japan in about 1985 I believe, '86 [1986].  That's a picture, 19, circa 1960 of my brother Alvin Fishburne, my mother Ethel Fishburne, and Lillian Elaine.  One of my favorite pastimes, fishing.  My promotion ceremony to 06, that was Lieutenant General Edmunds.
Speaker 2: On the far left.  There's me, that's my husband Albert Sullivan, my mother Ethel Fishburne, and my daughter Cherise Sullivan.
Speaker 1: That's photo, that is my 06 or Captain photo, so that is somewhere in 19--I think that one is 19, no it must not be 19, it's got to be, yeah, 19--before I went to '90's [1990's].  Somewhere in the '90 [1990], '90 [1990].  Picture 19--think that was 1980, '79 [1979] of Tracy Sullivan Morgan, me and Kimberly Sullivan, my stepdaughters.  That is a picture of me and Al my husband and Cherise in 19--probably '86 [1986] in Japan.  Another picture of me and my daughter in Japan.  That is me 19--probably 1959, that's it.  Prob--1991, conducting a re-enlistment ceremony at the southernmost point in Key West [Florida].  Lieutenant J. G. Lillian Fishburne in 1976, think it's '76 [1976].  And that's 1980, that's a picture of Cherise and I.  We had gone to Alameda to--her father's ship had come in.  June 21st, 1980, wedding picture.  Okay, not gonna go there.  May 1971, graduation picture from Lincoln University.  Change of Command ceremony, when I took command at Key West.  Graduation from the naval post-graduate school.  Let's see, 19, that was in the '80's [1980's].  I was commander, Lieutenant Commander Gracie Thompson, young lady in uniform I put in the Navy.  Me, my daughter and her advisor at the White Coat Ceremony at Cornell Vet School [Cornell Veterinary School].  Mommy duty in Key West--bringing a birthday cake and serving it at the school.  That's a picture of Vice Admiral Samuel Gravely and me, Vice Admiral Gravely was the first African American naval admiral.  That is me at my retirement ceremony with Vice Admiral Mayo, the officiating and Chaplain Rear Admiral Barry Black, Chaplain.  Mother and daughter at the retirement reception.  Me and our Vice Admiral Reeson [ph.], first four star admiral, African American.  That is in 2000 I believe it is.  That's Thurgood Marshall's son, myself, Secretary of Defense at that time, Cohan and his wife on a trip to a commissioning ceremony, an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] commissioning ceremony in Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Thurgood Marshall's son.
Speaker 1: Janet Lang Hart who's Secretary Cohan's wife, Sec Def [Secretary of Defense] wife.  There should be an article on that on the Web.  I can't--
Speaker 2: Capstone, Ecuador, center of the earth.  That's a re-enlistment in Japan.  My promotion to, to Lieutenant Commander at the--that was at the naval post-graduate school, Monterey.  One of my official captain's '06 [2006] photos.  A picture of me with our Nab Con's Tell Stay [ph.] Japan, Japanese counterparts.  My mother and I at my promotion ceremony in Miami.  Change of command at East Pac [East Pacific].  A class photo, naval post-graduate school.  My promotion to Commander.  My mother and Captain Harrison.  Graduation picture, 1967, high school.
Speaker 1: What does it say on the back?
Speaker 2: No that, that's my father's retirement.
Speaker 1: That's my father's retirement from the Navy in 1964, retirement ceremony.
Speaker 2: Isaac Fishburne, Eight Hospital Corpsman Chief.
