Story_ID: 80725
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is Leon, L-E-O-N, D, as in Dorsey, D-O-R-S-E-Y, Finney, F-I-N-N-E-Y, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July the 7th, 1938, Louise, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a clergyman now and a professor of, of theology and somewhat of a, of a, of an executive director of a large community organization, the Woodlawn Organization.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is October the 3rd, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the studio to be filmed for The HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan, Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 80726
Speaker 1: All right, before we go into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish-type questions that I'm compelled to ask you.  The first one is--and they just require a short answer.  The first, the first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food probably would be turkey and turkey and the, the trimmings for turkey.  I'm a big turkey, Thanksgiving person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's all of that Thanksgiving kind of food I like a lot.  And turkey is probably my favorite of all meats and the breast of, breast of that (laughter), if it goes down to that.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is my favorite.  Blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, I like spring and I like fall a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really, I like a lot of wide open space, so I like skiing, and I, I like to go out to Colorado to ski.  But I also like to be out in, in, in, in Nevada, in, in and around Las Vegas [Nevada] because it's--and in Albuquerque, New Mexico, places where there's a lot of space and great mountains and great trees.  Oddly enough, I'm somewhat in that instance of, of a person who really appreciates the nature.  But I like space and foliage and greenery, and then, you know, but it's just spaciousness.  And so I tend to be a person who appreciates more of the openness that comes from being in the countryside than in built up areas, though I love Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: At the end of the day (laughter).  That's my favorite phrase, at the end of the day, which means the bottom line, the consequence of the results--at the end of the day, this is what this means.  So I'm pretty much known by that phrase, at the end of the day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 80727
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your background.  Can you give us the names of your parents and spell them for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's name was Atline, A-T-L-I-N-E, Tyler, and my father was Leon Finney, Sr.  Atline, as I said, is A-T-L-I-N-E, Tyler, T-Y-L-E-R; Leon Finney is L-E-O-N, D as in Dorsey, D-O-R-S-E-Y, Finney, F-I-N-N-E-Y, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay, now where, where were, were they born distinctively?
Speaker 2: In the same place, Louise, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did--do they have--do either one of them have stories about what your ancestors were doing during slavery or even, you know, or beyond or, or--
Speaker 2: Not my parents.  My mother is, is, is deceased.  She died when I was seven years old.  My father is not that forthcoming about the ancestry during slavery.  Much of what I know about my ancestors comes from my great-aunt, aunt, my great-aunt for me, Diella (ph.) Parker, who recently made her transition in last month; in the month of September she, she passed--I'm sorry, no, it was Oct--August the 30th Aunt Diella passed.  And so, to the extent that I know anything about our history in, in or around or just after slavery, comes from her.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what do you know about it?
Speaker 2: Well, I know that, that the area that we come from was obviously a heavy, heavily agrarian area.  I know that, that, that we--the, the, the, the--we have Choctaw Indians in our family.  As a matter of fact, the Choctaw Indian influence and the African American influence, or the African influence, is probably the predominant racial mixture in our family though.  There were whites that were also a part and these would have been plantation owners that lived or that were either lived or lived in the area or helped to sire children that were in my family that later on became my ancestors.  And those were the Hills and the, the Montgomerys were, as a white family, those are white family names as I understand it.  And so, somewhere along the line on my mother, mother--my father's side, we found that.  Then on my grandfather's side, my paternal grandfather's side, Ellis Tyler, there was--they were on the, the black and white.  And there was an old Bull Run, B-U-L-L, R-U-N, plantation that they were on, and there were two twin boys, fraternal twins, as I later found out, Ellis Tyler and Harrison Tyler, that were a product of some union between a slave, slave master and an undisclosed African woman that produced my father--grand--my, my, my maternal grandfather and my maternal grand--yeah, my maternal grandfather.  I have no understanding or appreciation of my maternal mother--my maternal grandmother in terms of who her family was.
Story_ID: 80728
Speaker 1: Then I have a paternal side of my father [Leon Finney, Sr.], and his name was Thomas Jefferson Huddleston, H-U-D-D-L-E-S-T-O-N, and he was the father of my father.  My mother--my grandmother, who is my father's mother, would have been Lula Dorsey.  And Lula Dorsey was at one time married to John Finney, but at some point that relationship fell apart.  And my father was sired by Thomas Jefferson Huddleston and, and--but so.  And, and John Finney, as I'm given to understand, was white, but he was not the, the father of my father, though he, my father, bore the name Finney.  It was--his real father was Thomas Jefferson Huddleston, who also had sired several other children.  And one of those that Thomas Jefferson Huddleston sired was my Aunt Jean Huddleston, who later married a man by the name of Espy, who they then had children.  And one of the children became Mike Espy, who ended up being United States Congressman.  Mike Espy and I are first cousins.
Speaker 2: The Secretary of Agriculture.
Speaker 1: He was Secretary of Agriculture, as well as he was the Congressman from the State of Mississippi before he was that.  Going back to my father's, my father's, my father's mother's side of the family, we have the Montgomerys, and in that context, Patricia, Patsy Dorsey, at some point married Alex Montgomery.  And so Patsy Dorsey had six children already before she married Alex Montgomery and Alex Montgomery had about six.  And they then married when respective previous spouses either died or, or we can't find them.  They then had two--three children by themselves through that union, one of which ended up being my great-aunt, Diella Parker, who had a sister who was my Aunt Birdie, Bertha Parker, Bertha--well, one became my Aunt Diella Montgomery Parker, and the other became my Aunt Bertha Montgomery Brody, and then we had a, a, an uncle, Hera (ph.) Montgomery.  Now you had--these were three, then you had a bunch, a group of Montgomerys that, that were brought into this marriage.  One of them was a Frank Montgomery, who, who would become the father, I believe, of James D. Montgomery [HM].  Now James D. Montgomery is a practicing attorney here in the City of Chicago and recently formed a partnership with Johnnie Cochran, so Jim Montgomery is like my third cousin.  So, we have--those are roots now.
Story_ID: 80729
Speaker 1: When we get to slavery, as in--as, as an institution of itself, there is a great deal of silence in the historical memory about our people, or my ancestors, during, during the period of slavery.  Much of what my ancestors have talked about that I know about had to do with post-slavery.  Slavery was over and then we began to pick up a oral tradition and, to a certain degree, a written tradition.  But I am sure that someone in my family, not me, might be able to resonate on or, or comment on the period of slavery and where we were then.  I know of no--I don't know of anything, as it relates to the Tyler side of my family, which is my mother's [Atline Tyler] father, that would speak to slavery.  I don't know anything of Shange Johnson--Jones, who was my mother's mother, as that would speak to slavery.  I know very little about that side of my mother's family because, obviously, my mom died at such an early age, and the histor--history just didn't get passed on.  I really kind of grew up with my family, my father's [Leon Finney, Sr.] side of the family, and so I know a lot more about that side than my mom's.  But again, I don't have a great handle on--I know that ala--I know that my--Ellis Tyler was the son--was my--would be my maternal grandfather, was the son of a slave master and was born on a plantation.  And I think that it was Bull--Bull Run, but I'm not positive about that.
Story_ID: 80730
Speaker 1: Okay.  You've got quite a bit of information to--you know.  Anyway, even though--I mean you're, you're trying to--you've got a lot of leads on this too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did your parents tell you much about their courtship or how they met?
Speaker 2: No, I think that my dad [Leon Finney, Sr.] and mom [Atline Tyler] met in high school, but I met to become in a relationship I think in high school.  But I think my father had known my mother for many years, because the--they--my father grew up on the Montgomery farm, which is a very, very large farm in Mississippi.  The farm itself had almost 3,000 acres of land, so that was the farm he grew up on.  My mother's mother, Shange, S-H-A-N-G-E, Jones was a sharecropper on that farm.  So my sense is that my father knew my mother for a very, very long time, though doesn't talk a lot about it, and I've not been awfully probative about it.  But I believe that he knew my mother for a number of years before their courtship, etc.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they, they were married in, in Louise, Mississippi I guess?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 80731
Speaker 1: What kind of a man was your father [Leon Finney, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Well, my father is very much alive.  He's eighty-six years old.  He is the owner of Leon--founder and owner of Leon's Barbecue, which is a restaurant chain here in the City of Chicago, probably one of the last of five surviving black-owned and operated restaurant chains in the city of Chicago, which is totally a family enterprise.  My dad went to high school, did a little college once he got here.  And all of my, my life I've known my father as a businessman.  I know that my father earlier though, before he arrived here in Chicago, worked for my paternal grandfather, Thomas Jefferson Huddleston, or T. J. Huddleston, which everybody called him.
Story_ID: 80732
Speaker 1: Now, T. J. [Thomas Jefferson] Huddleston--we should go back to that, because T. J. Huddleston we didn't dwell, dwell at all on T. J. Huddleston.  T. J. Huddleston was a very interesting man.  He was a trai--a, a tailor and a, a, a, a educator, of sorts, of his time that became an entrepreneur early in his life.  And as an entrepreneur, he started out I think teaching and making clothes, and moved from teaching and making clothes I believe to selling burial insurance, which was one of the early enterprises that, that African Americans go involved with in the rural South, and to a certain degree here.  Many of the later on insurance companies, life insurance companies, started out as burial insurance companies, and that was to make sure that, that if, if one met his or her transgress--transition, you could bury 'em or they could be buried, so it was burial insurance.  And he started out selling burial insurance, and then he was doing so well in the business that T. J. Huddleston went to the white owners of the burial insurance that he was selling, and asked them to put him on the board of director.  He ought to be in a position to make decisions about a company since he was one of their major top salesmen, and they refused to do so.  And so my grandfather, T. J. Huddleston, decided that he would withdraw from the association and started his own company, which, which became the Central Burial Association, Central Burial Association.  And in that--out of that association would come not only a, a thriving burial insurance business, but would also become the precursor to the Central Funeral Homes that my grandfather owned and operated in Mississippi.  And at one time, I believe there would have been at seven funeral homes that my grandfather, T. J. Huddleston, owned and operated throughout the State of Mississippi.  Now, my father, Leon Finney, Sr., at some point went to work for my--his father, who was T. J. Huddleston, and worked in the casking--casket making factory, as well as assisted on the mortuary side of the burial association.  My grandfather, T. J. Huddleston, also went on to found the Africom--Afro-American Sons and Daughters Hospital, which was situated in Yazoo, Mississippi, and that's Y-A-Z-O-O, Yazoo, Mississippi, which was the first hospital that would provide health care or African Americans in the, in the State of Mississippi.
Speaker 2: The African-American Sons and Daughters Hospital?
Speaker 1: Yes, Afro-American.
Speaker 2: Afro-American.
Speaker 1: A-F-R-O American Sons and Daughters, right.
Speaker 2: Do you have an idea when it was founded?
Speaker 1: I couldn't give you the exact date.  I would suspect that it was founded somewhere in the--sometime in the '30's [1930s].  That's my gut feeling that it was founded somewhere in the '30's [1930s]--late '30's [1930s] maybe--maybe midway--as we maybe were coming out of the Depression.  I, I suspect that would have been the time, but I can't speak with any great clarity on that.
Speaker 2: It's an interesting name because, you know, things in those days mainly named Negro or colored, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, he was very--as I, as I knew of him basically from the oral tradition, my grandfather, T. J. Huddleston, was very--I think--I mean just to even think of a man, and a colored man, or a Negro man, at the time he was coming along in the rurals in, in Mississippi, bilbo country, cotton king country, for him to work for a white man, a white insurance company, and then say to them, I wanna be on your board of directors, he wasn't--was hardly accepting the or believing that he ought to be affirmed as something less than out of a prouder tradition than that, that was somewhat concocted in this United States of America, me, i.e., Negro or colored.  Now that's not to say that necessarily thought negative about those terms, but the great affirmation for Africa Americans is to affirm Africa in our heritage.  And he would reach back and get that I am sure.  And so it was Afro-American Sons and Daughters, and that's what he made it.
Story_ID: 80733
Speaker 1: And there was a time I suspect, out of the [Marcus] Garvey movement maybe, and maybe pre-Garvey movement, that you had--it was common for certain, a certain black mindset to affirm Africa.  And they would say Afro American.  And so, my sense is that he [T.J. Huddleston, paternal grandfather] was out of that group that would affirm--I don't know if it was Garvey, but you had such great discussions at that those times, Garvey, W.E.B. Du Bois.  I don't know who might have coined it, but there was a mindset that said that we were Africans and that our heritage had its foundational place not out of--in slavery, but before slavery, off of the continent of Africa, and therefore, in Africa we were free.  And my, my, my grandfather, T. J. Huddleston, I believe, at least mentally and intellectually and emotionally, felt he was free.  And as such, he played out his sense of own--his own freedom in, in his life, in, in starting up his own business as a, as a black man in the State of Mississippi, challenging, to a degree, the white, white institution of racism as it was practiced in, in, in Mississippi at that time, to, to allow him to organize--to allow him to be a part as a partner at a business enterprise that white folk owned.  I mean that was serious, that was serious contradiction to the mindset and the institutional racism that was practiced in the social, political, and economic realm in the State of Mississippi at that particular time.  And so he was an entire contradiction mentally as to what a Negro or a colored man ought to be.  He was hardly that.  He wanted to define himself, and went into business himself, and did quite well at being in business himself.
Speaker 2: Sir, did, did, did he ever encounter any opposition, you know, with that strong of a personality and--
Speaker 1: I suspect so.  I don't know the stories.  Maybe, maybe my father knows 'em, but I'm sure that there was opposition.  But he would--I mean I think that there was a, a, a resistance.  You would find instances when, even if you have a burial association, you had burial insurance, the white funeral homes would not take a body, a black body, in there and handle the body to do the embalming procedure.  And they would leave 'em on a cooling board, and then the, the burial would take--have to be taken--take place right away, as bodies would deteriorate.  And so he went on, therefore, from a burial insurance.  He had then started a mortuary.  You follow me?  And then from a mortuary, then it was what, what, what are we gonna do if we're not dead?--hospital.  So I think that there was a natural progression for him.  But he was enormously intelligent, enormously thoughtful man that was I think always intellectually free, although I would suspect there was a fair amount of hostility towards that kind of black in the Mississippi.  But--
Story_ID: 80734
Speaker 1: And then on my father's mother's [Lula Dorsey] side, you had an equally--a sense of independence among that side because of the, the vast land holdings that, that the Montgomerys had.  And they believed they, they had their own total operation.  And when I say total operation, I mean that they had their own stables, own blacksmith, their own dairy, their, their own cotton gin, if you will, for a while.  At a level they had them.  Later on they would have to go--because of the great volume, and have to go and gin the cotton elsewhere.  They had their own slaughterhouses, own curing factory, own meat processing places, all of that on one plantation.  And whites were not allowed to come onto the plantation or to do anything other than to--meaning they just couldn't walk onto the Montgomery plantation without permission.  They couldn't visit without some understanding that they had not right of heirship to be on our plantation.  So, even on the Montgomery side, there is this sense of we are who we are and--or I should say Montgomery, Montgomery-Dorsey side we are who we are.  We give a certain definition to who we are, where, because of, of our belief that, that we are equal and we are free emotionally, intellectual, and, and socially.
Speaker 2: How did the Montgomery side acquire all that land?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I suspect it might very well have been through, through heirship, through--more than likely through the, the situation with, with post-slavery freedom.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: More than likely the--some--the--a paternal--my grandfather on the Montgomery side and--my great-great-grandfather on the Montgomery side and/or the great-great-grandfather on the Dorsey side probably left them land, gave land to the children that were born probably outside of the marital contract, and gave their children land that happened to be blacks and/or happened to be their mother at least half black.
Speaker 2: How this was--yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --this is interesting stuff 'cause it, you know, it, it contradicts the system they had set up in the South, but yet it's a part of the culture and stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So they--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I suspect--
Speaker 2: --can't disown--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and I think that that's what happened with my mater--my, my maternal grandfather, Ellis Tyler, though I'm not real clear about it.  And then, you know, it was a matter of parlaying, you know, so okay, so we have this land, well, we'll buy this next.  And prudent stewardship over what they had, I think also let them.  Once they had an ability to farm land, then the question is, can we pick up this next parcel of land which is adjacent?  So most of these farmlands were, were contiguous.  They weren't necessarily scattered all over, but more often than not you would find the land that was contiguous.  And, and so that's pretty much what happened.
Story_ID: 80735
Speaker 1: So your, your father [Leon Finney, Sr.] grew up in this, this atmosphere of this, this vital business--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, so he grew up in an atmosphere of being in business.  So my father never really--when he left Mississippi, never really accepted the fact that he ought to work for somebody.  He was always seeking to have his own business, and so that's what he has done for as long as I can remember.  He's been in, in, in the food and beverage business, period.
Story_ID: 80736
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, what about your mother [Atline Tyler], you know, what did she do and--
Speaker 2: Best, best, best I can sense is my mother was my mother.  Until she passed away in 1945 of tuberculosis, she essentially worked in the restaurant [Leon's Bar-B-Q] with my dad [Leon Finney, Sr.].  That's all I know.  She really did not live long enough for me--let see, she probably got sick when I was about four, and so she was in tuberculosis sanitariums here in Chicago for a long time.  So figure a four year-old, what stories would I remember or what stories did she tell me that would be of any real value right now?  Not a whole lot.  And again, since, since I was with my father, my whole--when she passed, my whole life shifted to my father's family.  And so there, there was relatively minimal integration into my mother's family.  Outside of that, that I found from my patern--my maternal grandfather [Ellis Tyler]--and I did spend a considerable time with him, but I generally learned--I, I didn't get a lot of stories from him.  Had I spent time with my maternal grandmother [Shange Jones], I suspect I would have a fair number of stories that I would then have discovered from, from that side of the family.  So I really have a very, very sketchy reflection or recall about my mom.
Story_ID: 80737
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell, tell us when and why your parents left Louise, Mississippi to come to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the merest I can think, my dad left probably in 1940.  And he left because he--while he understood the business of my, my paternal grandfather, T. J. [Thomas Jefferson] Hud [Huddleston]--he was not that enthralled with the casket business to the point that he wanted to be--live and grow up in Mississippi.  I think that he thought he was attracted to a life in the Northern part of the, the world.  And I think that while he appreciated the family business, it was not strong enough, on my judgment this is, to hold him in Mississippi.  He wanted to see the, the life in a different way, outside of Mississippi.  I think that he felt that he wanted to see more of the world, and he wanted to see a different way of life that was probably not so restricted as it was for a black or an African-American or a Negro or colored in the State of Mississippi or in this, in the area that he grew up in.  So he left basically because he--not so much for opportunity.  I think he left for social reasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't--and I think he left for social reasons, not because it--there was not ample work.  He wasn't unemployed, had cars and things like that.  That wasn't issue.  I think that he left because he did not want to live in the social context that we find or would find in Mississippi at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 2: Many other blacks left because--for in pursuit of work, but he had work and plenty of work.
Speaker 1: I think they kind of keep up on each other--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the, the need for work and the social--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, right, so--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But he didn't leave for that.
Speaker 1: That was a problem.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he didn't leave for that.  He, I think--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I don't--he wasn't run out either--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --because his family, our family had enough means.  He wasn't run out of Mississippi.  Nobody chased him out.  He just left because he wanted to see--he wanted to be in a different social context.
Story_ID: 80738
Speaker 1: Well he's [Leon Finney Sr., father] unusual in that he comes here with means, you know.  So he, he wasn't--did he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my--well, my grandfather [T.J. Huddleston] helped him get started in business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, my Great-Aunt Bertha Brody--we called her Birdie--was working in a restaurant, was owned by a white man here at 55th, Garfield Boulevard, between Calumet and Prairie Avenue.  And as such, she, she found herself--one day the, the owner said that he wanted to sell the place.  And she inquired as to why, and he said well, the police have closed up my, my, my gambling.  I guess he was--had a gambling operation in the basement of this restaurant, which is the real reason he had the restaurant (laughter).  And he said, you know, I'm--they've, they've shut down my gambling operation.  I don't know if he was booking horses or policy or what.  I don't think that policy was a white thing, so it was probably either he was running a gambling operation either for cards and dice and what have you, or it would have been for horses, or all, or all of the above.  Anyway, so the police shut him down, probably at some time where there was--he probably fell out with the--some local politician at that time, and so he got shut down.  Well, he didn't have any interest in the restaurant business.  It was just a cover for the gambling joint in the basement.  So once the gambling joint was closed down, then he had no use for the restaurant.  So he told my Aunt Birdie, who was working in the restaurant for him, that he--that if she wanted it he could--she--he would sell her the restaurant.  And so the question was how much, and so he said $700.  So she didn't have $700, but her nephew, who would be my father [Leon Finney, Sr.], she thought would.  And so she got a hold of my dad, who was working at some factory here in Chicago, trying to figure out what he was gonna do, whether he was gonna go in the Army and Navy, or what have you, see the world and maybe change his social whatever.  Anyway, my, my dad came by and looked at the restaurant, and called his father, T. J. Huddleston, and told him that he had this opportunity to buy this restaurant and send him $700.  And so my grandfather, T. J. Huddleston, sent my grand--my father $700, or maybe a little bit more, and he went into business, and that was it.  And then, of course, I was with my mom [Atline Tyler].  My mom left Mississippi to come and help him in the restaurant and left we--me--with my--her father, my--who would have been my paternal grandfather, Ellis Tyler, and I was there.  Now I'm thinking that this is, this is about '39'-ish [1939] to '40' [1940] when they went into business.  So then--so she comes to Chicago, leaves me in Mississippi with my, my, my grandparents, and they get started in business.  And then I guess two or three years later, of course, she contracted tuberculosis.  But anyway, my dad got started that way, and he's been in business ever sense.  And so my mom left Mississippi following my father, and I came here following my mom and my father.
Speaker 1: Now was it initially a barbecue--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --business?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's always been a barbecue business.
Speaker 2: Always been Leon's Bar-B-Q.
Story_ID: 80739
Speaker 1: So, I want you to kind of think back and reflect on the neighborhood you lived in, and give us a sense of what that was like, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, there--essentially, I grew up, grew up on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] for much of my life, except for a brief period time, maybe three or four years that I spent in Nashville, Tennessee.  So let's talk about Chicago South Side, whether I was living in Woodlawn, or in Groveland Park, or, or on 51st and King Drive, or as far away as 94th and, 94th and Forest.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: Forest South in fact--
Speaker 1: --moved that many times in your--
Speaker 2: --meaning that--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, not, not, not as much moving, but remember now, I'm a kid with no mom, with a father [Leon Finney, Sr.] who is in business.  So I'm--it's not so much moving in movement, as it is in, in staying with my, my family members, 'cause somebody's gotta care for me.  You follow me?  I'm a kid; my dad's got a booming business; somebody's gotta care for me.  So my caregivers--all right, that's the way to look at it--would have lived on the South Side of the city of Chicago.  My Aunt Birdie, my Aunt Diella, the main caregivers lived on the South Side.  My dad, once he got remarried, lived on the South Side of the city of Chicago.  And so I'm very familiar with the South Side of the city of Chicago from the, from roughly 35th Street on the north to basically I would say 71st Street.  That was the primary area that I grew up in.  Any address, it was in and around there, it was (unclear) with a relative.
Story_ID: 80740
Speaker 1: It was pretty much a little black metropolis.  We could do almost everything that we wanted to do on 63rd Street, meaning that we could shop up and down 63rd Street, from Stony Island all the way to Halsted.  There were stores, shops, not necessarily owned by blacks, but there were shops that were all over that we could go.  And that was a big long shopping district, 63rd Street, the 63rd Street that I grew up in.  And we could go to the movies, because there were plenty of movie houses on 63rd Street or in and around 63rd Street, and so you could go to the movies.  There were plenty of, of cultural things and places.  There were ballrooms and, and social gathering places in and around the South Side of the City of Chicago.  There were great churches up and down King Drive that blacks were going to, so--and there were schools that were either the public schools or the, the Catholic schools.  And so, pretty much on the South Side that I knew, one did not necessarily have to venture too far out of what you would call the black belt in order to have a--to feel fulfilled.  There were restaurants everywhere.  If we--the restaurants were not on the main drag, meaning 63rd Street, they would be on 47th Street, they would be on 51st Street, they would be on 55th Street.  The major street of 60--of 63rd would be pretty much white-owned and operated businesses, pretty much, and the, the, the sub-streets, the sub-arterial streets: 61st Street, 58th Street, 55th Street, 40--51st Street, 47th Street, 43rd Street, 41st, 39th, and 35th--of my life.  That's where you would find the black businesses.  They would be the cleaners; they would be the restaurants; there would be the taverns; the juke joints and what have you, they would be on those streets.  But now, so, my--I guess what I was saying is about pretty much everything that we wanted to do we could do within the black community, and much freedom, with exception of every now and then you'd have a run-in, a row, with, with, with white cops or white police.  There may be whatever.  But then you had great blacks in those days, black policemen.   Two-Gun Pete [Sylvester Washington] was around and his legendary reputation.  And then you had the Bill Dawson, who was the congressman and you know.  And so there was a sense of political power--empowerment in this black metropolis too.  So there was a fair, I think, degree of, of social movement.  And in those days, the schools and what have you were pretty much black in the area that I grew up in.  They--though there would be white teachers, the schools--the, the student body would be pretty, pretty black in the area that, that I grew up in on the South Side of this, of the, of the city of Chicago.  And the, the, the, the divisions between social classes were relatively minimal, because you had poor people, poor blacks, living right next door to people who had some professional means or some professional degrees.  We all were here together, and so you had a fair degree of mixing among economic groupings that were in the black community, and--which was not untypical pretty much to what had happened in the South or wherever.  Integration brought about I think--once the era of integration occurred, where, where blacks could move and, and live legally wherever, I suspect that you found--you would find that blacks began to group themselves by classes: we over here; we over here in Chicago, and we didn't have the schools to reintegrate them.  You follow me?  So--by neighborhood.  So anyway, the neighborhoods that I grew up in the maids, and the doctors, and the carpenters, and the street sweepers, we all lived together, and I would say fairly successfully.  Now, I would suspect that there--if there was significant division, it would be division around color, what hue you were, whether you were medium brown or chocolate brown, or whether you were black.  Divisions would be around hair, and sometimes you would find some education, but it wasn't there for me that much.  Now, my predecessors ta--talked to me about the color line being very, very pronounced in the African-American community, but it wasn't so much when I--as I was growing up.  And hair texture, that was very, very important, good hair and bad hair.  That wasn't what I grew up with in the South Side of the City of Chicago that I know of.  The, the--so that was pretty much what it was like.
Story_ID: 80741
Speaker 1: Now what about religion?  Did you go to church a lot when you were--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --church very--church was always very important.  Coming out of a Southern background, I think that church was very, very important in my er--wherever I was and in whatever time.  Going to church on Sunday, being actively involved in church was very, very important, and whether I was going to Catholic schools, where I went to St. Anselm's, or if I was going to public schools, I had to go to church, had to go to church; Sunday morning, have to go to church plain and simple.  And in some instances, I would be involved in certain social activities that were church driven.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: I got a lot in--I got into a lot of that for the period of time that I went to Nashville cente--Nashville, Tennessee to--when my father remarried to, to Deloris Gene Moreland, my stepmother, I went to live with her parents for a brief period of time, about three to four years.  And in that period of time, I had another whole experience around this black community, and this is in Nashville, Tennessee.  And in Nashville, Tennessee, say from '49' [1949] to '52' [1952] or '53' [1953], somewhere in that, I was, was I think really introduced to a fairly intense involvement with, with, with the church.  And we were-- I was part of the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] denomination, African Methodist Episcopal in Nashville, Tennessee.  And in, again, what I found in Nashville, Tennessee, was not too different from what I find here in Chicago and that was a black community, and it was, it was called North Nashville.  And in North Nashville the blacks lived, and everything we needed was pretty much there just like it was here in--on the South Side of Chicago.  Our shows were here, our restaurants, our drugstores, our shopping districts, had a lot of things that were there, and our schools.
Story_ID: 80742
Speaker 1: But anyway, as it relates to the formative, the impact of religion on me, my sense is and was that early on, it was always this affirmation in my growing up and development, that you got to be involved in church.  Now it took me awhile to understand religion.  But at least on the early period, I realized that I had to be in church, and that there was a God, and God was important in my life, and I had certain social morays, and certain things, religious principles or what have you I had to adhere to because they were God-given.  And so in that particular instance, my sense was that, that religion was important.  And as I developed, the older I got, obviously, the--as most kids do, the further and further I got away from going to church every Sunday.  And so by the time I was eighteen years old, I wasn't going to church too much anymore.  I'd sort of drifted away because I didn't have to go to Sunday school, hadn't had to get up, and nobody was making me go to church.
Story_ID: 80743
Speaker 1: On that same note, though, what, what, what kinds of things did you like to do when you were a kid when you were coming up?  You know, what kind of games did you like, books, sports?  What did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Well, growing up, the things that I loved to do, obviously, as most boys, I loved the cowboys and the Indian games.  And I could--I remember playing out in the fields cowboys and Indians.  I remember break--taking branches off of trees and building myself or making myself a bow and arrow.  I remember going out in the fields and getting dried weeds that growing up in the fields, pulling them up and making arrow--making arrows for my bow and arrow.  And I remember bending pop bottle tops around the, the stalks of weeds, and now I've got a real arrow that, that can pierce things.  So I remember that vividly.  I remember making--
Speaker 1: Did you ever shoot anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, sure, sure I shot those arrows, we'd shoot 'em up in air (unclear).  I remember those great games we used to play.  And I remember making skateboards out of the used roller skates and making myself a skateboard, and then a skateboard cycle, would get a two-by-four, a two-by-four piece wood, cut it and then put the skates--take a--separate one skate and use one, one of the separated skates for a foot and put the heel on one end and the toe on the other end, and, and nail it into the board, and then I got a skateboard.  And I would put a milk crate--in those days, the wooden milk crates were still around, and I would nail a milk crate into the board, and so then I'd have my little storage area.  And then you'd have a handle that would come up on that the milk crate was fastened to, and then had another piece of wood.  Now I'm in good shape.  I've got my, my skateboard, and then you gotta decorate it.  So we would put milk top, we would put pop tops around the side as if they were reflectors and things like that, and we would pretend we had a motorcycle.  And we would have great fund riding down the, riding down the--in the streets.  You wanna ride in the streets because you didn't wanna have the sidewalk, because the sidewalk you had the scored lines, ridges and so.  You gotta get--gotta ride in the streets.  I mean we would have good time doing that.  I remember that vividly, and it was great fun doing that--
Story_ID: 80744
Speaker 1: I remember, I remember some of my friends and I jumping off of--we were over at St. Anselm School.  And at St. Anselm School one day we decided we were gonna parachute.  And so we got, we got a, an umbrella, you know one of these big black umbrellas with the handle.  That was set for us to parachute (laughter) off of a, the first-story--first floor.  I guess the school was, it was--the first floor was over a basement so it was kind of high, maybe about ten feet.  You know, this was big for, for a kid.  That's a lot--maybe twelve, at the max twelve, so we decided we're gonna jump off (laughter) of this.  (Laughter) So we got the umbrella and jumped of the porch.  The umbrella went up--bam! (Laughter) So--
Speaker 2: How many were--that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --kind of sting your feet a little bit, you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: How many were tested umbrellas (unclear) (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Everybody--see, about three or four then, you know, we did it and then everybody said, well, you're not doing it right, so another guy would come over and he would try (laughter).  So after about four or five of us did us--three or four of us did it, (unclear) this is not a parachute.  And then you know we'd build (unclear) in the alley and throw a rope over a tree and have a real tire swing.  I mean you did those kinds of things, where you build a swing on one rope with a, with an old tire, old flat tire, you'd get it.  And, and I remember doing vividly as I was a kid.  I remember shooting marbles.  That was a great game.  I used have, I used to have--I would--by the time I was playing, they had developed a pair of pants, jeans, that had a knee pad in it.  And the knee pad would--so I would wear out the, the, the top shooting marbles and get through the knee pad.  I would still be down to the skin trying to shoot marbles.  But it was--I was great.  I loved to play marbles, and I loved to accumulate vast quantities of marbles in marbles games, and I was pretty good at it.  I could shoot with a steely; I could shoot with a bowler; I could shoot in--I could shoot the marble and, and make it stay in a circle so that it wouldn't go out, and I can keep on shooting marbles.  I was--I loved to play marbles.  It was a form of, real form of fun for me.  And then I remember playing mumble peg and root the peg.  Those are great things with--you'd have a knife and a gr--best way, of course, was to have one of those Boy Scout knives that had the several different--had three or four different blades in it and--oh, boy, we would do that.  And that was--of course, you would start with various positions of the knife that you would try to make sure it stuck in the ground.  And you would start out with maybe your toe, and you'd put the knife on your toe.  And you'd flip the knife down, and it would flip over and it'd stick in the ground.  And then you'd do it from your toe to your knee and (laughter)--knee, and your arm, and your elbow, and then all of it--the head, nose, the head, just great games.  And now, whoever lost, of course, they would have to root the peg, which mean that if you missed, if you, if you missed and you were the last one in the game after having not gone through the whole entire process of, of the mumble peg or root the peg--root--mum--root the peg, then what would happen is that you would have to do the unthinkable, and that is we would cut a, a, a, a piece of--little piece of wood, and this became a peg.  And then all the players, we'd put the play again, and all the players who played, except the one who lost, got to hit the peg and drive it into the ground, unless you drove it in the ground it would get shorter and shorter and shorter.  Now the guy who lost, would have to get down with his teeth, and he'd have to pull the peg out of the dirt (laughter). So these are great games.  These are games of kids--I mean no money involved; marbles, no money; skateboards, no money.  Then in the wintertime, it was, it was--wintertime, it was sled time.  And do it--did we love the sled.  I mean we loved to get a sled.  And we would get, get our sleds out, and we would run down the street and flop down and just skid along the, skid along the roadway in--on our sleds.  And that was great fun, finding a place wherever the streets were relatively not--you know, it didn't have a lot of snow on 'em, you know, not traveled a lot; side streets and sled, that was great fun.  Ice skating was great fun.  I grew up as a kid having great playtime, and then later on it would be to go to the par--go to the swimming pool.  This is after were getting up in the ten, eleven, twelve--go in the swimming pool, and then staying in the swimming pool all day long at either Washington Park--just swimming and, and throwing each other in water, water and running off the dive, the high diving board, and doing the bomb, touching your feet, tucking yourself under and bam, you hit the water.  That was great fun as a kid, and I loved to do that along with other kids.  And then you get into water fights and what have you.  And at the end of the summer, after being in the water all summer, we--our--we--our skin would be almost parched, 'cause we--you know the water magnifies itself when it's on your body and you got out in the heat of the sun, so we'd just be parched.  You'd see our eye would be red and our faces would be purple (laughter), deep hues of, of darkness.  But it was great fun, you know, growing up and being a kid then and free of really, you know, just of, of any care about anything other than, obviously, maybe now and then you'll have a little bully around, you know, that wanted to bully people around, but there was this big kid that decided he want, he wanted to bully.  But you know, growing up and being a kid was great fun for me and great games and great, great activities that we just invented on our own--
Story_ID: 80745
Speaker 1: Then going to the show we loved; I loved to go to the show, whether I was taken to the show or what have you.  And I can remember going to the NRA Theater.  That was a great story, the national rat alley (laughter).  National rat alley was at 57th.  It would have been at 57th (unclear)--5738 South Prairie.  This was right next door to one of them places my dad later owned as an after hour place.  But the national rat alley, and they had--you could go to the national rat alley I think for maybe a dime or a--I don't remember exactly, probably 15 cents, and they called it--it was the NRA.  That was the name of the theater, NRA.  Now, while I'm not that familiar with this, that--I think it stood earlier for the--NRA meant I guess at that time the National Recovery Act.  That would have been a new deal program under President Franklin Delano Roosevelt.  But anyway, so we had this NRA Theater, and we called it the national rat alley because it was full of rats.
Story_ID: 81331
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  Now you went to Catholic school initially, right, St. Anselm?
Speaker 2: I went to St. Anselm's [St. Anslem School, Chicago, Illinois].  I went to St. Anselm's grammar school.  I went to Willard grammar school for a second.  I went to Burnside grammar school, and I went to Willard grammar school for a minute, and I went to--that was it.  And--
Speaker 1: Can you spell St. Anselm's for us?
Speaker 2: St. Anselm's, A-N-S-E-L-M-N-S, St. Anselm's.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) I think it's...I'm not sure (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's been a long time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: But anyway--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --yeah, I went to these grammar schools--
Speaker 1: You went, went to four different ones?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to those, again, following the caregivers with that after my mom [Atline Tyler] died.  And so, but I had a good education.  My dad [Leon Finney, Sr.] thought at, at the time, we should--I think that for blacks, we should focus a little bit on St. Anselm's.  I remember my dad left the South because for social reasons, not for employment, but for social reasons.  Why would he put me in the Catholic schools when I got here?  Well, my dad thought that education was very important.  And my dad was pretty clear that, in his mind, in his time, which would have been in the '40's [1940s], that the best education that you could send your kid to, in the North even, was into a Catholic school.  And so my dad wanted me to go to the best school, and so he sent me to Catholic school, St. Anselm's.  Because he thought that there I would get a superior education than that than was--that I might get in public schools.  So--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --already--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so already there's this sort of debating going on in the black community of that time that there's some schools that are good schools, but there are certain schools that are better schools.  And for those who really want to have their kids get a really great education, send them to Catholic schools, and that's what my dad initially sent me.  Now fortunately--unfortunately, I didn't--not unfortunately, I may be fortunate in a manner.  I wasn't able to stay because I--the Catholic school got to be too far for our caregiver to bring me to.  So I had to then leave the Catholic school for a while and go into public schools.  But an important thing I think for the history is the debate that was--would have gone on in the black community around public education and of education in the early '40's [1940s] and early to mid '40's [1940s], and it is--well, in the '40's [1940s] period--and it is, is it better to go to a public school or to go to a private school, and if it's a private school, what private school?  Catholic schools were he superior schools in the city of Chicago thought by of such by blacks.  And so that's what--that's why my dad put me for the first four years of my schooling, I was in St. Anselm's.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you know, in Chicago, and probably in the other major cities, I know it is true in Chicago that Catholic schools are the schools that are attended by the people in power, Irish Catholics basically.  You know, do you think that, that, that influenced his--
Speaker 2: I don't know what--
Speaker 1: --people think about--
Speaker 2: All I know, I, I think that my dad was, was impressed by quality.  I'm not sure that he was--had made the empowerment hookup and the linkage hookup, you know, in the relationship.  After you go graduate from grammar school, then you go to a Catholic high school.  You keep on and you're hooked into that sort of Catholic network.  I don't think that was so much where he was.  I think he was after a qualitative side to this whole thing.  So anyway, I mean I think that that's probably the best part, Larry [Crowe], to lift up about that early school and that was--and then when my dad--the other side of it, my dad began to think that I needed to be in a different kind of environment in school.
Story_ID: 81332
Speaker 1: So my dad [Leon Finney, Sr.] made a (unclear) decision that I would leave my aunt, great-aunt, who was not that literate, did not get out of grammar school.  And she was my caregiver, right.  So he said, wait a minute.  I think that for my son's development, he needs to go and be around more literate people.  Now my Great Aunt Birdie was a great woman, loved me to death.  But I think that he began to worry that I might not get the best in education and get the kind--bet--the best kind of support that he thought that I needed.  And so he nother--made another critical decision, and that was he went--he decided to send me to Nashville, Tennessee.  And Nashville, Tennessee, already at that time had Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], had A and I State University [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial University, currently Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] had Meharry Medical School [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], right.  And so for blacks that was a place where blacks were affirming education; there's a culture about education there.  And so I went and I stayed three or four years there, and I went to grammar school there. And--but I was in a nurturing aca--environment that nurtured me academically.
Story_ID: 81333
Speaker 1: And then when my dad [Leon Finney, Sr.] thought that I'd--he'd gotten--I had gotten as much out of that, that, that experience that I could get, I was stable, I was doing well in school, good report cards, he then made another critical decision, and that was move me back from Nashville, Tennessee, to Chicago [Illinois].  And where to in Chicago?  The district that I should have gone to high school was Englewood, Englewood [Technical] High School here in Chicago.  But my dad was not convinced that Englewood was the best school.  And so he searched around and talked to his friends and discovered that the best high school in the city of Chicago, public high school in the city of Chicago, or even private for that matter--because there was a debate whether to send me to lab school, the University of Chicago, or to what I la--later went to, Hyde Park High School.  And when I was in Hyde Park High School from 1954, '53' [1953], '54' [1954] through the time I graduated, Hyde Park High School was the best public high school in the city of Chicago and in metro Chicago, only challenged by New Trier [High School, Winnetka, Illinois], which was a surbu--suburban school and was rated ahead of the University of Chicago High School Lab School [Chicago, Illinois].  So my dad sent me to Hyde Park High School.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that's interesting.  We've interviewed other people that, that told us that they actually were kept from going to Hyde Park, even though they lived in closer proximity to Hyde Park than they did Englewood, and had to catch--had a long bus ride to Englewood because, you know, the white community guarded Hyde Park, sort of, as a place that, that they didn't wanna see overrun with black population.  That's what--
Speaker 1: Well, I think that that might very well--I don't know about that, but I know that my dad, Leon Finney, Sr., made a decision that his son, Leon Finney, Jr., was gonna go to the best grammar school, which was St. Anselm's in his judgment.  And when he was not convinced that I was in a good learning environment with one of my great-aunts who loved me and who cared for me and was a powerful influence in my life, he moved me to Nashville, Tennessee, that so that I could be in a, in an academically enriching environment.  And then when he thought that I had gotten what I needed out of that environment, he brought me back to Chicago and did not send me to Englewood High School.  He sent me to Hyde Park High School, and he was able to persuade one of his friends who worked in one of our business establishments, Mercedes (ph.) Hale, who lived at 4901 S. Kimbark in Kenwood part of Hyde Park to allow to him to use her address so that I could go to Hyde Park High School, because my--our place of residence was 6121 South Rhodes, which put me clearly in the Englewood.  Now, I don't have any idea or clear--about this business about whites guarding Hyde Park.  What I suspect is that, that Englewood had for social reasons one may want to go to Englewood, and that may kid inspired.  You follow me?--very black and everybody was over there, and it was a what was happening school, you know.  But my dad wasn't into that.  Hyde Park was not the most what's happening school for blacks.  It was for anybody, the best academic school.  So that wa--the idea for me being able to socialize and have a whole lot of fun or be in the activities that were, that were culturally enriching from an African American afr--from affirming blackness.  You wouldn't have said that was at Hyde Park.  But to go and have and learn the critical thinking skills that are necessary for survival or have them refined and honed, there was no comparison between Hyde Park and Englewood.  Hyde Park was a place to go.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just a couple of things.  I think what we were told a couple of days ago by another person interviewed that, that a city [Chicago, Illinois] had gerrymandered the school district so that the black--where, where, where the black population sort of kind of cut off, they would, they would all go to Englewood, I mean or most of them would go to Englewood.
Speaker 1: There's no doubt about that.
Speaker 2: And yeah.
Speaker 1: There's no doubt about it.
Speaker 2: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Cottage Grove, Cottage Grove was the dividing line.  Well, blacks lived right up to Cottage Grove, so that meant everybody west of Cottage Grove had to go to Englewood, and everybody east of Cottage Grove had to go to Hyde Park.  You follow me?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Unless you were able to get an address, unless you were able to move east of Cottage Grove.
Speaker 2: And there were no magnet schools in those days--
Speaker 1: No, no, oh no--
Speaker 2: --or something like that.
Speaker 1: --oh no, oh no.
Speaker 2: Then, then the other thing, we didn't talk about this be--earlier, but did your father go to college?  Did, did--
Speaker 1: Just a little (unclear) courses and (burp)--
Speaker 2: Okay.  I didn't know.
Speaker 1: But he had a healthy appreciation for college.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 81334
Speaker 1: So and, and I wanted to ask you how--now you moved around quite a bit in your, your academic life as a youngster.  How did that make you feel, and was it hard to adjust, you know, to several schools in the city and then going to Nashville, then coming back to the city [Chicago, Illinois]?  I mean was that hard to adjust to that?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I think the biggest adjustment that I had to make when I was a kid was the loss of my mom [Atline Tyler].  Everything else was sort of downhill from there.  So once I learned how to live without having my mother, I think that I became an adaptable kid that could be comfortable as I went, went one place.  And always remember now, there was a strong thread of my dad [Leon Finney, Sr.] everywhere I was, and so I was never ever in a sort of abandoned place.  So my dad was always there.  He was always checking on my grades.  He was always intimately involved with my life.  And at the end of the day, we look at the caregivers, and they were two great-aunts, both of whom were sisters, and a, a, a, a, a grandmother who was a step-grandmother; those are three women.  So I might have moved a lot, but there was a consistency there, a family consistency there with my two great-aunts, Aunt Diella and Aunt Birdie, who both lived on the South Side.  And they were, they were very close, and they were close to my dad, and then this grandmother who--the step-grandmother who was in Nashville, Tennessee.  And they were both great caregivers.  So my point is and I think that, that the love and the support that they gave me was enormous.  And so I grew up very, very healthy as a kid, not very duplicitous, not hostile, and not walking around with a lot of anger in me because I had to move and then too I had to make adjustments.  And I was pretty good at making new friends and, and--or friends period.  And just why?  I don't know.  But I think that early on, somehow or another I was, I was comfortable enough with who I was, and what I was, and what I was about that I could sit down and parlay and strike a relationship with people pretty easily.  And I've always been able to do that if I chose to do that.  Now sometimes I can be very reticent, but, but that reticence is never imposed by my fear of being able to be in relationships with other folk.
Story_ID: 81335
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what did you like to--in, in, in school?  What did you--what, what subjects did you like, and did you encounter any teachers that were mentors or any other--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I can re--oh yeah.  Sister Ingcarnatta, of course, at St. Anselm's [St. Anslem's School, Chicago, Illinois] was one tough cookie (laughter).  I remember her--
Speaker 1: How do you spell her name?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know.
Speaker 1: Say it again (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sister Ingcarnatta, I-N-G-C-A-R-N-A-T-T-A.
Speaker 1: Ingcarnatta, like--
Speaker 2: Sister Ingcarnatta.
Speaker 1: Like incognito sort of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  But anyway, you got an "a" at the end of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Anyway, Sister Ingcarnatta, she was a tough cookie.  I had her for two years.  Then God blessed me, and I had Sister Omealiha, and I loved her (laughter), 'cause she was--
Speaker 1: Can you say that name again?
Speaker 2: Omealiha.
Speaker 1: Omealiha?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Omealiha.  I guess it's O-M-E-M--O-M-E-A-L-I-H-A, or something like that--been a long time.  But sister Omealiha, now she was--I had her for two years.  She was great, because she was not so abrasive as Sister Ingcarnatta.
Speaker 1: So they carried the rulers like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, this way (laughter), this way.  And so, if, if you, if you misbehaved, if you got two fisher--(unclear)--if you did not focus, whatever.  Now, if you didn't--if you try to do your work and couldn't do it, that was a different question.  But if you got too busy and, and were easily distracted and did things which were not appropriate, then you could get a little good whacking.  And later on, I mean I remember corporal punishment over at Willard [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] the period of time I was there.  Sister, ma--Mrs. McCalpine (ph.), and she had a huge ruler, and take the hands, you know, because you were--and because I was fairly aggressive in terms of action, I mean I was just a, an active kid, I would, I would find myself in trouble not infrequently, and have to go before the bar of justice and have (laughter), have justice meted out in the painful, painful or pain of ruler.  But the point was that those were relatively few instances, and, and they were all related to not, not being focused on what I was supposed to do, playing, talking, you know, whatever, bringing something into the room I shouldn't have brought in, you know, bringing a bird in from my pocket, you know, all kinds of crazy stuff that boys do, not getting, getting back into the room at the right time, you know, staying late, too late out on the playing ground, whatever, you know, losing my coat, you know, all kinds of old crazy stuff--hats--that you get a spanking for.  So that was the kind of stuff.  But I was pretty much a quick learner, was a bright kid, and so I never got any challenges around my academic (unclear).  If you--if I got--if you got my attention I was gonna do the work.
Story_ID: 81336
Speaker 1: Okay, now in, in, in high school, what were you like in high school?  Did you, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, wow, in high school, high school was just a great place for me.  I, I discovered a whole new world by high school, and I, I discovered girls now.  They're no longer something that you pull on their pigtails and stick their pigtails in inkwells and stuff like that with, you know, which all of which I did (laughter), shooting rubber bands at across the room.  Those things that I really--before you got into high school, I was really an avid practitioner of disruptive behavior around girls (laughter).  But by the time I got into high school, then it was time to chill out.  And so then there were the, there were the social activities.  There were the parties, the teen parties; the--there was the senior variety; there was the speaking stuff, the (unclear); there was a track team; there--you know, the swim team.  There were just activities, and I was just bursting with stuff that I could do and be a part of.  And there were the buddies, and so I had a good, I think, a good run in high school.  Hyde Park was good for me.  I went just briefly to Pearl High School in Nashville, not long.  But high school was the defining school for me, Hyde Park High School.  And I had great friends there, made great lifelong friends there, Conrad Worrill [HM], Allison [S.] Davis, right on down to today, Andrew Preer--still great--Marva--I'm trying to learn--I mean I have numbers of great friends that I've--that have been enduring lifelong friends for me that I met in high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--as you mentioned some of the people, it seems as though that generation of people that came out of Hyde Park is very close, you know, and they, they talk about each other all the time here in the city.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So there's been some kind of a golden age of Hyde Park.
Story_ID: 81337
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that for some of us it would have been the first generation of kids that were up from the South that, that had an opportunity to, to experience a sense of openness of parents who were up from the South.  For parents of kids who'd been here longer, it was an era after the war, Second World War, and even the Korean conflict, that now things are open.  Blacks are return--have returned home, bought homes in the North, you know, begun to kind of take root, presh and press towards social and economic development, and to a certain degree, a nascent political development, not very strong.  We weren't doing a lot of politics, but I suspect that underneath our elders were deeply concerned about the political situation.  But us kids at that hour and that moment I don't think that we were that attuned to it.  We later on, by the time it was college time, we got into it, and then, of course, '55' [1955], you know, 1955 and "Brown vs. [Board of Education of] Topeka."  And then, then Martin Luther King [Jr.] burst onto the scene, and you know, in the late '50's [1950s], and then, you know, you get this whole Civil Rights Movement.  So, it got to define us.  Much of the definition for the blacks that I've--us blacks in high school, at the time I was in high school, up and through graduation happened after by virtue of the Civil Rights Movement as it took hold.  And we began to sense this great, great turbulence.  And that was underneath the relative calm that was in the Northern cities, I mean enormous amount of pent up frustration that many--in many instances the kids that were privileged enough to go to Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois] or some other places, we really weren't that into because we weren't doing the--we weren't the ones trying to get--buy the houses, nor we the ones trying to rent the apartments, nor were we the ones trying to get the jobs or get a promotion on the jobs.  You follow me?  We were not paying that much attention to the social, political, and economic strictures that were placed upon the African-American community.  But once, once the, the, the Civil Rights Movement began to take on, and once Brown--"Brown vs."--in my, my mind, I began to be more and more aware, here something's wrong out here, you know, something ain't quite right.  And so by, by hi--by, by the first year of college, something really is going on here; by second year of college, something's happening; by third year of college, you know.  So you began in the sense that hey, there's something wrong or something challenging out here.  And to be black is okay, but to be white is a privilege that you--that confers privileges that blacks don't have.
Story_ID: 81338
Speaker 1: But anyhow, back to the high school [Hyde Park High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I sense that it, for me, it was a good period.  Again, it was an opportunity for me to refine my critical thinking skills, which I hold to this day as crucial to almost all of life.  And those who have well developed critical thinking skills do well whether they ever finish college or not.  They do well because they've got it here, and that's what it takes.  Hopefully one does lose it by the time one gets through matriculating graduating college.  But anyway, I think that for me Hyde Park High School was a high point.  The social environment was a high one.  I got a chance to mingle with whites as--and, and blacks, and Hispanics, and Asians very, very early.  I got a chance to appreciate people who came from the Jewish faith community.  I got a chance to appreciate people who, who were poor.  I got to appreciate Irish, Irish Catholic, Poles.  We were all there at Hyde Park High School.  It was sort of like a, a pot that had not melted, you know, meaning that we were there.  There was a level of social integration--minimal dating between blacks and whites, but some.  You had some white girls that would date black boys, and certain black women, black women might date a white boy here or there.  But it was not an--was not something that happened a whole lot, but to study together, to be in study groups together, to work together in teams, debate team, all those kinds of things that were extracurricular active, thoroughly integrated.  It tended to break down, however--the integration tended to break down a bit when it came to the, the dating part of it and, and, and to the parties that were not parties, that the parties that were--like, blacks had a lot of black parties just for, and only blacks, and every now you may have a white that would drift in.  And whites had a lot of white parties, and every now then maybe a black would drift in.  So basically, when it came to, to our little social parties, our events that we would have, our clubs and stuff like that that were, that were developed because we were in high school together, we shared a certain common ethnicity, we tended to group together by race and, and keep that going.  But everywhere else, on the football we were thoroughly integrated, on the basket--all the team sports thoroughly integrated, a lot of respect there on the debate teams, on the science teams; all of that was thoroughly integrated.  It only got to be when you're talking about dating and then what we are preferences as related to who you're gonna party with, whose party are you gonna go to?  You follow me?  Whose music you gon' listen to, you know?  And of course those days blacks were pretty much listening to, listening to R and B [rhythm and blues] and doo-wop.  And whites had begun to get into Elvis Presley.
Story_ID: 81339
Speaker 1: Okay, just a word on, on Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] now.  Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois], I know that this was actually in the area of Chicago we consider Hyde Park.  That's the name Hyde--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --that--
Speaker 2: --Woodlawn, Woodlawn.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Hyde Park was in--
Speaker 1: --even in those days--
Speaker 2: Hyde Park--
Speaker 1: --they considered it Woodlawn?
Speaker 2: Hyde Park is in--Hyde Park High School is in the Woodlawn community.  It is in the--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Hyde Park Township.
Speaker 1: That's, that's part of the, the ques--my, my, my question.  Because I know when I came to Chicago, and I'm not trying to interject my, myself in--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --he discussion, but Hyde Park High School seemed to be in Woodlawn.  And I wondered in times past if that were not considered Hyde Park (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, here's the way, here's the way it works.  Hyde Park High School--well, first, if you look at the, if you look at the real estate property designation, there is something called on the Torens [Torrens] book [title], T-O-R-E-N-S, which is a real estate terminology that relates only to properties and subsections of property, real property, in this municipality, there's something called the Hyde Park Township, all right.  And in the Hyde Park Township is the community Woodlawn.  In the Hyde Park Township is the community of Hyde Park.  In the Hyde Park Township is the community of Kenwood.  In the Hyde Park Township is the community of South Shore.  In the Hyde Park Township is the community of, of South Shore--Park Manor.  I'm, I'm not sure.  But anyway, there are several sub-communities, communities that are in this township that no longer functions as a township because it elects no mayor or anything like that.  It's now just--it's no longer a political district--place.  It's just only for the purpose of tracking real property.  Now, Hyde Park High School has always been in the Woodlawn community, right, that's since it's very beginning.  Hyde Park High School always, up through 1967 or '68' [1968]--67' [1967] I think--served Hyde Park and Woodlawn and South--and So--Hyde Park, the Hyde Park community, the Woodlawn community, and the Kenwood community, all right.  So all of those communities that would have been to its north up to roughly 47th Street, Hyde Park High School would serve them, all the way to roughly 67th Street, all right.  Hyde Park High School would serve--or 71st Street Hyde Park High School would serve those communities.  You follow me?  So, it was the high school on the southeast side of the City of Chicago, which I think when you look at the geography, it's close to the lake, meaning also that you're gonna find a greater incidence of affluence in those areas.  And so, and you would also found the great University of Chicago right there in Hyde Park.
Story_ID: 80755
Speaker 1: Okay, Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: HP, good old Hyde Park High School.  Well, like I said, it was, it was a pot that you had a whole lot of people in, different ethnic backgrounds, very, very culturally rich.  And I think that my dad [Leon Finney, Sr.] made a wise decision when he brought me back and enrolled me.  As illegal as it was, it was by--I was not supposed to be at Hyde Park.  I was supposed to be in Englewood.  And incidentally, I had a cousin, Warren Jones, who went on to get a PhD, that did quite well at Englewood [Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois], graduated from Englewood, went on to Northern Illinois University, got a bachelor's, bachelor's degree, masters, and doctorate degree.  He had a doctorate degree before he was thirty, like something like twenty-seven.  So I won't--I don't wanna bash Englewood, but I wanna say that my dad was so intent on making sure that I had the best opportunity for a high-quality education, and I think subliminally would be in a integrated situation, if not sub--if not overt, certainly subliminally, that he thought that I would be better affirmed as to who I was and what I was to be by being at Hyde Park High School.  Now that is not in any way, as far as I'm concerned, to suggest that an all-black Englewood or an all-black high school is not just as good.  But it was my father's perception that given my age, I had to live with.  And I think at the end of day, my dad was right for me.  And the friends that I met and associates that I met, as I've said before, are lifelong associates.  The skills that I developed in terms of being able to effectively deal with other races, other ethnic groups, to give them their quarter, but also to be able to demand the quarter that has to be a quarter to me as an African American I think, in part, were, were developed.  Those skills, social skills, were developed at Hyde Park High School.
Story_ID: 80756
Speaker 1: We had social groupings, as I said.  We had--at, at, at Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] we had my friends--all of my male friends, we were part of the Lochinvars Boys Club.  It was like a young men's club, Lochinvars.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that?  You know I'm gonna--
Speaker 1: L-O-C-H-I-N-V-A-R-S, Lochinvars, after Sir Walter Scott's Lochinvar.  Anyway, we were in this club, and it was a social club.  And in that social club I met lifelong friends.  And now I would say that that social club for young men, it did not just attract young men from Hyde Park, though principally, it was a Hyde Park High School group.  We did attract young men from Tilden [Career Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and from other-Parker [Francis W. Parker High School, Chicago, Illinois]--high schools as well.  But the important thing that we had this social club, and that became the center of much of our social activity.   The girls were part of the--and these are African Americans I should say.  [Cough] The African-American girls, or young women, were part of the Lassies, and they had their Lassies, L-A-S-S-I-E-S.  And so the Lochinvars and the Lassies, these were black social clubs for black young men and black young women who were at high school age.  And it helped us to, again, affirm we are and what we were in a social non-threatening atmosphere.  And so the idea was to have social events and to do civic things that were important.  Mr. Wilkins was, was, was, was our sponsor.  And we used to meet over at St. Paul's Lutheran Church at--in the 4900 block of Dorchester.  Later on that church would burn down, but we would meet there in its nice Lutheran Church rectory.  And we would plan our social events and, and pledge new people.  We operated almost as like a fraternity to us.  We would have Hell Week, and we would do modest hazing, no beating and anything like--modest hazing and more embarrassing kinds of stuff than physical beating, and we did none of that.  But anyway, you pledged and you became a Lochinvar.  And we had our little pins and little insignias and little meetings every Sunday.  At 1:30 we had our, our club meeting.  And that was a good thing for us.  And we passed it on to--we always had an intake process that would get the next group of--you had to be I think a junior to even--a sophomore to pledge.  And it was a good thing.
Story_ID: 80757
Speaker 1: And in that social activity we got to meet and put forth activities; get, for instance, the first time I met Dizzy Gillespie we had a party at the Sutherland Hotel.  And the Sutherland Hotel had a ballroom in the ground level, kind of you step down three stairs or four into what would be not quite a basement, basement, but a ground level.  And we had--I'm trying to struggle to remember the name of that room--New Yorker Room--and we had our--Dizzy Gillespie, we had him there, and we had a big party there, and we invited him to be the featured artist.  One of my good friends, who is now deceased, and they went to Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois] with me and we graduated together, was Alden Lawson.  Alden was a big jazz enthusiast, and so obviously he was a main proponent of the jazz part of our social activity.  So he was the one who made contact with Dizzy Gillespie, along with another friend who's also dead and that's Billy Quinn.  Billy Quinn, who later on would become one of the editors of "DownBeat" magazine, he's now gone as well.  Alden would go on to be curator of African Ameri--African art, African and African-American Art at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  But anyway, we had this club called the Lochinvars and it became, again, a, a social outlet for the energy that we needed to release and to engage in a social context.
Story_ID: 80758
Speaker 1: Two questions I--how did you all come to call it the Lochinvars--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was--well, it was a name that--I don't know, 'cause we didn't start it.  It was passed on; there were other generations of Lochinvars.  Larry Landry, who was also very deeply involved in our, in our, in our group.  And Larry [Lawrence] Landry would later go on to be a major businessman in Washington, D.C.  But he was one of our senior--he was one of our junior counselors and junior sponsors.  He had been a Lochinvar.  And I don't know where it started, quite frankly, where the first group of Lochinvars--it was just sort of passed on, and I don't think that we, we did dwell a whole lot on its origin.  We dealt--I, I can't remember.
Story_ID: 80759
Speaker 1: But anyway, I, I became the secretary of the Lochinvars, and then--and to date I would--then I would later become the president of the Lochinvars.   And then I would later, of course, move on, and then someone else would be the, the president and what have you.  But the important thing was this was another place, an exponent of Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois], men that I grew up with, have still got lifelong friends, and of course young women who now are, are still very much lifelong women, I know them all.  Sandra Forney, Pat Pratt, and any number of them, we were in social contact with each other.  We dated, took each other out, you know, at the social parties.  If the Lassies gave something, then whatever, Yvonne Edwards, Andrea Dawson.  I can remember many of the young women who, most of them were from Hyde Park or from Parker High School [Chicago, Illinois] or from Morgan Park High School [Chicago, Illinois].  And we just had this ad--this extension of the black community, as it went to the disparate places where other high schools were beyond Hyde Park.
Story_ID: 80760
Speaker 1: But some would argue that this was a class thing.  I don't know how intentional it was a class thing.  I don't remember ever barring anybody out or blackballing anybody for class reasons.  But some may think that it was a way of collecting middle, middle income, or middle--so-called middle-class blacks and getting them involved in the social to sort of reinforce the middle class-ness, and that may very well have been.  Though I suspect that something else might very well been at--have been at play.  And many, many years ago, though I've not explored this thoroughly as a, as a, as, as a thinker, but there is--there has been in the black community for a long, long time, probably going all the way back to slavery, the notion of the talented tenth, that that ten percent of us, there's always a talented ten.  I think that there's a sort of anthro--anthropological sense, cultural anthropology, if you will, that every race presents, has a capability of producing at least a tenth of its if--of its, of its members as talented.  And I know that this was something that blacks, my forefathers and parents, grabbed and the rev--resonated this idea: find the talented ones of us and make sure that they good education 'cause they're gonna be our leaders.  You know, it has that sort of thing about this talented tenth.  And I think that maybe some of that was underneath these social clubs that had begun to develop for my, for my generation.  And perhaps they were, they were there under different rubrics or different names for other generations of African Americans, and that is the whole businesses--find the talented ones and make sure that we nurture them, and make sure that they get a good education, and make sure that they go on to be the leaders in our community.
Story_ID: 80761
Speaker 1: And so, yes?
Speaker 2: Were there any, any--now grades were the criteria too for membership, right?  You all had a certain grade point--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Had to have a certain GPA [grade point average], yeah you--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--were there poor--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you had to have a G--you had to have a GPA.
Speaker 2: Were there poor kids who--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --as, as members that actually didn't have any money, but had good grades.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I suspect so, but I'm no--I'm not--I don't know so.  And I kind--I'm sort of saying this the way I'm saying 'cause I really don't know.  Number one, some of the schools that we went to you had to work to get in.  Hyde Park, as you say, I suspect that you had to work to get into Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] because of the way the boundaries were drawn.  If you're African American and did not live in the, the district that had been, I think, gerrymandered as rightfully someone else, then, then you weren't gonna get to Hyde Park.  So you had to put forth the effort.  Well, who's gonna put forth the effort?  That's the question.  What kind of parent is gonna put forth the effort?  Now if you were a parent and you were gut poor, and you put forth the effort to get your kid into Hyde Park High School, it's likely that your Hyde Park School kid where he would be in the Lochinvars, that's the point.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You follow me?
Speaker 2: I, I, I understand.
Speaker 1: Because parents had to be serious about their kids.  So I'm just sort of laying that out there.  So if you were behind your kid, very supportive, what have you, the likelihood of him or her being in, in the, in, in the Lochinvars was, was, was, was, was highly probable.
Speaker 2: I suppose if you were poor and bright, you'd probably end up going to Englewood [Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois] anyway--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --because you wouldn't have--you wouldn't live in the district.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and the likelihood of a whole lot of Englewood--I don't think we had a whole lot of, of young men from Englewood that were in the Lochinvars.  I don't think so.  So my point is that some may say that it was an elitist place, that there was a certain elitism there.  I certain as a part of it don't remember being that.  I don't remember being elitist because my, my father [Leon Finney, Sr.] had gotten me there.  My father was a restaurateur.  My father was, was--sold al--sold liquor in our, in our after-hours place when we got that.  So I was hardly one of these sort of silver spoon blacks that might have been invited into it, but I was invited into it I think because I was at Hyde Park High School.  You follow me--and because my dad was meaningfully involved in my life and pushed me.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: It seems the color thing is not a factor in this either.
Speaker 1: No, I don't think so.  By then, color was not a (unclear).  Now I wouldn't say the same thing for the Lassies.  When you got to the young women, I think that you may have had some of this color thing that was, was, was, was there, but I'm not real sure, and I wouldn't wanna be held to it.
Story_ID: 80762
Speaker 1: Why do you think that that endures as just--this is just general talk.  It's not based on science or anything, but just, just observation of black communities.  It seems that the color, color consciousness around that is perpetuated more by women for some reason than, than men, I mean on a level.  May, maybe it is, but it's--maybe it's not, but I--it seems though women seem more, more conscious of that in their organizations than men do in their organizations.
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  I've not thought about that as a social scientist very much.  What I could say is that women tend to think--to, to, to think about where they believe men's preferences are around certain things.  And so my sense might be that there may be some of this thinking that comes from the perception that men, black men, prefer black women who look a certain way.  And therefore, if I'm gonna be in a relationship with black men, then I ought to look a certain way.  You follow me?  So I'm not sure that this is male inspired, rather than inspired solely by--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the fen--female gender.  That's, that, that would be the--my, my pushback on it.  Yes, I think that women may think more about how people look than the other way.  And that may be some of the driving, but the question is why--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --and, and is there some--is, is this in response to a subtly communicated male preference, preference--you follow me--that's communicated subtly enough for the women to pick up--pick it up and say okay, fine, you know.  And we're all gonna try to get--we're all gonna get married, 'cause ultimately all women wanna be married, period.  That's a broad statement that I--this big paint brush, but I think that it's generally the truth.  And so when we start looking for mating and what have you, I suspect that mating, there's a perception that the mating occurs by virtue of what the man what's out of the woman that he is going to mate with.
Speaker 1: I guess what I was getting to it just seems to be I guess in, in this discussion (unclear)--it may be two dynamics going on here, that men in their own organizations don't seem to--black men--don't seem to discriminate in terms of color, but men do, do seem to be--black men do seem to be very color conscious in terms of who they choose.
Speaker 2: There you go.  That, that was what I was trying to say, yes.
Speaker 1: Black women, in their organizations, tend to be more color con--conscious than who they choose, I mean
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: --because black women will, will choose a guy if a guy's successful, he's dark--
Speaker 2: Different criteria, not his color.
Speaker 1: --it doesn't make any difference, yeah.  So it's--
Speaker 2: It's interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is.
Speaker 2: Somebody needs to, somebody needs to delve into that one (laughter).  Anyway, I think I'm gonna put my heap--hip boots on and lay back out of that one, 'cause I really haven't thought about it enough to be that, that, that cogent about what, what, what my thoughts are, but I will think about it.
Story_ID: 80763
Speaker 1: But anyway, so in high school, and we've got these social groupings and integration in terms of classes, etc., is working.  Team sports is working.  Where it tended to break down was when it came to the dating and the socializing outside of the school act--school organized activities, that's where it broke down.  And we went--the blacks and--the blacks went their way; the Asians went their way; the Hispanics went their way, the few that there were there; and the whites went their way; and the Jews went their way.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now you--I know, know you talked about that er--earlier, but did you have any mentors at Hyde Park that you really considered important?  And, and what was the ratio of black teachers I guess--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, boy, black teachers over at Hyde Park was scarce as a hen's teeth; there were not a whole lot of 'em.  Mr. Long I remember, who was on the--in the, in the P.E. [physical education] department; Mrs. Turner, who was in the language department; and--I'm starting to draw a blank.  I suspect that of the entire faculty, we didn't have five percent of the entire faculty that were African Americans when I was at Hyde Park--say--yeah, I don't think so, '52' [1952] to '57' [1957].  I don't think there were--say when I got there in '53' [1953], I don't think there were five--I don't think five percent.  And I guess if I were to sit down with a fellow Hyde Park HP-er, I'd--we probably could dream up some more.  If I sat down with Connor and Worrill, Dr. Worrill, we would probably say okay, remember this one, remember that one, but they were very, very, very scarce-- a lot of Jewish teachers, a lot of Jewish teachers.
Speaker 2: A lot of students from the--who had links to the University of Chicago?
Speaker 1: Yes, a lot of students who had links with the University of Chicago, a lot of Jewish people, a lot of Jewish students.  It was a, a strong contingent to Jews at Hyde Park and some of my lifelong friends.  I mean I met a lot of Jewish people at Hyde Park.  And we've been--you know, we've--while we don't communicate, I would know them tomorrow.  And I would have great stories to tell about them and with them, and they'd have great stories about and with me.  And you know, we had great--we had a fair basketball team that tended to be dominated by the African Americans, 'cause we still were jumping higher and shooting better, even in those days.  I remember Tex Martin, and I remember Theodis (ph.) Garth, and I remember Jimmy Steele, and I remember George--I remember Mustafel (ph.), and I remember Jimmy McClory (ph.).  And you know, those are just a few guys that were on the basketball team that I remember.  And of course, later on Conrad got on the team.  Conrad Worrill [HM] was I think two years behind me.  I think he's on the class of '59' [1959], Dr. Conrad Worrill.  But anyway, he was a very, very able basketball player of his own, played guard, I think point guard.  Anyway, and he obviously was a good friend, and I met him there, and we would run the halls of Hyde Park High School.  And I don't know how I--how we got into having such a good lifelong fellowship, but I'm pleased to say that I know him.  And Conrad and Allison Davis, when I got married for the second time this last June, two of my high school classmates and in high school alums, fellow alums, were there in the wedding, Allison S. Stubbs Davis, who I still debate with these days; we still fall out.  And Conrad Worrill, and we still fall out, but we're still friends.  I just had an argument with Allison five days ago; probably had an argument with, with Conrad four weeks ago, but you know, that's what, what long-lasting friendships are all about.  We can fall out and still be able to, to come together at times when you need to be there.
Story_ID: 80764
Speaker 1: But anyway, high school--Hyde, Hyde, Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] was a powerful, powerful place.  And my sense is that it added to the intellectual quality of life for the young African Americans, as well as any other of the groups that were--it served.  I think that the Jews began--got an opportunity to look at blacks a little bit differently, as something other than maids, and that had intellection presence, as well as the blacks got an opportunity to display what they could do intellectually.  And we were part of the, the debate team.  We were not denied access to the Sigma Pi Phi's and, and the people who were the honor's people.  We had honors.  We had blacks who were in all of those honor's classes.  And we were there because we could compete well.  We were there because we had good thinking skills right along with the Jews and the Asians and, and the Irish.  We were still there.  We didn't have that many Hispanics, but we had a few.  So I felt that we--I became I think able to appreciate integration, although I--in Hyde Park High School, although I have found, later on in life, which will be a subject of another tape or another chapter, that integate--integration carries with it some down sides that I don't think that those of us who pushed for it at the time--who were pushing for it really realized what the down side of it might very well be, and thereby better prepare to offset the down side.
Story_ID: 80765
Speaker 1: But anyhow, this is a--it was a good run.  And the, the annual efforts around senior varieties, I never will forget those.  These were just--it was like on Broadway.  We'd have this sort of Broadway production, and Mr. Ramsfield (ph.), who was the, one of the choir--music directors--and I'm trying to research for the names.  But anyway, we would have this great production, almost like "Guys and Dolls," was whatever.  And there was such a powerful experience for me to work on a play set and be a part of the singing group, and be a part of the dancing group, and, and there'd be everybody in it, you know, irrespective of race, color, or creed.  Herbie Hancock [HM] was around at the same time.  And Herbie Hancock wasn't even playing the (unclear)--playing the bay--piano.  He was playing the bass fiddle [upright bass], and I remember him.  And Horace Webb, who went on to become special assistant to Elliot Richardson, who was then--who became the, the chairman of--not chairman--the Secretary of Commerce--no, Secretary of Education under one president, I'll--maybe--I don't (unclear)--maybe Nixon.  But any--no, not Nixon, he was a Democrat.  Anyway, we had people like that.  Mel Torme went to the Hyde Park High School.  Steve Allen, another, another performer became a TV star and--
Speaker 2: He, he was there before you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were there before me, but I'm just simply saying this is the Hyde Park High School kind of thing.  So, Mel Torme was there a lot of years before I was there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Herbie--but I later on learned in life that Herb Kent [HM] the cool gent was also a Hyde Parker when where I think that somebody did a 50th--50 or 60-year anniversary and Herb was there, but I think it was 50.  But Herb, Herb Kent was there.  And Leon Forrest, who's now dead, he--
Speaker 2: The author, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he, he, Leon was there.  Now these guys were ahead of me.  Leon was ahead of me and--but it was a great school, and I had a great run there.  And I, I look back on it with a certain degree of, of appreciation.  As I am no longer in the--as I am in the autumn of my life, I think that it is--was a real, real, real powerful aim--and inspiring place for me and so many other African American young men and young women.
Story_ID: 80766
Speaker 1: Do you, do you go back to Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] very often--
Speaker 2: I'm in Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois] probably 15 times a year.  I was in there yesterday--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --doing some filming for a program that I'm involved in.  I supported financially, I've given scholarships.  I've worked for this building program.  I've--Hyde Park High School is a part of me.
Speaker 1: Yeah it's--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --I know it's had in I guess the last twenty years a lot of gang problems and--
Speaker 2: A lot of gang problems that we're working hard to--we--to take it back to its once great splendor.  The problem, of course, is that once the--then this, this is has really come to another chapter, but the problems is that, with Hyde Park, is that much of it was redistricted.  And the Hyde Park community, which is to our north, no longer sends its students to Hyde Park but rather sends them to Kenwood.  The whole idea of it being this pot that (unclear)--melted have done away with, and so we don't have the white students, and we don't have the Jewish students coming in to enrich that as it was when I was--and we don't have the Asian students there anymore.  You follow me?  We don't have a cultural and ethnic mixture at Hyde Park anymore--high school anymore.  And I think that that helps to undermine what it was--what it, what it, what it was, and has allowed it to become more of what it is.  But anyway, we're up for the fight, and if Hyde Park is to be a racially isolated commun--school that serves basically blacks, then it's got to be the best black high school in the city, and that's my belief.  And if it becomes that, then I believe others will find their way to the door.
Story_ID: 81475
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Leon D. Finney, Jr., Leon, L-E-O-N, D, as in Dorsey, Finney, F-I-N-N-E-Y, Jr., J-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May the 20th. I'm not sure what it is.  Is it May 20?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMER DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: All right, and today's date was--we, we just said that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, today's date is May, May 20th, 2003.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We're at 1900 South Michigan at HistoryMakers--
Speaker 2: Okay, now--
Speaker 1: --in the City of Chicago.
Story_ID: 81476
Speaker 1: Right, and we're trying to--we're, we're, we're concluding the interview we started back in October.  And we're, we were--we had you at Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] on the verge of graduation from high school.  When you were ready to graduate, what did--what were your career ideas?  Where did--what did you think you would do next?
Speaker 2: I wasn't real sure.  You know as I indicated earlier, I was son of an entrepreneur, a businessman [Leon Finney, Sr.], so I figured that somewhere along the line business would be important in my life.  I mainly, as many kids and young people at that time, I thought that it was time for me to go to college because college was expected of me.  I never even thought about not graduating high school nor not attending college and then getting a degree.  I think maybe I thought maybe I might be a dentist; maybe I would be a lawyer.  I had not really fixated on just what at the time I was about to graduate.  I had no clear passion to do anything other than graduate and then matriculate into ca--college, figuring that at some point I would figure out what I wanted to do with my life.
Story_ID: 81477
Speaker 1: Now had you selected a college?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was--had thought about the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and hoped to get there, because it was right there.  I grew up in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois].  In the neighborhood I grew up was a kind of a host community years ago for the University of Chicago.  And so I sort of grew up in the shadow of the University of Chicago.  I studied, did my homework on the campus, and ran up and down the hallways as a high school student, pretending I was in college over at the University of Chicago because it was very open.  As you know, colleges are not a lot of security in those days.  And so, and we--I remember vividly studying in the Social Science Library and doing my term paper while I was in high school--and term papers, I should say, while I was in high school.  So University of Chicago was one.  And then I thought perhaps I would go to Bradley University [Peoria, Illinois] 'cause I had this--maybe, maybe I wanna go away to college.  And then, of course, I settled on the University of Illinois.  And I think I settled on the University of Illinois because I'd really didn't get the counseling I sh--might have had to prepare me to apply and then to matriculate to University of Chicago from high school.  And certainly, I don't think I got a lot of that focused counseling from home.  My home environment was you will go to college, but my home environment was not you will go to this college or that college, or you should go to this college because it can offer this.  That was not in the household, and so I sort of had to figure that out for me.  And of course, I finally realized that the easiest place to go was the University of Illinois [at Navy Pier, Chicago, Illinois], where I did, in fact, apply and I was accepted.
Story_ID: 81478
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you go?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I, I attended the University of Illinois at Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois] and along with many, many other students when Navy Pier was still operating as a, as an extension of the University of Illinois.  Circle Campus had not--
Speaker 1: Okay, so
Speaker 2: --been built, had not been built there yet.
Speaker 1: Okay, in those days--yeah, okay.  There was no Circle Campus.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was no Circle Campus.  Circle Campus was in planning, but it had not developed at that particular time.  And of course, my expectation was that I would go.  I would spend time at the University of Illinois here in Chicago, and then ultimately I would end up downstate [Urbana-Champaign].  And during the course of my study, I took nineteen hours of credit work and came, joined the wrestling team, the swim team--no, not the swim--wrestling team, and the football team.  I was a--one of the football team student managers, which meant that I got to check in the equipment;  and I got to hang out with the guys; I got to go on the trips with the football team.  And with carrying nineteen hours as a freshman, I found that by September I was in deep trouble.  I was on probation because my grades were not what they needed to be.  I was not focused on--enough to carry nineteen hours with all those extracurricular activities.  And so when I got my grades, my dad [Leon Finney, Sr.] saw my grade sheets--boy, you're in trouble.  And my dad said look, you, you gotta get--you gotta get yourself together, and you're not gonna--I'm not gonna pay for this kind of--these kind of grades, supporting you in school, so you gotta get yourself a job and you support yourself in school.  And so I left the University of Illinois [at Navy Pier, Chicago, Illinois] and went to what is now Olive Harvey City Colleges [Chicago, Illinois], then Southeast Chicago, Southeast Chicago Community College, which was housed in the CVS [Chicago Vocational] High School over on 87th and Jeffrey.  And there I did quite well.  I was essentially a straight A student.  I would say better than straight--I was not straight A, but B+, A-, average, did quite well; I was focused; I studied well, and spent--I spent a year there.  And then I got my average straight, you know, 'cause in those days your whole idea was to get your GPA [grade point average] to where you can then go back into a four-year school.  And I decided to go back to Illinois I think in the winter semester of the next year.  And did not--I enrolled and now I'm savvy.  I'm working at the post office, trying to hold a nighttime post office job down and working.  And when I began to get into trouble with any of my course I'd drop 'em, 'cause I--now I gotta worry about protecting my GPA.  So stupid people get behind in a course, where--ride the course out, get a D or an F in the course, tear into that GPA.  So I'm savvy now, and hey, man, I'm out of here.  So I think I may have ended up dropping almost all my courses.  May--I think I may have dropped everything at the Illinois, bailed out before the--I had chime--time--to incur any additional problems.  And then I think in the summer I went to [Woodrow] Wilson Junior College [currently Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], took a bunch of courses, doubled up, and then in the fall I went to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].  And at Roosevelt I did okay, but by now I'm thinking maybe I just wanna go on and do something else.  So by November at Roosevelt, I decided that I would en--enroll in the United States Marine Corps.  And so I terminated my work at the University of Roosevelt in good-standing--it didn't hurt me--and joined the United States Marine Corps.
Story_ID: 81479
Speaker 1: Now, why the United States Marine Corps?  That's the most combat intensive part of the service.  I mean did you, did you--what was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was raised as a very focused and disciplined kid.  And for me to not do well in anything, I took that seriously.  And so I didn't feel that I was doing well and making the progress that I needed to do in school.  And so I figured that I needed a structured environment in order to get my head together, quite frankly.  And the slogan was "the Marine Corps builds men."  And I said well, maybe that's where I need to go, get myself--my head tightened up where I can go to school and focus and get out, and then move on in my life.  So I joined--I, I--a buddy of mine and I, Alden Lawson, who's now deceased, he graduated with me at Hyde Park.  The previous year Alden had bailed out and gone to the Marine Corps.  Now, at that time, Alden and I were considering, when I was getting ready to go to the University--when I was, when I was on my way to Wilson Junior College, Alden and I had decided we were gonna go to Marine Corps together.  I ended up in--at [Woodrow] Wilson Junior College [currently Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], and Alden ended up in Marine Corps.  So (laughter), so, so anyway, this is a year ahead of time.  So anyway, we had this big party, everybody's having this big--all the girls just hanging on, you know, and oh, we had this big party.  Alden had already met the recruited, had been, had been sworn in.  I had yet to meet the recruiter to be sworn in, okay.  So, but I had agreed we were gonna go together.  Well, we had this big party, Alden and we--I spent the night at Alden's house.  We were supposed to wake.  Alden couldn't wake me up.  I'm passed out, I mean like we had tied one on.  And so, Alden went to the Marine Corps.  And of course, when I awakened, it was too late to even try to get down to the recruiter's office, so I didn't go.  I felt somewhat bad about the fact that at the time I'd promised Alden I would go, I didn't go.
Speaker 1: How did he feel?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, one of the things about the Marine Corps is that once you sign up, you're gone, I mean you're gone, gone.  So he had, he had to go through the twelve weeks of boot camp, which is, you know, the Marine Corps has the longest boot camp of any service.  You had to go through the 12 weeks of boot camp and the, and advance infantry training, so he was literally out of the picture.  And we didn't have a lot of communication.  I suppose he wrote his mom, but I don't think he wrote me anything.  I think it probably--later on, when we caught up with each other, of course then he registered a certain amount of disappointment.  But anyway, Alden John Lawson, and he was my buddy.  Anyway, he went to the Marine Corps.  So--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --a year later, a year later, on November the 8th, 1959, I joined the United States Marine Corps.
Story_ID: 81480
Speaker 1: I hit the Marine Corps recruit depot in San Diego, California, MCRD [Marine Corps Recruit Depot], and started my training in the Marine Corps.  And it was a, it was a, it was a wonderful experience.  Indeed, I did meet the challenges that would make me rise and be focused while I was there in the Marine Corps, because the Marine Corps training, just the boot camp experience, pushed me to limits that I hadn't been pushed to ever before, just in terms of endurance, the physical endurance and the psychological endurance that you had to go through in order to go through the training and do it well.  And I wanted to excel in everything, and so, in fact, I did go through the training.  And when I got out of the, the, the boot camp part of the training and then went to second, second ITR [Infantry Training Regiment], which is the advanced infantry training, in Camp Pendleton, California, that was there, that would have been 1960.  It was there that I went to another phase of training, which I thought was helpful, not nearly as stressful as the prior training that I had been through in boot camp.  And when I mustered out of that, I--I shouldn't say mustered--when I completed that four weeks of training, then we went to--I went to the Reception Center.  And because I was a swimmer, meaning I could swim--many of the marines couldn't swim, recruits couldn't swim, and I was a swimmer--that put me in a separate category.  And because I had--I was--I had been to college, that put me in another classification, and also because--one thing I should remind you is that when I got sworn into, as a United States Marine--this is sort of going back a little bit, but it's important--the recruiting--I never will forget the recruiting sergeant.  I had to take a battery of test of course.  And the recruiting sergeant told me--asked me how many years I wanted to enlist for.  And I said oh, four, give me four.  He says son, wait a minute.  With your college record and your scores on this test, don't take four, take three years.  And if you, you like it, re-up, meaning reenlist.  That was the best advice that any human being had ever given me to that moment.  Little did I know how important it would be later on.  So, I'm getting out of the, the training and graduated and all of that good stuff, have graduated from boot camp, been given a first--I became a private first-class, so I you know I had my little rank coming out of boot camp and honors.  I was in honors in everything.
Story_ID: 81481
Speaker 1: So now I'm coming out of second ITR [Infantry Training Regiment] and I got to the Reception Center.  I mean there's no graduation out of second ITR, just advance infantry training.  It's not a big deal.  And I go to Reception Center where you--for assignment.  Now this is where I would think.  So I'm a first, I'm a first-class swimmer.  I'm a private first-class.  I'm an honor's graduate from boot camp, and I am a sharp shooter.  So I've got a lot of things to say--it opens up some options (laughter).  But in my service record book there's this one thing that was very, very important that would prove to, I think, turn my life right around right there.  I wanted to be a seagoing marine, and I qualified to be a seagoing marine, which meant I would be sailing with the Navy, and I would be part--a marine--part of a marine, marine detachment with the United States Navy, and I'd fly on--I mean I'd sail all over the world.  Now why did I wanna be a seagoing marine?  Because all Alden Lawson, my best friend, or one of my best friends, was a seagoing marine.  And he was--you know, I'd already heard about the fact that he'd gone--he would have been, been on the med cruise, and he'd been to Japan.  I had all these great ideas about where I would be.  Well, when, when the assignment officer--assignment sergeant, I would say--looked at my service--my record book, and he saw that while I was in school, there was something called Poli. Sci. [political science], and it was abbreviated, P-O-L. S-C-I.  And so he looked at my record book, and, and there--and some buddies of mine and I were debating whether or not I was gonna request to go to--and I'd said I wanted to request to go to be a seagoing marine and, and go to sea school for four more weeks and/or to--then the other option was be in First Force Recon.  First Force Recon were like the rangers, green berets in the Army, right.  These are real tough guys.  These are--this is all the way bad guys, all right and they are serious.  And of course, I had a little spunk about me, and I thought I could possibly take the training.  So I--that was sort of playing in my mind.  But then a little guy says well, you know, they got a lot--they gotta jump out of airplanes.  Well, I wasn't that cool about jumping out of airplanes, but fortunately I didn't make the decision.  I didn't have to make that decision because when they looked at my service record book, they read Pol--Poli. Sci., which in--at college stands for political science.  But in the Marine Corps, they didn't read it that way.  The Marine Corps it was police science.  So (laughter) the assignment sergeant said oh, police science, Headquarters Battalion First Marine Division FMF PAC [Fleet Marine Force Pacific].  You're gonna be a military policeman, boy (laughter), and that's what happened.
Story_ID: 81482
Speaker 1: And so they put me on, they put me on the truck--get all your gear, and put me on the truck.  I went straight to--he signed the order and I went to first--I went to Headquarter Battalion First Marine Division in Camp Pendleton, where I stayed for the entire enlistment.  Because now when I got there, then they sent me to CI school and--Criminal Invest--Accident Investigation school, where I became a policeman to do accidents.  Then immediately they sent me to Criminal Investigation school, which was a--which was they would have an FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] kind of curriculum where we--and part of the curriculum was FBI school, and I became an investigator, criminal investigator, one of the five black African American criminal investigators in the United States Marine Corps.  It was my job, of course, to--as a military policeman to enforce the Uniform Code of mister--Military Justice.  And I became quite good at that.  I was given--they, they gave me rank and gave me a position, they gave me soft clothes, gave me credentials where I would just flip my, my credentials out which said I was a criminal investigator or I was with the Headquarter Battalion First Marine Division, CID [criminal investigation division] Division, CID, which a certain amount of prestige went along with that, meant I could--I had--did not have a, have a, have a liberty card.  I could leave the post at any given time because I had the special privilege, so I would put it--sort of been put into a special privileged area.  Now, of course, you need to make roll call and a whole lot things.  You have to be accounted for because the Marine Corps, you know, while you, you have an ability to leave when you choose to without a liberty card, the fact of the matter is that you do have to let people know where you're going.  But I had (unclear)--literally the open gate; I could come and go because--well, look at this way, if you're a detective and, and the gate is manned by uniform policemen, and you're a policeman, as a detective, all the guys on the gate are your buddies, so (laughter) you're coming and going whenever you want.  And so that was a good thing, and I en--but I didn't really abuse the privilege 'cause I was serious.  And I was involved in several major investigations.
Story_ID: 81483
Speaker 1: My particular part of being an investigator was to be worried about the Article 125 and 134 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice, which dealt with sodomy and homosexuality.  And it was my job to investigate allegations that had been directed towards marines, where they were involved in either sodomy or, or Article 125 or homosexuality.  That was my, that was my beat, and so I--that then meant that I was able to leave the post quite often and go up into, up in into--down San Diego [California] and to do surveillances and up to Los Angeles where a lot of strong gay community in, in the Los Angeles [California] area around Hollywood [California] and what have you and--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, anyway, so--
Speaker 2: This is before that Don't Ask, Don't Tell, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh no, man--
Speaker 2: --gay--
Speaker 1: --we would, we'd, we'd, we would--I, you know, my job, we'd, we'd--I'd interview guys and throw 'em out all the--I mean write 'em up all the time.  They'd cop out.  And a (unclear) became quite skilled at interrogation.
Speaker 2: So they were really focused on trying to weed people out.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, because there was no--yeah, I mean for, for, for gays to be in the Marine Corps at that time, that spoke against this whole macho thing, you know.  We weren't worried about the ra--the rights of gays.  We were worried about the prestige of we build men.  We don't build something else.  And I wouldn't say at this particular point that we were right, but we were operating within the confines of the UCMJ [Uniform Code of Military Justice] and, and how the Marine Corps perceived itself from the commandant all the way down to all the way up to the Congress of the United States that this was a place where our nation's finest men were honed into a fine fighting force that were able to engage an enemy at a time of crisis.  And so, and it was no place for shrinking violets and no places for people who had second thoughts about their sexuality, what have you.  It was a place for people who would say if you--if the Marine Corps said jump, you said how high, run how--you know, that was it--how far?  But it was never a question.  And, and the Marine Corps is one of the places where team was very, very important.  And so everybody had to be very, very transparent about what they believed in, what they did, how they walked, what they--what their preferences were.  You had to be transparent.  You couldn't be secretive and be part of a team.  And one of the things about the whole esprit de corps business was that the idea that through the, the eight weeks and the twelve, with the total twelve weeks of training, it was to get you to the po--a point that you believed in team, and that your buddy or the guy that was on--in your group, he was as important to you as you were.  And so it, homosexuality, for the Marine Corps would undermine the whole sense of building team because people wouldn't--how do you become a team member with someone who, who, who's sexual preferences are not heterogeneous?  Now, it's not to say it wasn't possible, but at that particular time, the world view of homosexuality was that it was not possible to be a team member with a person who was gay. That was just out, and so therefore you had to have men like Leon Finney, Jr. who were, who, who were assigned the job to identi--to identify if, possible through surveillance, to interrogate if, if, if, if necessary, and to gather evidence to, to bring a person who had homosexual sexual preferences or any what we would call deviant sexual preferences which may fit on the broad rubric of sodomy, that those--you had to go.  And you would either get a general discharge or you would get a BCD, Bad Conduct Discharge.  That's what you'd put on the book, and that was my job.
Story_ID: 81484
Speaker 1: Along the way, however, because I was skilled at investigation and interrogation, I developed--I was also assigned other kinds of matters and I'll--I--two murders that occurred on the base, I ended up having to involve myself as an investigator, and one of them handle--happened--on my watch, and so--meaning that I was officer of the day, or in that instance it would be the investigator of the day.  I had the duty that day, and so it fell upon me as a senior person to, to, to, to roll to the scene, and to make the arrest, and to handle the lockup, and do all the paperwork, and then begin the investigation.  And so--
Speaker 2: Can you remember what happened and, and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --out of the cases?
Speaker 1: Oh, what happened was that essentially a, a marine had shot another marine.  The marine was standing guard duty, and another marine--and, and this marine that was standing guard, guard duty had been drinking.  And some other marines had come around and began to play with him and harass him.  They were just drunk (unclear) drinking beer up at the PX [post exchange].  And the all left, and then one, they came back and fighting, this guy in the dark.  It was dark.  And he said, "halt"--bam!  And the bullet went true, right through this marine that was trying to pull a prank, killed him.  Well, he's standing guard duty.  Did he exercise all the precautions necessary before he fired his weapon?  Did he--da--was his weapon the weapon that did in fact, was in fact used in, in this killing?  Yes.  What was the intent?  What was the motive?  It was my job to arrive at intent and motive.  And my sense is, was then, that it basically was an accidental shooting when you looked at it prima facie; however, there was something else underneath it.
Story_ID: 81273
Speaker 1: While I'm in this, in this investigation, then we find out that when we began to interview the friends, we find out that the assailant and the person who was killed had an ongoing argument and that they had been, had, had a fight earlier at the PX [post exchange].  Now, the assailant had left the PX, hopped a ride, after having been at the PX, right, hopped a ride, reported back to his barracks, got his weapon, and been posted to do guard duty, being inebriated, all right.  He'd had a fight earlier with the man he killed.  Now the plot thickens--maybe this wasn't an accident.  You follow me?  Maybe, in fact, this was not a harassment.  Maybe, in fact, this was a situation where the assailant had gotten his weapon and decided to end the fight, and in so doing, took this other marine's life.  The, the court martial convicted him of murder in the first degree, premeditated, because of the work that I did in uncovering the previous fight and the fact that they had had an ongoing argument.  And indeed, it was highly likely there was enough visibility for the assailant to identify the man he shot, and it was not accidental.  It was premeditated.
Speaker 2: Now, now tell me, did--
Speaker 1: That's what the courts found.  He wasn't able to (unclear)--he wasn't able to put up an adequate defense.  And so circumstantial evidence, plus the fact--in terms of motive, plus the fact of he did shoot him.
Speaker 2: He did--he actually did it, yeah.
Speaker 1: He did shoot him.
Story_ID: 81274
Speaker 1: Well, tell me, did the criminal justice system in the Marine Corps mirror the criminal justice system in the outside world in terms of vis-a-vis the rights of African Americans?
Speaker 2: Well, let me put it this way--
Speaker 1: And we're talking about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Let me ta--let me put it this way.
Speaker 1: --fifty--
Speaker 2: --yeah fif--fifty--
Speaker 1: --nineteen sixty [1960]--
Speaker 2: --nineteen sixty [1960], yeah (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Let me put it this way--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you were black in the Marine Corps, everybody, everybody black was a homeboy.  You knew you were black.  Now, the--there was not a lot of overt racism devect--directed on the base.  But once you got off the base, then you're in this little town called Oceanside, California, or you're in a larger city called San Diego, and there you'd run smack up against racism.  You knew you were black.  Black people went certain places.  White people went certain places.  And I can remember in Oceanside, California, the reason that I had such liberty in the town was because they, people knew the, the barkeeps, the merchants knew that I was military policeman.  At--every now and then I would have to put on uniform sometimes and do foot patrol, because it was my turn.  So they knew me as a cop, and so they were reluctant to take that step, because one day if they refused me service or refused whatever, one day I am walking around in civvies, in shorts on the beach, or the next day I'm investigating somebody or got a coat on my side.  I am the pa--I am the police for real, I am.  And so, but I--while I was accorded a certain amount of deference, I know that my colleagues that were black weren't.  And so a lot of times that would filter back onto the base.  White--I remember there was a white woman who was a woman marine.  She was in the women's Marine Corps, and she was trying to date a black man.  Oh, caused all kind of trouble, I mean for real.  I mean that went through the Camp Pendleton like ex-lax going through your body; it's a no-no, can't do that.  It was a friend of mine--can't do that, because it'll compromise your ability to function.  Outside of the social interaction, be--off campus--I mean off base--and the segregation we met there, I can say this pretty--without any fear of con--contradiction, there was not a lot of overt racism on the base.  I don't remember any serious incidents of where whites jumped a black, beat him up, none of that--
Story_ID: 81275
Speaker 1: Now, when it came to promotions, would a black and a white be viewed as equals by the commanding officers thereby who--I suspect that the white had a, had an edge, and he did or was or might be denied.  But remember, even when I was at the bot--I was in the Marine Corps, I was in a special little cocoon because I had rights that nobody else had and privileges that no one else had, and that was to leave to investigate.  And if you were a captain in the Marine Corps, and I put my credentials on you, I'm an enlisted man, E4 [corporal].  If I put you under arrest, you're under arrest.  If I asked you questions in the line of my duty, you gotta answer 'em.
Speaker 2: So that's a powerful position to be in is what you're saying--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You follow me?
Speaker 2: It's a--
Speaker 1: That was powerful position.
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, you know, you get captain, major, once you get to the field grade, field grade officer, you gotta back off of them.  But up to major, you got some pretty--and especially if you got a, if you got a CO [commanding officer] that's in charge of the (unclear) that trusts you, he's gonna back you.  If you're, if you're an invest--and there were times when, when I had to interrogate officers who were clearly my superiors, you know, but it's my job.  We didn't have anybody else to do it.  Just because you had bars on your shoulders and I had stripes on my, on my sleeves did not obviate the fact that an investigation had to be made, did not ob--obviate the fact that if I caught you doing anything that was untoward, that I could not engage in some sort of intervention to apprehend.  We're never told to, to, as a marine at that time, a mil--Marine Corps military policeman, that in, in pursuit of protecting the, the life or the property of the United States Marine Corps an officer was able to--could override the law.  If we saw him, then we were supposed to do what we could to subdue him or her in the event that they were doing (unclear).  Well, am I gonna call a--my superior and send a captain out here because I gotta deal with a captain?  Well, I would say that good wisdom would say you try to do that.  But what's, what if your op--what, what is your alternative?  If not, you gotta do your job.  Now if you get--start getting into colonel, back, back off of them, 'cause they got too much, got too much stuff on their shoulder.  And, and maybe a major, you don't wanna fool with them too much; captain, lieutenants on that, didn't have any trouble.  But, but that my point is, because I was in this particular part of the Marine Corps, trapped there, 'cause they--once they had only myself, a guy by Edward Lester Washington, and a guy by the name of Palmer, we were the only black investigators in the entire United States Marine Corps, period.
Speaker 2: You were at the same camp, at the same--
Speaker 1: No, one was in--Washington was me.  We were--Washington and I were on Pendleton.  Washington ultimately would ship out and go back to the rock--that's Okinawa [Japan]--and had a lot of problems over there.  They would keep me at Pendleton for the entire tour of duty.  And they kept Palmer in Hawaii for the entire tour.  I mean he was there forever.  I think he loved Hawaii or something like that.
Story_ID: 81276
Speaker 1: So anyway--but anyway, while in the Marine Corps, I was able to take continuing education courses.  I went to the local community college there and got some additional college credits, studied anthropology, got a little history under my belt, cultural anthropology, physical anthropology, got a part-time job in town in Oceanside [California], sold clothes at Walton's Clothier, and saved up money.  And then the great thing happened.  Alden [Lawson] now gets out of the Marine Corps, my buddy.  He gets out of the Marine Corps in July of 2000--not 2000--July of 1963--after four years.  Leon Finney, Jr. gets out of the United States Marine Corps in September (laughter) of 2000--I mean 1900 and--what did I say, 19--
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: Nineteen hundred and sixty-three [1963], two months after Alden got out.  Now that really, that really riled him.  I would say something else, but now I'm a clergyman right now.  But anyway, that really teed him off, because he went in ahead of me by a whole year.  I get out two months after he got out, so I served just a little under three years.  But I wouldn't trade the experience for anything in the world.  I met friends.  I was able to do things that helped me later on in life to, to, to manage some of the challenges that one faces as a black man in American.  The bad thing about it though was I was not able to--because I was in the Marine Corps, when the Civil Rights Movement got launched, I wasn't able to engage in that.  I wasn't in the early marches 'cause I was in the Marine Corps, and so I wasn't there for that.  But when--
Speaker 2: During the sit-ins and all that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Sit-in--the Southern, the Southern tour I was pretty much, you know, '60' [1960], '61' [1961], '62' [1962], you know, I'm in California.  And I used to say I'm in--fighting for my country on the far-flung beaches of Oceanside, California (laughter), where--basically as serving as a, a, a, a military policeman or in crim--in the Criminal Invest--Investigation Division.  I would--the only time I would become worried, I think it was in '61' [1961] when--during the Cuban Crisis.  And in that instance, the military--the headquarters would tie in personnel become part of S1, S2, and S3.  And those are counter-insurgency people.  And I had that training as well, and we were also trained to go in and do--set up the governments, set up civilian government, set up prisons, set up the law in--sort of set up the law, the, the legal framework for managing civilians.  And so that meant that on "A' wave I was put on ship and, and sent into the, sent into the, sent into the ocean for a possible invasion of, of, of, of Cuba.  Fortunately, the Russians backed down, and I didn't have to get off the ship.  But I learned something about being ship as well.  To be a float on the water for almost a month is some serious duty.  And (unclear) in the cramped spaces, to just kind of understand life in that level of a con--of a confined area I think gave me another kind of appreciation for the camaraderie that develops when, when men have to prepare for and/or endure major challenges. I can identify, for that matter, with almost any group, even today, to find yourself having to go into harm's way.  And the psychological preparation for it, to do it, I think is, is significant--
Story_ID: 81277
Speaker 1: You know, I just--while I detest the whole idea that the United States of America--I'm fast forwarding, but I'mma comment on this and then I'mma move back to, to time sequence.  But I'm was really upset with, with the United States having to go into war against Iraq in this year 2003, and I didn't think it was a justifiable effort.  I didn't think that we would--there was sufficient provocation.  I think--I thought that the President of the United States [President George W. Bush] had, in fact, hoodwinked the American public by managing and mismanaging the news media.  And I think that I've--many of us who oppose that have been vinigat--vindicated, because as of right now, this is now May 20th, 2003, and no weapons have been--of mass destruction have been found by the United States Marine Corps, my branch of service, which is I think is probably still one of the finest fighting forces that any country has.  They sent the marines in early.  They were in the vanguards, but they didn't find any weapons of mass destruction either.  I don't think they ever were there.  I think there's always been oil over there.  But the Marine Corps was not--you don't send the United States Marine Corps, I think, or any other military men, women into harm's way or into an invasion on some thinly veiled reason of weapons of mass destruction, and not one of the weapons of mass destruction were used, nor have any been found.
Story_ID: 81278
Speaker 1: But we're at 1963 now, and that's forty years back the other way.
Speaker 2: Now in '63' [1963] when you were on the, on the ship, you know, waiting to be deported to Cuba--
Speaker 1: To go--yeah, in Guantanamo Bay.
Speaker 2: --were you aware of the drama that everybody else was aware of in the country in terms of--it's a very tense time.  I know [President John F.] Kennedy was on television--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --[Robert] McNamara--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I don't remem--see, but you know, remember now I'm on the ship.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.
Speaker 1: So there was only a certain amount of news we were getting, yeah.  And so we would get the news bulletins and updates.  You know, you have the--they would come out and say, give you some sort of update.  But then all of those instances, once the--once you get military briefings, you get military briefings at--
Speaker 2: I'm just wondered if you--
Speaker 1: You don't get--
Speaker 2: --realized--
Speaker 1: --you may not get a--you may get--you know, may not get the political briefing, but you getting a military briefing.
Speaker 2: I, I just--
Speaker 1: They are the enemy--
Speaker 2: --Well--
Speaker 1: --and we're preparing to go get 'em, and that's it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But were you all aware of it, 'cause the country was petrified that the, that--an a-bomb was, you know, close by in, in rush--on a Russian ship, and they might be able to launch it from this, you know--meaning the people were petrified, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did, did you have the same sense of--
Speaker 1: I didn't have a sense of fear.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had some anxiety, but I was prepared to go.  I'd gone on--I'd sworn in.  I'd sworn to uphold the Constitution of the United States of America.  I'd support--I'd sworn to obey the Commander-in-Chief, the President o the United States.  I was prepared to go and put my life on the line.  There was no question in my mind, not one iota, that if I had to get off that ship I was gon' go.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--I was gonna carry my M1 with me, and if I had to shoot it, I'd shoot.
Speaker 2: I wasn't talking about personal fear so much as I was were you aware of the--I mean 'cause it was very tense.  People thought that the world was on the brink of nuclear annihilation at that moment.  And that's, that's what the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't think that I thought about that.  I think that it was the enemy.  How dare the Russians come into our waters in defiance of the what is it, the Monroe Doctrine I think that it was, and launch an invasion?  We gotta stop 'em.  That was what it was all about, period.  They are not going to install those whip--weapons--in Cuba.  We were gon' stop 'em.  And so I didn't have the same sort of I--lat--level of anxiety that I might have had, had I not been in the service and then subject to the same level of information that I have now two--twenty--forty years later.   When I look at what happened in, in, in Iraq in this year 2003, I could see the political context, and I was anxious about what would happen, being an American.  But I was more anxious that, that we were making a big mistake.  Had I been on shore watching, listening to radio and news and reading the unfiltered news, I probably would have had the same anxiety as other Americans about the possibility of a nuclear hol--holocaust.  But right at that particular point, I was focused on--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --on, on whipping the enemy's butt.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's where we were.  That was what I was prepared for.  I was trained to do that, and I wasn't--and was not trained and not--was not even thinking about what the debate was.  Whether we were right or wrong, I wasn't even thinking about that.  And I would dare say, again say most of the guys that were on ship with me weren't thinking about that.
Speaker 2: Now were all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But yet the general public was.
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah, yeah, people thought we were about as close to as--I think that's the I think people felt that we were our closest to some kind of a nuclear holocaust because of it.
Speaker 1: In retrospect, I would say that we probably have not been closer, even in my time.
Story_ID: 81279
Speaker 1: Now the events of Birmingham in '63' [1963], were they trickling down to you all?  Did you, did you catch the--
Speaker 2: We were getting the news, and I was pretty--when were off ship I was pretty pe--I'd peated--pretty p'oed about that.  And, and big--but you--now, you remember now, I'm coming out of a military mind right now and not a civilian one.  So I'm--when the rights of people are being violated, and they're being beaten and dogs, and hoses and all that, I was incensed, as--and, and really incensed that that would be happening in this country, and wanted to be a part of it.  But, you know, at that particular moment in 1963 I was still in the Marine Corps, and wouldn't be able to become a part of it until I'd mustered out and then reestablished myself as a civilian.
Speaker 1: To what extent do you think the Marine Corps alters your once thinking, I mean in terms--I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, there is no question.  They're in the mind stuff (laughter), and it takes awhile to shake it.  I mean there is still a part of me that's a marine right to this day, because there is a mind--there is a business of getting to the mind of a young man or a young woman, and helping and altering the way they think about duty and responsibility.  That's if you allow yourself to be trained.  You can be trained to the point that the way you think about your fellow man and woman and the way you think about your life is altered forever, the willingness to make a sacrifice for someone else, the thought that you'd never leave your comrade, if you could get him on the battlefield, go get him, the fact that every day is a day for you to have an opportunity to serve and to serve your fellow man and to serve with honor and dignity, always trying to take the high moral ground.  Those were thing that I thought that when I went through the United States Marine Corps were important, and I gravitated towards them.  Now, you (unclear) well, then what was it about you that made the Marine Corps connect with you, because I would suspect that there are men and women that go in the Marine Corps that they don't make that connection.  And I think that that may be because of the values that I had gotten from my earlier life as a kid, what I was raised and how I was raised and, and the issues that were important.  And responsibility was very, very important in my life.  My dad [Leon Finney, Sr.] taught responsibility every day of his life.  He's eighty-seven years old now, and he still is an example of being responsible, socially responsible.  My grandfather [T.J. Huddleston] had founded the, founded the hospital [Afro-American Sons & Daughters Hospital] in Mississippi, founded a burial association in Mississippi, had, had tried to serve his community.  So I had a rich history to connect with around responsibility.  And when I got to Marine--got, got into the Marine Corps it sort of focused it.  And those elements of the teaching and the training and the preparation that one gets from going through the rigors of the Marine Corps effort of transformation did happen to me.  And I would say that "Semper Fidelis" is still very important to me.  And what does that mean?  Always faithful, always faithful, and never give up, always hang in there.  And so, that means always faithful to what?  You know, it's not some ephemeral thing.  It's always faithful to, to God and to country, and to your family, and to those things that we hold true in our republic.  And of course, for me as a man of faith and of the cloth, the clergy, it takes on another whole meaning, that I never want to feel that I have abandoned the people that I'm called to serve.
Story_ID: 81280
Speaker 1: Okay, you exited the Marine Corps September of '63' [1963], right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And tell us what, what, what did you do--
Speaker 2: Well, came out and went back to work for my dad [Leon Finney, Sr.].  My dad now is still in the barbecue business.  And he has, he's that--he's in the barbecue business, and we were a little bit we had--he was a little--he was also in the gambling business, what we call clearinghouse, not policy, but clearinghouse.  He was a unit man and--
Speaker 1: What is clearinghouse?  I've never--
Speaker 2: What was--
Speaker 1: --heard of that one.
Speaker 2: --clear--clearinghouse.  Well, it was another way to play the numbers.  With policy you get the, the policy slips, you know, and they get printed and you know what, what fell.  Clearinghouse was simply you decided to bet on a number, and you pick a group of numbers and you give them to a, a bookie.  The bookie say well, I want 3-8--3-8-1, that's my number, and I want to put a dollar on it.  Well, a dollar, if the number comes out 3-8-1, you get, I think maybe you get 10.  I can't remember exactly.  I wanna put two dollars on it and get twenty.  You know, it's like ten to one, so--or maybe it was a hundred.  But anyway, I'm playing for a dollar.  I wanna box that number, so if it comes out 3-8-1, that's straight, I get it, get paid.  If it comes out 3-1-8, I still win.  If it comes out 1-8-3, I still win, meaning that all combinations of 3-8-1 I win.  And so you give to this a, a bookie.  A bookie takes your dollar.  If that number comes out, the duck--bookie comes back and gives you your winnings, all right.  Well, so my dad had several bookies working for him, all right, and then he worked for another guy, all right, that he reported to.  Well, where do you get the numbers from?  Well, the numbers, how you know that the numbers are fair is that that the handle at the racetrack is what tells you what fell today.  Now, that's not too much different from the lottery, right?  The lottery you go to the lottery and you buy a ticket, and you say I wanna play 3-8-1, right?  Well, in the evening, you have this nice lady that steps up at this little device that--and she picks some balls, and she picks the ball 3, long pause, 8, long pause, 1, right.  You know you won fair and square.  Well, with the, with the clearinghouse method, it--you found out what won, numbers win, by the handle at the racetrack, handle meaning the total amount of money that was bet that's to the penny.  That's what the handle was.  And you take the last three numbers of the handle, and that is the number of the day.  So--
Speaker 1: So the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --you had--
Speaker 1: --every day?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it varies every day.
Speaker 1: Nobody controls it?
Speaker 2: Nobody--well, you can control it a little bit (laughter).  You're always--the thugs always trying to figure out a way to make the number change.  If they think the number's gon' come out 3-6-9, I don't need to tell you what 3-6-9 was.  If you look at the dream book, it was not something good, but a 3--if they saw that 3-6-9 had any possibility of coming out, then what they would do is they would work to change the number by betting more money.  But anyway, there are all kinds of ways to get this thing going.  The numbers come up on a tort--tote board.  But anyhow, so, you we--dad was doing that a bit and, and so he would get paid a certain amount of money to do that.  And he'd also had this barbecue place.  We're back in the barbecue business now, and it was Village Barbecue at 83rd and Cottage Grove between Evans and Cottage Grove.  And that put us back in--we were back in the barbecue business now.  And I think that I talked early about our earlier barbecue business, where we had all these barbecue stores up and down--
Speaker 1: And that's a decent location--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --right near Chatham Village.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right next, it was right across (unclear) Village, Village--that he went into partnership with another gentleman.  I won't call his name because the other gentleman was in fact in the numbers business too, and they were both in that together.  But out, out of deference to his family I'll leave that one out.  But this is a historical piece, and we need to be as accurate as we can.  So anyway, dad--we--dad was in the numbers business.  And, and once I was out, I went back to working for him and going--went back to school and reenrolled at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 81093
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I go back to Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois] and part time and as, as well, and then I also decide I'm gonna do three things, go to Roosevelt part time, and a buddy of mine, Anthony C. Gibbs, Tony Gibbs, who was underclassman at Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois] with me, we decided to get a job at social security.  So I'm going to school part time at Roosevelt--Tony and I there--and going to Roosevelt.  I'm working kind of part time with my dad [Leon Finney, Sr.], closing up and at night, and I'm back home.  When I got--first place I lived when I got back home was the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], the Washington Park YCM--YMCA.  That was the first place I got, and now it's about to be torn down.  But I come back home, get a room at Y--Washington Park YMCA, ultimately move out of there into the Rosenwald Building--not to--Walden Building, and that's at 6108 South Dorchester.  That was in Woodlawn.  I'm back home in Woodlawn now, 'cause as you know, I grew up at 6121 South Rhodes.  So, but anyway, I'm back home there, and Tony Gibbs and I hook up.  We get a job at night working for the social security department as a purges, record purges for the social security, United States social, social security services, Soc--Social Security Administration.  And somewhere along the line we decided that, that we would, we would get a job at the First National Bank of the City of Chicago.  They were looking for bright African American college students and/or graduates, particularly those of us who were in business.  And I was in--now moved from Poli. Sci. [political science] basically to business.  I'm more focused on business, thinking I'm probably gonna get--be a lawyer.  And we take a job at First National Bank, both of us.  They put us through a rigorous management training program, and then I end up in the trader's cage.  That's where stocks and bonds are traded every day.  And they assigned me to buying and selling commercial paper, commercial paper meaning, for instance, if you get a loan from General Motors, General Motors had, had their own credit operation.  So, but they sold their--that loan into the secondary finance market, and it would be GMAC, which stands--so, anyway, Walter E. Heller, City Financial, any of those.  So I had about $38 million dollars every day of commercial paper to invest.  So that proved to be an exciting kind of thing.  And then I'm watching the stocks and bonds and learning the stock--the trading process of trading stocks and, and bonds--not a broker, but I'm on my way, and pretty happy with myself, again in school and working, and not failing in school, just taking enough courses to the course year--I mean a couple of courses at a time.  Don't take a whole lot because I'm trying to, trying to get a kind of a sense of, of, of mobility and motion and career going, and began to date my, my, my later to be wife, Sharon McGoy, and trying to get a little serious about stuff.  She's had--she's, she's finishing, at this time, finishing up at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois], and so I'm just kind of floating along.
Story_ID: 81094
Speaker 1: Meanwhile, the Civil Rights Movement is still kind of cooking, you know, and I'm more and more listening to Malcolm X challenging, and Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and the debates back and forth, the [Black] Panther Party is, is, is beginning to pop.  And everything is happening around me, but I'm not involved.  Well--
Speaker 2: This is 1964?
Speaker 1: This is 1963, '64' [1964].  I'm not really involved.  I'm on the periphery of stuff.  This is about '64' [1964].  Then we--I go through this period about '65' [1965]--I'm walking down the street, going back to--had gotten off the el, and I'm sort anxious about getting connected.  And so I stop into the, the ward office, the 5th Ward Democratic office, which was in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] on 63rd Street.  And it says Democratic Organization.  Well, maybe I'll get involved with Democratic politics.  I needed to get connected.  Remember that when I'm in the Marine Corps I'm an organization man, right, 'cause that's one of the things the Marine Corps is all about, teamwork, organization, what have you.  Anyway, I get involved, so I--maybe the Young Democrats, I'll get involved with that.  And they took my name and promised to send me something.  I said, what do you do and how do I get involved?  And the lady just took my name, and nothing ever--nothing really happened.  I wasn't really inspired by the conversation.  And then another day I was walking down the street and I saw this, this, this sign on a window, the Woodlawn Organization.  And I'd seem to remember some material, flyers, printed material having been stuffed under my door in my apartment at 610--6107, 6107 South Dorchester is the Walden Building.  And so I walked into this, this office, and I said, what do y'all do?  And I met a woman by the name of Lorraine Johnson.  Lorraine Johnson was the catalyst for another major change in my life.  Lorraine Johnson was an organizer.  And so she immediately said what are you, what you look--I said well, I'm trying to see what y'all do.  She said we work in neighborhoods, and we're, we're trying to improve neighborhoods, we're trying to improve schools, we're trying to get people housing, we're trying to keep our people jobs, trying to make sure that black people have a real fair--oh, this look like it's cool.  We're trying to make sure black people have some power to get things done.  But I'm thinking that this is a social work organization, and so I never had dreamt--I never noticed, I never dreamed to be a teacher, never dreamed to be a social worker.  Those were never my childhood dreams or adult dreams, so I'm sort of, sort of halfway listening to what she's saying.  But at least she's talking about doing something that I could loosely associate with Dr. King's about, right, and Malcolm X is about, and that is uplifting our people, doing something about our condition, right, and not being part of this black bourgeoisie which his doing nothing.  You know, 'cause part of the thing, I'd also started writing a little article with the "Defender."  I forgot that--"The Rise of the Black Bourgeoisie," and these are the black bourgeoisie people who were doing nothing for their people but riding their back of the wagon or back of the bus, and not really being actively involved, so I didn't wanna be part of that either.  So I was looking for a place to get involved, and the Woodlawn Organization came out.  So they invited me to a meeting, and I came to a couple of meetings and joined the civil--the schools committee.  Meanwhile, I'm still at the Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], I'm still working at the First National Bank, I'm still checking out er--getting up early in the morning and checking out my dad's [Leon Finney, Sr.] restaurant [Village Barbeque] at 83rd Street, right.  I'm doing all of that, which means I've always been multitask I th--I suspect.  So anyway, I get, I get involved in, in the Woodlawn Organization as a volunteer.  And I go on a couple of--during my lunch hour they want me to come and be a part of a little demonstration, and I do that down at the board of education, nothing heavy.  And I'm sort of casually working with this thing, right.  I'm doing whatever I can do to keep body and soul alive, but I'm not really hitting on a whole helluva lot.
Story_ID: 81095
Speaker 1: Well, my dad [Leon Finney, Sr.] has a, a heart attack, and so when he does, I got to my boss at the bank [First National Bank], Mr. Stinder (ph.), and I tell him, I said look, you know, I may have to take a leave of absence.  He said oh, why?  I said because my dad has a heart attack, so--and I said--I approached it on a leave of absence because I really intended to come back.  And I knew that the white boys down there--I mean if you were white, you know, you got a little--whatever your parents and business, if you have to take care of the family businesses, quite acceptable.  But it wasn't acceptable for me as a black man.  He said well, you've been here--you haven't been here long enough, Finney, to, to take a leave of absence.  I said but this is my father.  He's been--I said I can show you he's in the hospital.  We've got three businesses.  He said well, you either have to--I hate to lose you, but it if you're gon' press this, he said I'll give you a week off to try to get it (unclear), but if you press on--press it, I--you have to resign.  So I said are you serious?  I said well I'll tell you what, Mr. Stinder, I just resigned, okay, nice--I shook his hand.  I said I just resigned.  I said because I can imagine that if I were in your place and then--and I told--you told me that your father had a heart attack, I wouldn't try to make some accommodation, and so I don't think this is where I wanna be anyway.  And I said it's--incredible thing is because I like the job, but I don't like your values, that's what's troubling me.  And I said, you know, I spent time in school.  I've served this country in the United States Marine Corps, to prepare to die for it, and I would think that that would--my record, and my work and performance, never been late, said all of that, you know, should count for something.  And it doesn't mean anything to you, so thank you for the opportunity.  I'm out of here.  I resigned and I went with my dad and ran the restaurants.  Now we have not one, but we now have two, one at 83rd Street and one at 6811 South Stony Island.
Story_ID: 81096
Speaker 1: My dad [Leon Finney, Sr.] gets well, gets on his feet, and he's ready to take back--cause my dad at that time, which that would have been 1964--'64' [1964] from now is what, 29--'64' [1964]--39 years ago, huh, that right?
Speaker 2: You, you say he's 87?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so my dad would have been what, 40-forty-eight.  My dad was-forty-eight was, you know, a lot of life left in my dad. So my dad gets back on his feet, resumes the businesses, and I, you know, essentially cool out, not all the way out, but back off.  And a guy by the name of Squire Lance is also working at the Woodlawn Organization.
Speaker 2: Is he an organizer too?
Speaker 1: He was an organizer.  And around this time, this is '66' [1966], Squire approaches me.  He said, you know, you ought to be an organizer.  I'm just volunteering right now.  I've gone out and knocked on doors for demonstrations, but I'm just volun--volunteer.  And when--I should say, my volunteer work at the Woodlawn Organization increased once I was working for my dad because there was not a whole lot for me to do.  I wasn't actually working the cash register.  I was managing, so I was--yeah, if you want me to knock on a few doors, be in a demonstration, be at a press conference, I would be there.  So, little did I know, that Saul Alinsky and Squire Lance and Ed Chambers, these were all--and Dick Harmon, these are all organizers.  Saul of course was the master organizer.  They had--
Speaker 2: Chambers was here in Chicago?
Speaker 1: Yes.  They had met on me--over me.  They had been watching me maybe for six or seven months, and said this is the kind of guy that we ought to try to recruit to be an organizer, or train him to be an organizer.  So, I don't know any of this.  So Squire asks, say, you know, let's--all right, let's have a cup of coffee.  You got time for a cup of coffee or a drink?  So I said sure.  So he said, you know, look, what are you gonna do with your life?  I said well, I'm gonna finish school, maybe be in business, maybe go to law school, that's what I'm gonna do.  He said when are you gonna do something for your people?  I said what do you mean what am I gonna do for my people?  I said I'm working here, volunteering.  He said ah, yeah, you're doing a little here, a little there, but you're not really serious.  You got--you can contribute a whole lot more than what you're doing.  When are you gonna really get off the stick Leon?  You know that you wanna do something, but you're afraid to get involved with the hard work of trying to build power for your people.
Speaker 2: This has gone to agitation.
Speaker 1: So I said well look--I said I'll tell you what, if you're talking about working here, be clear that I don't believe in social work; I'm not interested in being in social work.  Two things I never wanted to be is a social worker and a teacher.  He said wait a minute.  We're not about social work.  We're not about teaching.  We're about building power.  So I said well, I don't understand what that means.  Then he began to talk to me about the labor movement, and I did understand what the labor movement was and how they came together.  So, he said I'll tell you what: you need something to do, and there's a job here for you to do if you really care about your people.  I said well, I don't know about that.  I'm okay right now.  So he says are you satisfied with being just okay, being in the middle?  He said if you had the choice, Leon, of owning a bank or being the president of the bank, which would you choose?  I said own the bank.  There's a difference between being a good organizer and these crap that's out here.  You can be a good organizer, 'cause you can figure that out.
Story_ID: 81097
Speaker 1: So he [Squire Lance] said I'll tell you what I want you to do.  I want you to meet a friend of mine.  I said who is he?  He said I want you to meet Saul Alinsky.  So I said who's Saul Alinsky?  He said well, I'mma let him explain it.  All I want you to do is trust me.  You meet him and you talk to him, 'cause he wants to talk to you.  So I said okay. So they arranged a meeting for me to go down to 8 South Michigan to meet Saul Alinsky, who for me was just another guy.
Speaker 2: So you hadn't heard about--
Speaker 1: I ain't heard of him.  He wasn't Martin Luther King [Jr.] or Malcolm X, so (laughter), so at that particular point I was torn between whether or not I was with Malcolm or I was with Martin Luther King.  You know, I had these two great black giants, you know, to gravitate towards.  So I said I'll meet with him. I met with him.  And Saul [Alinsky] almost reduced me to tears.  He got on the inside of me, around the critical question of whether or not I was serious about black people, and whether or not I was ready to do what it took, myself, to make a change for my people, or whether or not I was just gonna ride through life being adrift and not live up to my potential.  I mean and Saul was not--I'm being not as graphic as he was.  He challenged me, and he challenged the very values that I had refined in the Marine Corps, that I'd learned from a kid up, and that was around responsibility and whether or not I was really being responsible, when all I was thinking about myself running up and down the street, getting--chasing women, drinking, you know, halfway doing this, halfway doing school, halfway doing everything.  When are you gonna get serious?  I mean it was that kind of hard, up in your face, and he was smoking Parliament cigarettes, and these big horn rimmed glasses on, and I mean he was like going at me.  And it was all conflict, conflict, and he was bringing, constantly raising the issue of where am I in me and what am I gonna be about.  And at the end of the meeting, I said well, Saul, you think I can do this job.  I don't even know the job.  But one of the things I do know: if you can do it, I can do it.
