Story_ID: 486525
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer, and Neculai Burghelea is the videographer and I'd like you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: Hello, hello my name is George Faison [HistoryMaker George W. Faison] and--what, what am I saying again?
Speaker 1: You're, you're stating your name (laughter), George--hold on one second Neculai.  George, now we have to get this, we have to be serious okay about it, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But you wanna state your, you wanna--okay so you want to, I want you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, and I want you to have your middle name if you, if you have one.
Speaker 2: Hello, no hello--
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: George William Faison
Speaker 1: G (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) F-A-I-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And George and William are spelled typically?
Speaker 2: Typically like George.
Speaker 1: Okay your date of birth.
Speaker 2: Twelve, twenty-one, forty-five [December 21, 1945].
Speaker 1: Okay our--today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 3rd, 2007.
Speaker 1: March 5th.
Speaker 2: March 5th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: The Faison Firehouse Theater at 6 Hancock Place, New York City, New York [New York, New York].
Story_ID: 486526
Speaker 1: I'm gonna start out by asking you five People magazine-ish questions, just short answers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Oh, I guess chicken (laughter).
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Wherever they're taking reservations.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: What are you doing (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 486527
Speaker 1: Now I don't have the benefit of having your questionnaire, but I wanna start out by asking you about your parents.  So I first would like to ask you about your father, you know what you know about his background.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm one of the lucky ones I was raised by my father and my mother, so, in Washington, D.C.  I have four other siblings (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your father's name?  Four--
Speaker 2: My father's name is George O., Owen, Faison [George Faison], born in Wallace, North Carolina.  My mother is Agnes Crockett Faison, born in High Point, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Now can you tell us about your father what you know of his growing up and his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, he came from a fam- my father came from a family of about six to eight kids, and they grew up in the country in Wallace, North Carolina, planting cotton--what is it--cutting and with sewing, you know and smoking tobacco, you know I mean, I'm talking about curing tobacco.  And I went down one summer and I did all of that as well.  But they had a farm and horses and, and, and everything that goes along that, watermelon and, and fish, and just everything that I guess a, a family would have.  I mean, you know, it was the segregated South, segregated America, and it was about in the '50s [1950s], we would go down and have summers in the, in the country.  My father--and you know they cured all kinds of meats and so, so they were kind of independent.  They weren't really sharecroppers or anything like that.  They, they grew everything that they ate and, and whatever else they didn't they sold.  It was the South.
Speaker 1: Do you know what your, where the name Faison comes from?
Speaker 2: It comes from that county in North Carolina.  I think it was one of the plantations, the Faison, you know, plantation--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Faison, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Now did you know your grandfather on your, grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather on my father's side, no I didn't, but I did see the records as to how they were, they, they bought the land, how they in increments of, I don't know what increments, but they bought a parcel, a piece at a time, until they had amassed like twenty, thirty acres.  And they built houses on them and again planted the tobacco, cured it, and corn and whatever the country meant.  It, it was like quite an adventure going down there and discovering, you know, that we, you know, we, we were all a part of that.
Story_ID: 486528
Speaker 1: Now what did your father [George Faison] do, and what kind of person was he (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was, my father made awnings, awnings for all kinds of shops in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], you know the Peoples Drug Store [Peoples Drug Store, Inc.], those awnings that roll out.  And I even hung awnings, so I can, I'm a three story band, so I can go up as high as three stories on a freestanding ladder and hang awnings as well.  So--and what else?  He made them and he, once he retired from the business then he was hired by Brooks Awnings [ph.] in Wa- Washington, D.C., I think, Silver Spring [Maryland].  He, he went into his own business and had, and provided or us and so forth.  My mother [Agnes Crockett Faison] didn't work, so at that--
Speaker 1: So, now did he talk about growing up at all?  Do you remember any stories that stick in your mind, you know how parents tell us stories?
Speaker 2: Stories, I mean we were always on, you know we were, we grew up in segregated D.C., so it was like whatever stories you had to tell about how tough it was or how segregated it was, you know, I think they were the tough stories that every black man has in growing up in the South, I mean, you know, we--
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you what, what about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 1: What was kind of person, how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Quiet, I think.  Quiet, determined, a provider, loyal, good teacher, mentor, but not, not passionate, not close like, like that, but stern, and you know but loving underneath I guess, you know, but, and not too much.
Speaker 1: Not demonstrative.
Speaker 2: Not demonstrative.
Story_ID: 486529
Speaker 1: Now, what about your mother?  Can you describe her and you had given her name, but can you describe, you know, her and she was what s- (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Agnes Faison [Agnes Crockett Faison] is one of eight of children on my, she is now deceased, but her sister, who is ninety-five, still lives in Brooklyn [New York] on Wortman Avenue, Evelyn Gill [Evelyn Crockett Gill], Wortman Avenue in, in Brooklyn, and lives alone, and she was the oldest actually of my mother's siblings.  Outside an uncle who may be, who was the baby of that family from ninety-five to, he maybe eighty-seven, eighty-eight, Lester Crockett of 124 Ingraham Street, Washington, D.C., and he was my mother's baby brother.  They grew up very fair-skinned people and you know one sister, one aunt had blue eyes and you know dirty blonde hair and, and the other one was, were probably Cherokee or something and African American.  So, we had like, we looked like you know Indians [Native American] and hence the profile and all of that and that, that was it, I mean it's--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: It was like I don't know, you know I think that in a sense we were a ra- we are and continue to be a race divided by color because there's so many, many shades of us.  So, growing up, well I've had, had the benefit of both in a sense (laughter) of being black and very proud of that, but also being, you know, having all of those fair-skinned Negroes in my family as well and Indians and all that, so it's like (shrugs).
Speaker 1: So, so you mentioned that, but what impact did that have, George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], do you think, I mean, of the fair skin.  Did you hear of anyone (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, you know like we were also segregated within our own race, so it's like not hard to believe that.  And growing up in Washington, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], or even New York [New York], you know, the society, black, even black society was very white and you know you either passed the paper bag test or you didn't.  So I grew up in all of, all of that.  But I don't know I kept, I guess you think of there being something more or if you grow up in an environment with your parents and so forth it, it was just part of, a part of life.  We grew up in the civil rights, during the Civil Rights Movement, or even earlier than that during the really segregated Jim Crow '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: All right. Now your mother--do you--can you describe what kind of person she was?  You've described your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh wonderful, wonderful, beautiful woman, fair-skinned, Indian [Native American] looking.  Very outgoing.  I guess, you know, a lot of the inspiration, you know, encouragement I guess came from her.
Speaker 1: And did she talk about growing up at all you know in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Oh yes she talked about growing up and being the blackest one of these light-skinned people that were in her family, and I didn't think that she was dark or anything like that, but you know, we were peculiar, I mean because of a society that was very peculiar.
Speaker 1: So she, where did she fit in the birth order of the eight?  I know you have the old- you know the two--
Speaker 2: I think she was the middle child probably.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She may have been the middle.
Story_ID: 486530
Speaker 1: Was there--do you know how your parents [Agnes Crockett Faison and George Faison] met?  Do you--
Speaker 2: They met in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  My father was working in D.C., maybe during the Depression [Great Depression] when a lot of people didn't have jobs he had a job as a super, super of a building or janitor of a building.  And he was married before my mother to someone else who later died, and the then married her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was like, he had a job (laughter), and he worked so that he was, you know, I guess at that particular time a catch you know, 'cause he had a job and was independent, had a car and so forth (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did he--did, so you don't know the exact story of their meeting, you never heard that story of how they met.
Speaker 2: I think they met at a dance or you know the social events.  Now you must remember you know and when I say the segregated South I'm taking about real segregation in which you know the church was the central, was the central social organization and then you had the Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star] and the Elks or the Masons, and you had all of those other social organizations.  Then on the university levels you had the fraternals and the sororities and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now your--with your mother was there, do you think there was any issue in the family with your mother being fair-skinned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And marrying a black, a black man.
Speaker 1: Right a black--a dark skinned person.
Speaker 2: Right, like my father yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean all of the, the, you know taboos or prejudices, I mean that's all that is.
Speaker 1: Do you remember hearing anything discussed about it or can you give one instance where you became aware that maybe that was, you know, there was tension on that side?
Speaker 2: I think there was tension within her own family, but--
Speaker 1: That's what, oh but period or about, about the marriage.
Speaker 2: Yeah about him being dark and she being very fair.  I'm taking about very fair, you know.
Story_ID: 486531
Speaker 1: Like pass, did any of her (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't know.  I think one or two of them could have possibly, but fair, very fair.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you don't remember anything being said where you became aware?
Speaker 2: I think in anger sometimes people would say things.
Speaker 1: Would they call people out of name or--?
Speaker 2: Yes I think--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but at that time, particular time you her- heard it, you know, less from your own people and not, definitely not as a term of endearment, but you heard it from your, your own people, but you know it wasn't something like that, that you said, you know, as--with the frequency that you hear it today.
Speaker 1: You're talking about the n-word.
Speaker 2: The n-word.
Speaker 1: Okay, the n-word, so, so someone being dark would be spoken in a pejorative way in the n-word.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, let me--how do you think your mother [Agnes Crockett Faison] grappled with that?
Speaker 2: I don't, you know outside of taking care of her own parents later and having that responsibility, I think she could see that as freedom.  You know what I mean?  And then she could raise her own kids and so forth, so it wasn't like you know--I think she could make her own life, I mean whatever it was going to be it was her life and it was, and it was fine--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know once, you know growing up and having all the weight of taking care of her ailing mother and, and/or her father.  Now they could really pass, the grandfather (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Her, her--do you think they did?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, because there was convenient passing sometimes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: People get a card to the library or go shopping or, you know.
Speaker 2: Just living unha- you know, without being harassed or hounded or as Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said in standing tiptoe state, you know, without the due respect of being called Mr. or Mrs. and so forth.  It's boy or you know strong as an ox, you know that, you know because you know your prowess was you know measured in how much you could lift and how, you know, in, in slave terms (laughter) how much you could lift, how many, how, how, the hours that you could work and so forth.
Story_ID: 486532
Speaker 1: Especially if, you know, I think, you know I would consider what he [Faison's father, George Faison] did a skill.  You know, he had a job that he could do and, and it took him into other neighborhoods.  So, you know even when we went into other neighborhoods we got to see how other people really lived, even if it were how the back lawns were and how innovative the awnings could be made.  But you know it could, you know it, there was a certain amount of pride in making those homes look even better with an awning or so forth, but it did take us into another section of town [Washington, D.C.] that I don't think that we really would have seen if he weren't, weren't providing a service--a luxury service I think--on those big houses that had those wraparound verandas.  And, and then often, you know, you would get, you know, gifts.  Like I can remember getting, you know, a what, you know, bookends that were from Italy, at that time probably, you know, from, from the early, you know, the turn of the century made out of some soft kind of stone that were really quite beautiful, you know.  But you--they would give or a stained glass, Tiffany lamp shades and things and furniture once discarded, you know, by these families, you know, and rugs and so you know we saw a lot of, a lot of different things because he was, you know, he was working on renovating, innovating the houses and so forth and so and so it was like there was some, you know, perks so to say, so to say (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 486533
Speaker 1: How many children in your family?
Speaker 2: Five.
Speaker 1: Five, now where can you--
Speaker 2: I'm second (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) give the--can you give the names and, and the--
Speaker 2: Carolyn Faison, Thelma Faison [ph.]--
Speaker 1: Is after--
Speaker 2: --is after me.
Speaker 1: Me. Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Daniel [Daniel Faison] is the fourth, and David [David Faison] the fifth.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so that's three boys and two girls?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, three boys and two girls okay.
Story_ID: 486534
Speaker 1: Tell me, George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], what your earliest memory is of growing up?
Speaker 2: Earliest memory?  That we were always clean and pressed and neat and you know we always went to church.
Speaker 1: What was your church?
Speaker 2: Salem Baptist Church on 9th [Street] and N [Street], Northwest Washington, D.C.  Reverend Grymes [Richard D. Grymes] was the minister, and, and that expe- you know that was you know a very somber serious experience, the church and who the elders were and the deacons and the deaconesses, and the ceremonies and you know the singers that would come around or the gravity of this, you know, of the, of the church, of the elders and what they represented and you know educationally with the, and, and the knowledge that they had and so forth; it was, it was all that.
Speaker 1: Now when you talk about the ceremony, what ceremonies were you talking about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just going to church, the ritual of worship.
Speaker 1: What does that mean?
Speaker 2: The--the taking of Communion, the being baptized, the, the, you know, the dates that came around, Christmas, Easter, deaths, you know, funerals, socials.  And the, the actually just the fellowship between, you know, people that belonged to the church and how they, you know their self, the self-sufficiency among themselves was, was--you know so I didn't, I didn't know I was missing something to tell you the truth, because we were provided for and we had, you know, TV and stereo when that came out and all of the, you know, the things, Christmas and gifts and just a family.
Speaker 1: So was your, do you think your mother [Agnes Crockett Faison] was raised Baptist?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She was?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they shared that, your mother and father [George Faison]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, was one more churchgoing?
Speaker 2: She, my mother was more churchgoing.
Speaker 1: Church going okay, okay, and it's interesting you would say that you know one of your earliest memory is of being pressed, so she took great pride in--
Speaker 2: In, in that.
Speaker 1: In that, okay.
Story_ID: 486535
Speaker 1: Can you just give the address of where you were raised?
Speaker 2: Fifteen t- well there was 10th [Street] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you live in several--?
Speaker 2: One and, and we moved from--
Speaker 1: Where were you born?
Speaker 2: --from an apartment--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on 10th Street, 10th and N [Street].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And, and my relatives.  I had a set or relatives that lived downstairs.
Speaker 1: Now was that on your mother's [Agnes Crockett Faison] side?
Speaker 2: On my father's [George Faison] side and then my aunt, my, wait a minute, a couple of aunts that I had that were married to, my, my mother's brothers lived up the street in big, a big, even a bigger house and they were light too (laughter), so it was just like, you know, and very beautiful women.
Speaker 1: So you, so 10th and N you lived 'cause you were born, what was your birth day?  I know 1945, but what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twelve, December 21st--
Speaker 1: Oh, so you're--okay. I see, okay.
Speaker 2: Forty-five [1945].
Speaker 1: Right there with the holidays, Christmas holidays, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, a dreaded day, no I don't know about dreaded, but.
Speaker 1: It was too close.
Speaker 2: To clo- yeah that's what you always said too close (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you would get short shrifted, maybe
Speaker 2: Right you would, shortchanged is, is more like it.
Speaker 1: Now, so here you, in, so when you were at 10th and, what you said 10th and N that was an apartment building, right you said?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then how long did you live there, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think 'til kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know because I do remember going to Grimke School [Washington, D.C.].  And then I of- often wondered later who could Grimke be?  You know, but then you look up and you find out that, you know, there's some historical person.
Speaker 1: Named Grimke.
Speaker 2: Grimke.
Speaker 1: Who was--?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I don't remember now, but I did--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --and I found and I ran across that name then--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that was at Vermont Avenue in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: So, the school was at Vermont Avenue, but where did you move?
Speaker 2: I lived straight up the street there--
Speaker 1: On Vermont?
Speaker 2: --where they intersect.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay--
Speaker 2: So the school intersected there.
Speaker 1: --okay well, well, let, let's describe that, that neighborhood.  Can you describe it for me?  Who was (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know houses, a couple of funeral parlors, Vermont Avenue Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.], which was Metropolitan [Metropolitan African Methodist Episcopal Church, Washington, D.C.] was not far from that and that's where Richard Smallwood, you know, who is now the, you know, the great contemporary gospel artist, you know, his father [Chester R. Smallwood] and his mother [Mabel R. Smallwood], his father being the preacher and his mother being the mother of the church and so forth.  And then we were down the street from, oh God, Bible Way [Bible Way Church] in Washington on New Jersey Avenue.  You know the churches were big, and belonging to a church was like belonging to, to society, and then I had Catholic friends that were at Holy Redeemer [Holy Redeemer Catholic Church, Washington, D.C.] where the, this, what is that Catholic Youth Organi- CYO [Catholic Youth Organization] met and the Boys Club [Boys Clubs of America; Boys and Girls Clubs of America] was in that area. We had all of these, these things and these organizations, so I didn't really miss anything, I mean you know keeping up with all of that what we were doing, but there were a lot of churches, you know, around thriving.
Speaker 1: So now you were still going to, you said yours was Salem, Sa- was it Salem?
Speaker 2: Salem Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Right, so was Salem close to--
Speaker 2: Right, and I belonged to the choir there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And that was still not, you know but then we moved to 3rd Street.
Speaker 1: After, okay.
Speaker 2: After 10th--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and 10th and N--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we moved to 1521 3rd Street.
Speaker 1: Now the 1521 3rd Street was that when you were getting ready to go to, el- to--
Speaker 2: No, I grew up there.  We went to, to then junior high, then I went to elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay wait let me follow the chronology.  You were born at 10th and N and then you moved--
Speaker 2: And went to, to Grimke School, when at--in the kindergarten.
Speaker 1: When you were at 10th and N?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then we moved somewhere in that time and then I guess the first grade was then at Slater-Langston [Slater-Langston Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] on, between North Capitol Street and 1st Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And P, between P--at P Street, right.
Speaker 1: And then you went there.
Speaker 2: Then I went to Perry School [Leon L. Perry Middle School, Washington, D.C.] to the fifth grade.
Speaker 1: And then after Perry School was?
Speaker 2: I went to Shaw Junior High School [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: And then Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: And then Dunbar.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now okay so you went to one, two, three, four, five, five schools okay, I mean including, three, three elementary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, had May Day at one, but you know and, and on and on and made Easters baskets at another, you know how you grow up, I mean, but it's all in the same neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Right.  So now let me ask you--
Speaker 2: Well, I could walk to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486536
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you a question about just your childhood, and when you think back, you know, what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother [Agnes Crockett Faison] was a great cook, great.  She could make pastries.  She could, oh the turkeys and the dressings and the cakes and the potato salads, the rolls, the--.  And since she had grown, while she was growing up she worked in New York [New York] with her sister, so we got a lot of those Jewish pastries.  She could make rugelach, right make it okay, so and then or sour cream and those potato pancakes, and in addition to all the southern stuff, I got, you know, we got all of that, you know.
Speaker 1: What about sounds?
Speaker 2: Sounds.  Kids playing and the bus ride, you know, going down the street in front of our house, and stopping in the next block and picking up people, because that was the LeDroit Park [Washington, D.C.], which ended at the base of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] over there like W Street something.
Story_ID: 486537
Speaker 1: Go on you were, we were talking about--
Speaker 2: The segregated South.
Speaker 1: Well, we were also talking about the sights (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but--
Speaker 1: No, we were talking about the sights.
Speaker 2: The sights and the sound, right, the sights and the sounds.  Children playing and parades that would come through the neighborhood.  The ba- the homecoming games that they would be celebrating at Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] that was right up the street, which is where a lot of the fair-skinned Negroes went to school before they scattered out and went to other places.  Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew] came from, from that school, who is very fair, passes, and a lot of people at Dunbar High School passed because a lot, some of them were the children of some of the senators that were on, on, on Capitol Hill, known fact.  And they did, you know, social--you know, didn't, you know they, they stayed to themselves very, you know, blue ba- blue vein high yellows, okay (laughter), but I'm saying passing for real.
Speaker 1: Now who, who were some of these blue blood (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Blue veined (laughter).
Speaker 1: Blue vein, sorry, high yellow or passing senators--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that, that you would hear tell--
Speaker 2: No, no, not senators, these were--
Speaker 1: I mean senators' children.
Speaker 2: --these were, these were white senators who had--
Speaker 1: That's what I'm saying their children.
Speaker 2: --black children in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: So, who would, who would you--
Speaker 2: Oh, but I wouldn't know any, they were, they were there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or the Proctors from, from Virginia or, you know, there were certain names, I mean, you know, and to a certain extent they were our brothers as well and so forth, but in, in in, to a, to a, to even a larger sent--extent you know the more education, that rarified, more rarified the, the, the experience would take you.  And actually sometimes no matter how well educated if your skin was dark you weren't, you know, you weren't making it anyway.  And then you say the sights and sound, but we had Washington.  We had all of the historical monuments there and all, you know everything.  People were coming from all over, over the country, the world, coming to D.C. doing business.  The Union Station [Washington, D.C.] was there.  I, I, can't, I, I can't tell you the feeling of growing up.  We--my father [George Faison] would take us to see trains.  You know we would watch the trains come in and out.  That was a trip on Sunday.  He would take the kids in the car and we would sit and watch trains come in and out of, out of Grand--Union Station.  And then we would walk into the hallowed halls of Union Station with all of those, you know, statues that were standing around, standing guard.  I think those were Valkyrie maidens or something like that, something out of Greek, something that lined, lined the, the, the room, but it was too, just gigantic mon- gigantic monumental kind of, you know, places.  Passing the se- Supreme Courts [U.S. Supreme Court, Washington, D.C.], seeing the [U.S.] Capitol [Washington, D.C.], going up in the monument [Washington Monument, Washington, D.C.], walking up it, you know, going up and down the monument, you know, walking up all, all, all of the stairs.  It was 555 feet tall, something like that, I don't know.  As a kid you know all of that, all of that.  And then, you know, seeing, waving at some kids on a bus as they were, were going, and then being called a nigger all at the same time, you know, D.C.  And I, you know I thought that was a different experience, but then you, you had that poem, old Baltimore ['Incident,' Countee Cullen], you know.  I can't, whose poem is that old Baltimore [Maryland], and seeing old Baltimore and the only thing--and it's, I think it's about Billie Holiday's [sic.] experience, isn't old Baltimore.  I can't remember it's a poem.
Speaker 1: I can't remember.
Speaker 2: And thinking that that was on my own experience, my own personal experience being a kid and so forth.  And then hearing her experience or relating that in a poem.  Somebody's related that in a poem about old Balt- you know, somebody with more education than me that views this tape will know what poem I'm talking about when the only, the, the, whoever is saying the poem, the only thing I remember about Baltimore was being called a nigger, you know what I mean, so it's like, it was that experience and so knowing, I don't know, knowing somebody else had been called that at that particular time or, I, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Didn't make it such a solitary experience.
Speaker 2: A solitary experience.
Story_ID: 486538
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, you did very well with sights and sounds, what about smells.  Were the smells of food or--?
Speaker 2: Oh food, yeah, food cooked, you know.
Speaker 1: Any other smells?
Speaker 2: Smells, or the perfume my mother [Agnes Crockett Faison] would wear, you know, or the clothes she would wear, you know.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Refine, I don't know I guess that you know you don't know where, you don't know--I grew up not knowing or caring or thinking about where I belonged.  I thought I belonged everywhere.  So venturing out of that neighborhood would become, and you know, would give my parents, "Where are you?  Boy what are you doing?"  And I would, I, I can remember in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] it's the, the early, the early '60s [1960s] when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] went to the Trinity Church [Holy Trinity Catholic Church, Washington, D.C.], you know, not, know, you know and you read about these things.  But, it was the '60s [1960s] and everybody was hopeful.  Motown [Motown Records] was, you know, you know we all of a sudden saw Diana Ross and, and The Supremes or, no The Supremes and The Temptations and all of the people that [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy had mentored and looking shiny and new on 'Ed Sullivan Show' ['The Ed Sullivan Show'].  We had a TV, and we would gather in, in front of that.  Seeing, you know seeing that, but that was later.  Earlier it was, it was the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.] and seeing everybody, Moms Mabley, making jokes, saying how, how JFK and Jackie [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] were her grandbabies, you know, and you know saying, you know saying how they were part of her family.  Or seeing Pearl Bailey or Etta Ja- or watching them turn Etta James, because she was fair-skinned and a blonde, pink and green and, and, and blue under all of these lights, the magic of the theater, Roy Hamilton.  You know we, you know we all were and are still very prolific.  We had a new song along with a new dance coming through our neighborhood every week.  So, what was I missing?  Gladys Knight was a kid, you know what I mean.  [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson was coming through, The Platters, who was I missing?  A kid, who was I missing?  I knew all of the people that I knew, so we you know.  Growing, just growing up and seeing the Jewel Box Revue, you know, twenty-five, twenty-four female impersonators and one woman, you know, who was the man.  It was like, you know, and us, and Peg Leg Bates, a man dancing with one leg and, and all of that and you know ventriloquist with black dummies.  I didn't miss anything, I mean because I saw myself.  It was me.  And going to the movies and seeing the movies, the movie of Oscar Micheaux who made black cowboy films, and then all of those other shorts that were made of the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], you know.  What was I mi- you know, I didn't know I was missing something.
Story_ID: 486539
Speaker 1: And then going out to the, the white neighborhoods, and see my father [George Faison] had taken me you know all, you know into neighborhoods I never would have gone into on my, you know, ventured or I wouldn't have known existed.  Dumbarton Oaks [Washington, D.C.], you know all up in Chevy Chase, Maryland.  These fabulous, fabulous homes and, and I would, and it, it was just, it was another part of life, you know, we, you know you liked all of those things.  But, see my father--I got paid.  My father gave me--I was getting paid, you know.  I was getting money, you know I had, you know an allowance and, you know.
Speaker 2: Well you were the oldest boy too right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now let me ask you this.  When you and your father would go to these other neighborhoods, would you ever discuss with him, you know, what you saw like, "Daddy, you know, look at the, you know look how they live," or was there any ever discussion?
Speaker 1: It was all fine, it was like, you know, manicured lawns and maybe I, maybe one day I'm gonna have that.  You know, he had his own house.  They paid for the-- you know even from, even my [paternal] grandparents they had their own, they bought their own land.  I saw where they paid for the parcels of land and you know and how they, they paid it off and taking the note down every month to someplace on K Street and getting it stamped off in a book that they paid the rent and, and so forth.  It was like, you know (shakes head).
Speaker 2: Now, George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], what--?
Speaker 1: I, I, I thought a lot, you know, to a certain extent that everybody was living like that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I really did.
Story_ID: 486540
Speaker 1: Now George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], now what were you like as a young, young boy?  Were you sensitive?  Were you, you know, rambunctious?  Were you in t- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think part rambunctious.  I was inquisitive, I--
Speaker 1: That's right.  You said you liked to wonder off.
Speaker 2: That's right, skated.  You know we had skates and skates board.  I taught my younger brothers, you know, how to play football.  And they had to remind me of that, the rules of football and all of that, which I learned from these teachers.  These, you know, these incredible teachers who were I guess some of them could have passed too.  And then I had a white teacher who I really loved.  She took me in, you know that was English lit, literature.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year or what grade?
Speaker 2: Parton [ph.], Ms. Parton back in the '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 1: And what--
Speaker 2: --or Ms. Hansberry [ph.].
Speaker 1: What grade were you in?  What grades were you in?
Speaker 2: I was going toward the 11th, 10th, the 11th.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh so you were in high school at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Ms. Hansberry, Ms.--
Speaker 2: They were in junior high school.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh junior high school.  They were, they were actually at Shaw Junior--
Speaker 2: Shaw.
Speaker 1: Shaw Junior High School [Washington, D.C.] okay.
Speaker 2: And one other lady that, that, you know, I guess she had (laughter), I'm not laughing at her or anything.  She taught geography, but she had--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --you know, and I think she had a stroke or something and she had to tape her eye up and sometimes the tape would come--.  You know, but she was very dedicated.  I learned a lot, you know a lot about the world, geography, National Geographic and then you know like, the teachers taught so much more.  I can remember in the third grade a teacher, Ms. Raines [ph.] or something at Langston [Slater-Langston Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] or something brought in a magazine I'd never seen before, National Geographic.  We saw Africans with no, with no cover, so we were laughing and, and I guess we were laughing at the pictures, and she told us to stop laughing because that's how people lived in another part of a country, you know and we were like, "Without clothes?" and, and, and or those Ubangis with the plates in their lips and all of that.  This brought a world, it was a world that you hadn't seen, so you know we were constantly inundated with new things, but that was books and reading and that's what books offered escapes and daydreams and, you know, all of those.
Speaker 1: Now were you a good student?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess pretty good student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, yeah pretty good student.  Yeah I was a--
Speaker 1: George let me ask you.
Speaker 2: --pretty good student.
Speaker 1: What, well why do you say--
Speaker 2: I guess, I mean, but I wasn't interested in, I don't know, I don't know something else.
Speaker 1: Tell me what that was.
Speaker 2: I don't know what that, you know.  I guess that was what led into, led me here today.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I'm not, you know, my imagination and inquisitiveness, my wanting to know took me th- that far and out of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] ultimately--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --you know, and a lot of people stayed there.  You know I was gone.
Story_ID: 486541
Speaker 1: So were you like--that's why I'm wondering--
Speaker 2: Oh when, you know again when in the '60s [1960s] and all of that I joined the American Light Opera Company when, which put on musicals.  I was still in high, I was like in the tenth grade and that's my parents [Agnes Crockett Faison and George Faison] said, "What are you doing over there with all of those white folks?"  (Laughter) But I was doing all of the parts in all of these musicals that were black parts and like, I did 'Show Boat' [Oscar Hammerstein II] and musicals that we were in like 'Kiss Me, Kate,' which was 'Taming of the Shrew' ['The Taming of the Shrew,' William Shakespeare] and you know and it was that, that music.
Speaker 1: This is in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm just wondering now before high school like while you were you was--
Speaker 2: Elementary school.
Speaker 1: You know even at Shaw [Shaw Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] and--
Speaker 2: At Shaw.
Speaker 1: --you know and even at Perry [Leon L. Perry Middle School, Washington, D.C.] was there, were you performing then at all, I mean that's--
Speaker 2: Right, well literature again we did 'Julius Caesar' [William Shakespeare] and in, in one of the programs I did, "Friends, Romans, countrymen."  Made my own leather tunic top.  I think I may have a picture of that, a sheet for the, for the, the thing, what are those called those wrist--
Speaker 1: The--
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: 'Ben-Hur' was--was 'Ben-Hur' out at that particular time?  What is that--
Speaker 1: But would you--
Speaker 2: That's all '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957] was 'West Side Story' [Arthur Laurents] on Broadway, so you know hearing that.  Leontyne Price was da- what was she doing, wait a minute.
Speaker 1: Stor- was it--
Speaker 2: No, listen these are all--I, I grew up with all these people.  Listen I did, I'm thinking now I met Leonard De Paur chorale [Leonard De Paur Infantry Chorus], and that's with [HistoryMaker] William Warfield--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Leontyne Price, Martha Flowers.  I saw my first 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] while I was still maybe in high school.  I saw Nureyev [Rudolf Nureyev] and Fonteyn [Margot Fonteyn] do their first public appearance at Uline Arena [Washington Coliseum, Washington, D.C.] in '64 [1964], and I still have that, that program--
Speaker 1: But '64 [1964]--
Speaker 2: The, the--but '64 [1964], but then, but we--
Speaker 1: But what, but I'm still trying to get you in high school though that's--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Elvis [Elvis Presley] was the rage in, in, you known, and then who was that Chuck Berry or somebody was--
Speaker 1: Right Chuck Berry.
Speaker 2: --was, was-- are you and don't,-- you know we had all of those kinds of things--
Speaker 1: What, what (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --with jokes, you know.
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: Wait a minute I'm trying to think of it.  Oh, Elvis did 'Blue Suede Shoes' and, and Chuck Berry did 'Blueberry Hill,' right--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and some little joke about something between Elvis and those 'Blue Suede Shoes' and, and 'Blueberry Hill,' you know, in, in, in relating, you know how he had stolen certain things and Big Mama Thornton and all of those early rock and roll.  That's why I kind of grew up confused about what was rock and roll and what was rhythm and blues and what was race records and all of that because it, it kind of all sounded the same.  I mean it--
Speaker 1: It all--
Speaker 2: --it came from us.
Speaker 1: Right.  It all merged.
Speaker 2: It all merged, I mean,--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, we would hear one thing and then when it became, when they did it, it was something else, and you know, so we had the race records and they had rock and roll so, so to speak.
Speaker 1: So let me ask I wanna--do you remember your first--was, was you--Caesar, was playing Caesar [sic. Mark Antony] your first performance?  Do you remember your first--
Speaker 2: You know and then no you have Christmas shows and--
Speaker 1: At church?
Speaker 2: At church [Salem Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] and, and you do "Jesus wept," [John 11:35] (laughter), you know and you can't remember any full scripture, you know.  "Say Jesus wept, Jesus wept."  "Jesus wept."  "Aah."  You know what I mean that whole, whole Christmas cookies and hot chocolate and so forth.
Speaker 1: But was--did you--what would--what attracted you about that whole thing?  Because you're describing, you know, the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.] you're describing performances at church, I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, Howard Theatre, pool halls, unclear, U Street was bustling, I mean every kind of--Florida Avenue into U street.  You know they had their own town.  I mean, and things were going.  Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] was right there, Garfield [Garfield Memorial Hospital, Washington, D.C.].  I mean it was a whole city.  You know, what was I missing?  I didn't know I was missing something.
Story_ID: 486542
Speaker 1: But George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], okay.  Let's, what I'm trying to figure out, no but I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know.  I'm trying to figure it out now too (laughter), now that you say it.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Damn, what?  Was I sheltered?  No I wasn't sheltered.  You know, we were very cognizant of what, you know--
Speaker 1: Right, but, so--
Speaker 2: --here we were and who we were and so forth, because see but I had still connections with the South.  I was--
Speaker 1: You were going there for some summers.
Speaker 2: Right and, and so forth and, and we would go up to the, you know, the boss' house who'd you know who were, I don't know white, you know, so when you really saw white people (laughter), white, white people.  I don't know everybody else is something else these days, but I'm like white people for real (laughter).  So, it's like we would go up, we would visit the boss' house.  We would go up and get Christmas gifts and things from the boss' house at Christmastime.  We--and all--my father [George Faison] would bring his family and oh we would shuffle into the, the living room and there they would be you know very, I don't know, you know, every hair in place, you know a white hair or--.  I don't--you know what, I don't know what I thought you know when we were kids, but we would get you know a few books, some you know nice candy and so forth and they were pleasant.  I guess they would have a drink and so forth and you know that was the relationship between that boss.  And we would meet the son who is going to inherit the, the business from his father, but later the father was gonna find out that the son didn't really (laughter)--we were all at the--it was a changing.  We were standing at the, the, the--on the precipice of change, falling into an abyss of race and confusion and growing up and finding a voice and leaders emerging.  Because all the time, you know, this was--Rosa [Rosa Parks] was sitting on the bus and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was emerging and all of that down south in the '50s [1950s], '54 [1954], '55 [1955].  Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower], you know, and they thinking that Ike was good and so forth and loving Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt].  I'm, I'm, I know I'm going backwards, but loving Roosevelt and, and you know and the loyalty you know.
Story_ID: 486543
Speaker 1: That's why, you know, you know--and then going through that transition of being a Negro, colored, black, African American, you know I've been everything.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: You know so it's like nigga everything, so it's like I own everything.
Speaker 2: So all these--
Speaker 1: You know what I mean all of hate, the love, the misunderstanding.
Speaker 2: But George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison]--
Speaker 1: The prejudice, all, I don't know why you, what do you want me to say?
Speaker 2: George, George (laughter).
Speaker 1: Then I meet people like Alvin Ailey, Miles Davis, I mean I know you wanna stop, but I'm just saying like, what kind of life have I had?
Speaker 2: So wait a minute, so am I giving you flashbacks?
Speaker 1: I'm having flashbacks right now, you know like even from the earliest time, Martha Flowers, John Bubbles [John W. Bubbles], I mean these are people that I met.  My mother [Agnes Crockett Faison] worked for a dentist in those early, early years, so they were with all of those intellectuals of that time, Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew], you know like Mary McLeod Bethune lived in, in, was there in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  You know she didn't die 'til '55 [1955].  A. Philip Randolph, Marian Anderson was right there.  What year was that? Forty-seven [1947], but I was on, yeah that was, I wasn't really, you know, conscious of all of that, but--
Speaker 2: Right, in '47 [1947] you were two years old.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right, but let, but let's go back to, I'm trying to figure out as you know your artistic sense, you know, was that--when were you aware of the fact, or were your parents aware of that they had an artistically-oriented child and was that, and, and--
Speaker 1: Well we had TV and we had everything and then I had--we had TV and, and books, Ebony magazine, Jet magazine that they reg- religiously got.  We got Amsterdam news [New York Amsterdam News] along with--
Speaker 2: Afro-American [Washington Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers].
Speaker 1: Afro, the Afro-American.  I sold that.  I work for a Muslim man who owned the cleaners.  I shined shoes, worked in, worked in their little delis.  So, you know here was a guy, a man that was self-sufficient.  He owned his own business.  So, he's following in, but had a, a, another kind of religious slant though, but that followed like my father [George Faison].  They worked.  My uncle was, excuse me, a policeman.  My one other uncle drove a cab.  The other one, one worked for the Bureau of Engraving [U.S. Bureau of Engraving and Printing], you know, in printing.  Another one was here in New York [New York], living in Brooklyn, you know prospering, was a chauffeur for somebody.  It's like they all had--they all worked.  They all had jobs.
Speaker 2: But George, that didn't ask, answer my question--
Speaker 1: What was that?
Speaker 2: --about, about your creative sense.
Speaker 1: Then, then, but I think that was all implied in the papers, the material that you would, you would read.  So you would, you would dream.  I'd say I'm thinking that the most and powerful thing before you learn technique or you go to school or somebody else influence you is the imagination that you are born with, and that you don't let become encumbered in any way, that you own yourself in that way.  You can imagine anything that you want to.  Nobody owns that and how you keep that and how you, how you escape and how you can escape into that.  Not escape to relieve any damaging thing or anything.  You know, I, I didn't feel cursed to be black or anything.  I knew my people were fighting for freedom and rightfully so.  That was, you know, a fair and noble cause, you know, to, to be free, to think, to do, to act or to even just imagine or make something up.  That's what we did.  We played cowboys and Indians [Native American] and had BB guns and somebody was tap, learning how to tap dance down the street, never (unclear).  "Oh those are tap shoes, show us a step."  This is me, I mean you know it's like not that I--
Speaker 2: It was all around you is what you're saying.
Speaker 1: It was all around me, all around me, and even in that kind of segregated society, so I met the best.  Probably Mahalia Jackson sang at our church [Salem Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] and, you know, just the personality and the, the character, the ca- you know the carriage, the, you know, the way that the people acted, dignified.
Story_ID: 486544
Speaker 1: I wanna know, the question I was asking about--
Speaker 2: Being young and--
Speaker 1: Well creative where you knew--
Speaker 2: Creative.
Speaker 1: Like, like when did someone tell you, "George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison] that was really good what you did. You really recited that well.  You--," you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know but when we were young we would perform for our own parents or our relatives the images that we saw from Stepin Fetchit to you know any grandiose illusions we may have had at that time (laughter), you know about, you know what the other people would do, you know like imitate I guess in a sense.
Speaker 1: Now when you did those productions, you know, for your parents [Agnes Crockett Faison and George Faison], who played what role 'cause there're five of you?
Speaker 2: Oh no you do standup, standup.  You were alone baby, you were on your own.  No, we didn't get together, "Oh you have this part, that part."  No, you were on your own.  What do you do sing, sing or if you have this imitation then you do that.  Or, or you know I can remember you know one time at a family gathering to you know mock Stepin Fetchit or something and you know they would ask questions, obvious, you know, kind of things.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: That would make you laugh, the joke, and that, that would tie into the character, the subservient or stereotypical coon so to speak.  You know we had that was that 'Amos 'n' Andy,' Sapphire [Sapphire Stevens], time too.  And we would even make, you know, fun of some of those, those images.  And I guess seeing, you know, whoever were the heroes of that time on screen, you know.
Story_ID: 486545
Speaker 1: Now, George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], how did you come to be with American Light Opera Company?  And what, were you in your junior year?  Was that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was--no I was, I was in the tenth grade at Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] and I, you know, from junior high school [Shaw Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] and singing in the choir.  Oh, from junior high school singing in the choir, playing in the band, which I played trumpet and French horn in the school orchestra and all of that I somehow forget, I don't know, that I had done that.  And that gi- gave me discipline beyond the dancing, playing the notes on the page, practicing, being a part of the band and I fi- figured that the, the French horn, you know saying who, who plays really the French horn at that time?  But it's very inte- understanding where you are in life is like playing the French horn in an orchestra.  Unders- you know because the French horn is a kind of muted.  It's, it, it, it, it's not, it's not like brassy, like a trumpet or something, it gets other note, (hums) and it chan- it changes the course of the orchestra because of the notes like the oboe that it, that it plays.  So, know, you know like knowing that you're playing this, this, you're behind the trumpet so the guys that are playing first, second, third trumpet, which I also play, but I was, you know, and if I guess I stuck with it you could play third, you know first trumpet, but I was like third and second.  But, understanding--
Speaker 1: So, you were good?
Speaker 2: Yeah, kind of, yeah good.
Speaker 1: You can't be playing first--
Speaker 2: Really, trumpet, right and be bad.  What am I saying?  But that was in high school--
Story_ID: 486546
Speaker 1: This is actually before I--or during, around that other time that I found out that I could dance.  You know, I could dance, just dance.  I'm not talking about tap dancing, but interpretive, modern, what would be modern contemporary dance.
Speaker 2: Now, how did you find--
Speaker 1: And social dance.
Speaker 2: How did you find out you could do modern?  Were you taking a class?  I mean people just don't find (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I could imagine.  You could put on a record and I could improvise to it.
Speaker 2: But you weren't taking dance classes?
Speaker 1: No, I wasn't taking dance classes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, I could improvise to it, and then I, and then in wondering how do you do those spins that they were doing on those shows and how did they stay up on that one leg?  How they stood up on that one leg and I would just try that, but then I'd get dizzy or I'd fall off, or I'd fall into some of the furniture and so forth.  And I, you know, and I would say, "I gotta get that, I gotta get that."  So I stood--we had a hallway that was probably thirty if, thirty-six inches wide if that, so if you put, if I put my knee, my foot up to my knee, which is what I saw them do, and turn around I could ultimately and not hit the wall, I could learn how to teach myself to turn and stay straight, and if I didn't I'd bang my knee into the wall of one side and my shoulder into the wall on the other side.  And I did this and I practiced standing on that one foot and trying to turn like this until I got it.  So I could dance.  Yeah, I could dance, I could turn, and then--but I didn't know what I was doing.  I didn't know what all of this meant.  I didn't know what the terms were until at the American Light Opera Company.  I had already danced in a production.  I opened Howard University, Cramton Auditorium [Washington, D.C.], in, in one of those years '63 [1963] or '64 [1964] with the American Light Opera Company as its only and lead black dancer--
Speaker 2: But, okay but--
Speaker 1: --wait a minute, this was still a little bit like high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], but all along I'm, I'm building up to that, but I was dancing then I got that job, but, that's later.  I'm saying that I taught myself how to turn and how to do this, and I would feel certain, you would feel certain things and then act them out or do, you know, but that was me or I would do it for my sisters and brothers.  They can probably tell you better--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --what I was doing 'cause I was off in, into my imagination and they were only--I would just use them (laughter).  They wouldn't know, you know, what they were doing at, at certain times, but I, there I would be.  Some, some great movie.  We, you know, you know great movie, old movie, you know, because all during the time that, that I was growing up we always had late night movies remember.  We don't even see that catalog of movies anymore, so I grew up on all of those, all of them, you know when they, you know and you saw different things, different experiences, 'The Good Earth' which was an epic and that was Chinese people and they, you know, and they did more than, than make Yaka mein or you know or Fren- or fried or--
Speaker 2: Fried rice.
Speaker 1: --fried rice or any of those things, which was, you know, we didn't have it much because my mother [Agnes Crockett Faison] cooked everything, you know so we didn't eat out like Chinese food.  But, when I went to other people houses we would experience all of that, all of that, but I taught myself how to do that.  But, when I was overhearing some trained dancers talk about plies and jetes and pirouettes I said, "What are they talking about?"  And they were talking about dancing and that prompted me to really go and take, you know, find a ballet school.  So, I went, I said, "Well, where do you study?"  And they were studying Jones and Haywood [Jones-Haywood School of Ballet; Jones-Haywood Dance School] up on Georgia Avenue in Washington [D.C.].  But, this is after I got a job dancing.
Story_ID: 486547
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wait a minute--this is after you were working with American Light Opera Company (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Light Opera Company.  Let me tell you how I got American Light Opera Company.
Speaker 1: But you have to tell me 'cause I can't, I've asked--
Speaker 2: I, I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was in the tenth grade, I joined the choir at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 1: Dunbar, Dunbar.
Speaker 2: --and there was singing and lovely singing and (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Now what were you alto or?
Speaker 2: I was, you know, tenor, or nothing.
Speaker 1: Tenor.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or baritone or something.  And in the choir and I met these, these people, this, this, this guy, Felix Rice, fair-skinned again, curly hair, was a lieutenant colonel in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] program.  See we had to take ROTC, so you had to march.  I had to learn drill.  I, you know, this is my first year in high school.  We marched every Tuesday and Thursday.  We got up before school started, and we had the worst captain that you wanna, you know, he would hit us with that ri- riding crop.  Back straight, hips forward, walk from the hips, from, you know, the hips down, salute, close order drill, parade dress.  You know how to put together M1 rifle because that's what we--and then wear a uniform two days a week and, you know, and all, all of that, the discipline, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now who, who was, who was head of the drill team?
Speaker 2: No, no, Colonel Rumsey [William H. Rumsey, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Oh, it was Colonel Rumsey.  Now who was head of the band who?
Speaker 2: The band was another man.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: You know these were--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --men, role models and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, so you know so, you know and they would teach woodworking.  I learned wood working and sheet metal--
Speaker 1: Okay, but we're gonna go back to Light Opera Company.
Speaker 2: But, okay so this friend came into school one day--
Speaker 1: And this--
Speaker 2: --because I was in the choir and they were gonna put on, I don't know some show, and said I, "There's an audition."  "Audition, what's that?"  "You know you try out. They, they, they'll give you something, you know you learn.  They'll teach you how to dance, you know they teach to do some dancing and they'll teach you some singing and so forth, and do you wanna go?"  It was an adventure to me, "Yeah, I'll go."  Tenth grade just out of the ninth grade, you know, like fourteen or something.  And then going to this Trinity Church [Holy Trinity Catholic Church, Washington, D.C.] immediately we were separated and I had never auditioned for anything in my life, anything.  And here we, you know since I hadn't done any show tunes.  What show tunes?  I wasn't like studying like that show tunes.  I didn't know any show tunes.  "Okay, sing 'Happy Birthday'."  So, I sang 'Happy Birthday.'  Okay and then they would all mark down, you know, things, and then I would go to the next room.  I guess, anybody else I guess would have been terrified and then there was a choreographer from the New York City Ballet, choreographer, Gloria Contreras.  I mean I'm meeting--these people are famous and you know Gloria, Georgia Engel, Rusty Thacker, Donn [Donn B. Murphy], I can't remember, Don--these were all people--you know Georgia Engel who--
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: --later became, well she and, she was there as well.  All of these people, so I'm auditioning.
Speaker 1: But what was the role?  This is, what is--?
Speaker 2: This, I was a dancer, the chorus, I was going to be the chor- in the chorus.  I had never (laughter) done anything like this.  So, at the end of it they tell me I got it.
Speaker 1: Now did your friend get it who--
Speaker 2: I run outside to tell my friend who had studied musicals, had been in the choir, had done all of that business.  I said, "I got the job.  How did you do?"  He had not made it.  And then you know I was on my own.
Speaker 1: So, did that end of the friendship (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Friendship and everything, so that kind of--
Speaker 1: Now what was his name?
Speaker 2: Felix Rice.
Speaker 1: Felix Rice, okay.
Story_ID: 486548
Speaker 1: And now, so you go in and you got the, I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got the role, I got the role and then they, I got--
Speaker 1: Do you remember what--?
Speaker 2: I led the chorus in, in the dancing for, what's the name, I hadn't studied yet.
Speaker 1: But what--
Speaker 2: I didn't even see those people until a couple of years later at the American Light Opera Company, the dancers that I, I'm talking about overhearing talking about dancing, and I had gotten that.
Speaker 1: Wait, so you got the role.  You got--
Speaker 2: Of a dancer in the chorus.  I could hold a tune.  I could, I could do the dancing, and they thought I was a dancer.
Speaker 1: So, what was, what was--
Speaker 2: It was 'Kiss Me, Kate.'
Speaker 1: It was--
Speaker 2: And I wore tights and a tunic.  I was one of the (singing), "The next stop, Cremona, dah, dah," ["We Open in Venice"]. You know, there's, what is that, oh what is that?  What are those songs from that?
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (Singing) "Were thine, that special face, a face da, da, da, dum," ["Were Thine That Special Face"] that is--John Ray had done that on Broadway.  "Too darn hot, it's too darn hot, dun, do, dun, do dun" ["Too Darn Hot"].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): "Brush Up Your Shakespeare."
Speaker 2: Right. (Singing) "Brush up your Shakespeare. Start quoting him now. Brush up--and the women you will wow."  What is the, 'Kiss Me, Kate,' what is in the, is that "Another Op'nin, Another--" ["Another Op'nin, Another Show"].  No that's--
Speaker 1: No, it's not [sic.].
Speaker 2: That's 'Annie Get Your Gun' [sic.].  But I learned all of that before I had, I had left high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.].  I had done 'South Pacific.'  I got cast as Abe in that.
Speaker 1: Now the American Light Opera Company so you're saying it's a white company.  Now is, what, explain how many blacks were there?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) you can count us all on one hand or, or in that, that instance I was the only one, "Boy what are you doing over here with all those white folks?" (laughter) is what my father [George Faison] would say.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so what did you learn in that whole process?
Speaker 2: I learned life. It was life.  You know some, some people didn't like you.  Some people did.  It was, it was life right there, so I was getting it whether I--I was just getting life.  It was life and how it was gonna be, so I didn't have to wait and find out any lessons, learn any lessons.
Speaker 1: Now where you performing when you were performing?
Speaker 2: Cramton [Cramton Auditorium, Washington, D.C.], Lisner Auditorium [Washington, D.C.], oh the big time, what are you talking about?
Speaker 1: So were your parents they were able--
Speaker 2: They didn't know.  They had never talked to any of these, and here I am my teacher who'd be, you know who came to see me in, in 'Show Boat' [Oscar Hammerstein II].  He was an English teacher, and he was at Shaw [Shaw Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] and oh that 'Show Boat,' you know because, (singing) "Niggers all work on the Mississippi" ["Cotton Blossom"] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mississippi--
Speaker 2: (Humming) "How could they--?"  You know but, that was life, but, you know, you didn't tell me about it.  You know, we didn't talk about everything, so you know, and then my parents again didn't have to talk to me about everything, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know.  I was out there.
Story_ID: 486549
Speaker 1: So what does your father [George Faison] think?  Is he upset that his--
Speaker 2: Son is dancing.
Speaker 1: --is dancing right, that's a major issue right?
Speaker 2: I guess it is, but I continued to dance.  I continued to work.  I had jobs.  I worked at the hat company when, I worked at NIH, National Institutes of Health.  I did the isotope things.  I saw the cats tied down, all the experimentation.  I catalogued the Nazi films in, for the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.].  What did I miss?  I did liturgical dance with Mary Craighill on at the church that--who, who was going to that church [St. Mark's Episcopal Church, Washington, D.C.]?  Johnson, President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was going to the church.  You know we cried over Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] when he got shot, you know.  We did all, you know.
Speaker 1: So let me, let me ask this now you're, you're doing this, but you're still in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so you're having--
Speaker 2: I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], still in high school.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Right, I at fifteen was dan- you know when I said that I had to find out what these dancers were saying, so I had to get on, on the good foot.  I had to find out what was this whole dancing thing.  I had to control this.  What was I, what was leading me?  What was I, I, I doing?  And so I went to, when I was still in high school took dance classes at Howard University under Carolyn Tate who had danced with Mar- Donnie McKayle [HistoryMaker Donald McKayle], but it started with dance, started at Howard with Mary Kay Allen [sic. Maryrose Reeves Allen] who was, the Bethune [Mary McLeod Bethune], of that, you know, and these very masculine kind of women that were forging this way.
Speaker 1: So, you're saying--
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: --but you're saying while you're with American Light Opera Company you're going to study (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Opera Company--I had to find.  I (unclear)--
Story_ID: 486550
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But now, I, I read some place that you know, after this audition, that six months later someone said you couldn't dan- you would never be a dancer.
Speaker 2: No I went to the ballet school.  Jones and Haywood [Jones-Haywood School of Ballet; Jones-Haywood Dance School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Oh no--now, Jones and Haywood is that a black school?
Speaker 2: School, it's a black school run by these two women and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you talk about who they were the two women?
Speaker 2: They, they trained the best.  Chita Rivera, [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson all went through there, who later went to the New York City Ballet.  They had a--Campbell, Sylvester Campbell later became, went to Holland [the Netherlands] and became the premiere dancer of the Het Nationale [Het Nationale Ballet; Dutch National Ballet], which was the national ballet of Holland.  And Raven Wilkinson.  These are all people that integrated white companies.  They later went, you know they left D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  Louis was the only black in 'Damn Yankees.'  He choreographed.  He was the first black to be in the New York City, the New York [New York] School of American Ballet, which was Balanchine's [George Balanchine] company, but Louis was short.  Louis lives next door.  We got him into that apartment that he now lives next door, my men- who was my mentor who brought me here.  Which is another story about Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and how I later got integrated into all of that--
Speaker 1: So, but I'm--
Speaker 2: --dancing there, but this is still before I had, I had even graduated from high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: So you're, okay so you go over, you become involved in American Light Company [American Light Opera Company] and then you go to--
Speaker 2: And that, that's summer.
Speaker 1: And you go to Jones-Haywood and then they tell you--
Speaker 2: They say, I go to Jones-Haywood and they--
Speaker 1: Now is that like after, like six, six months.
Speaker 2: I've been dancing.  I had been dancing and been on other programs, other places.
Speaker 1: And so they say, what do they say?  Why?
Speaker 2: They said, "We can't teach you anything.  You're too fast.  What are you doing?"  But, it was like I was trying to pick up and, and where, you know, where I knew I, I was--
Speaker 1: You needed some help.
Speaker 2: I, I needed the help.  They wanted me to start and so I had not erased my brain about the experience--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --that I was having, that I had already had, you know.  You know, but I had to slowly, you know get that, and so I went other places where I really buckled down and got plies and classical.
Speaker 1: Under, under control.
Speaker 2: Under control.
Speaker 1: But let me ask you, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I was doing modern, all of that time--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with Carolyn Tate and dancing, you know, and even at Howard University.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486551
Speaker 1: I'm just, okay I'm s- I feel like I'm a little dense, but you're saying that you, you got in with, you know you got in that performance and then for the next really three years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, and then they would come up with seasons.  They had a show every season--
Speaker 1: And you would--
Speaker 2: --that I would appear in.
Speaker 1: So you were in every season?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You were part of the company.
Speaker 2: Of the American Light Opera [American Light Opera Company] family.
Speaker 1: Company.
Speaker 2: So, when I won the Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], you know it was--
Speaker 1: George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison] you're gonna drive me crazy. George you're gonna drive me crazy, you cannot--
Speaker 2: No, but we're not--
Speaker 1: --do that.
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: You can't, you can't go forward like that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm just saying so, you know like, but think about the experience.  Here's this little black guy standing in the back in the chorus doing whatever he could do and so forth and later these people find out, Blythe Danner's brother [Harry Danner] was part of that.  The Danners were in, living in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  They were part of that American Light Opera Company.  Jon Jory who is now the president of the national theater at--in D.C. was one of the directors.  I think the director of 'Show Boat' [Oscar Hammerstein II].
Speaker 1: So, so--
Speaker 2: All of these people.
Speaker 1: So tell me, so were you the youngest member in the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You were the youngest member in, in the, in the--
Speaker 2: American Light Opera.
Speaker 1: --Light Opera Company, and what--okay so how often were you rehearsing?  You know I'm just trying--
Speaker 2: You know twice a week, sometimes three times a week and, and on the weekends, and, and then you did the production and they sewed the costumes, made the scenery, did the lights and you know so I did all of, all of that business.
Speaker 1: What do you think you learned with that experience?
Speaker 2: Oh my God, that was my Broadway training.  I couldn't have bought that.  You know, where do you, where do you go to school for that?  And still in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.].  So, I was on a fast track through all of this, musical comedy, playing instruments, singing in the choirs, and was stopped dead in my tracks when I saw Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater].  That was it.  I was home.
Speaker 1: Okay, but--
Speaker 2: Which, I was still in high, I was getting ready to graduate from high school--not high school, I graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Right, no, you went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] though?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486552
Speaker 1: Oh, and at one of those programs at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I had, my friend introduced me.  He said, "Look at this, look--," (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison].
Speaker 1: --"in this magazine."
Speaker 2: George hold on one second.
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: We have to have--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: You graduated from Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And was going on to college.
Speaker 2: Okay and, and at--
Speaker 1: While, right.
Speaker 2: While what?
Speaker 1: While I was still in high school.  I, I was asked by one of the Howard Players [Howard University Players], so while going to school over there in the phys ed [physical education] department learning how to dance I la- later met for real these people that only looked at me different, 'cause here this black boy was touring with all of these white people and they had rented, the American Light Opera Company rented Cramton Auditorium [Washington, D.C.], a black university and brought their production there, and they did the production in the newly-minted Cramton Auditorium, the most luxurious on this black campus, and so all the black people that were in there are looking at me.  I don't know them.
Speaker 2: But there, they're, they're amazed.
Speaker 1: They're shocked and amazed and, "Who is this?"  And, and I would later meet them and you know to varying degrees they would give me attitude or would stand back or--but you know, here I was in this production.  You know so here I was between the white people and the black people, you know, in 'Kiss Me, Kate.'  I met them later and that, and they were who I would later find out were the Howard Players who were at Howard University (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now who was--
Speaker 1: --in the fine arts department under Owen Dodson and Ted Shine.
Speaker 2: Can you talk about Owen Dods- Owen Dodson and Ted Shine 'cause you would--
Speaker 1: Owen Dodson was the dean--
Speaker 2: Because--
Speaker 1: --of drama at, in the fine arts department at Howard University.  Warner Law- I think is it Warner Lawson, Dean Lawson was the famous music dean in that same department.  I think there was an association with [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett, and all of them were in that department.  I, what did I have to do but go and wander through these halls.  Ted Shine, I mean it was just there.  So, you know, but the first production of 'Rashomon' that I saw was black in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] by the Howard Players.  I saw 'Hamlet' [William Shakespeare] black, in high school at the newly-built Ira Aldridge Theater [Washington, D.C.] who was a great Shakespearian actor of the 19th century.  It's like history was living for me and I could just, all these experiences.  I met the opera people again at Glen Echo Park [Glen Echo, Maryland] in, one of those summers when they were doing 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] and had never heard anything so beautiful and with Martha Flowers and John Bubbles [John W. Bubbles], and you know I'd had gone to the best.  I got the best.
Speaker 2: Now did you, did you study under Howard Dodson?  Did you?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay you did.
Speaker 1: Owen Dodson.
Speaker 2: Oh, (unclear), I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 486553
Speaker 1: But are you knowing at this point you definitely want to be a dancer?  Well, see this is what I, so you went into Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] though to be a dentist suppo- that's--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --okay that's what I read.
Speaker 2: Or something.
Speaker 1: Okay or some--
Speaker 2: Respectable, you go, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you go and you be a dentist, a teacher, or a lawyer or something,
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but you don't dance.  And, and so you know you put that in the back of your mind.  You're not really going to dance or anything, and you don't know that you have these talents or you're going to even choreograph or anything.  You've had these experiences and so forth and for a while you think that oh you can be this and a so forth, but as you get, as you, as graduation grows nearer, you have to really be serious.  You've taken your SATs, what are going?  Where are you going?  How are you gonna go and can you afford it?  All of that is in your mind, and you, you know, scrape together your means and, and then you continue to press, press forward and, but who can really afford to go to, to college and who can really afford to, to do all of the other things?  So in the meantime, I'm auditioning, doing readings and so forth, and then actually Ted Shine says, "Why don't you, why don't you apply for, get a scholarship?  I'll give you scholarship to go be a fine arts major."  And it was something that Owen Dodson wanted as well, so that became, you know, a focal.  But then, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they were mentors of sort.
Speaker 2: They were mentors--
Speaker 1: Both of them.
Speaker 2: --along with [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And quite a few other mentors that were in old show business, Clara Harrington [ph.] who was just a theatrical character.  And then Louis Johnson who had come down from New York [New York] who had had a career already, was a choreographer had been then only, the black that was in 'Damn Yankees' movie and you know, and who could dance, oh my god, dancer and a choreographer.
Story_ID: 486554
Speaker 1: Sort of, you know, Kennedy, excuse me, and then, you know, those assassinations and all of those other things started happening.
Speaker 2: And how did that--why do you reference that?  How did that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You have to get serious.  You know I guess to, to that point it was, everything was so idealistic and, and yes I could do this, I could--you know civil rights had opened those doors in spite of the bombings, the burnings, the killing and all of that and then the murders and all of that.  But then after a while you, you got really serious about what it was.  No your identity and then you started marching with Kendall Flowers who was activist on the Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus along with [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory.  You know you picket and you, you know, you meet other people, Odetta [HistoryMaker Odetta Gordon] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte.
Speaker 1: Harry Belafonte, Nina Simone, you meet a whole another radical crowd.  The students rebel over how they look.  We took over the administration building and insisted that the homecoming queen be able to wear her Afro.  We're introduced to, you know, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] is one of those people we, just, this is just before he radical, you know that summer where they broke--
Speaker 2: Right with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].
Speaker 1: --and became radicalized with SNCC.
Speaker 2: Right and Black Power, I'm sorry with Black Power movement.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: What about, now the, the president of the university is still Mor- was Morde, was he Mordecai, was Mord--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Mordecai Johnson.  And then now was Alain Locke was he in, in the fine arts department or not?
Speaker 1: No, I think that they had began to--
Speaker 2: To pass on, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay 'cause I had read something somewhere where Dodson [Owen Dodson] and he didn't particularly you know get--
Speaker 1: Yeah Dodson represented the new--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, and plays.  He represented the new radical writing as well, the Maya, the, the, the James Baldwins and then by their association with the Maya Angelous [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] and all of the other newer writers.  'Blues for Mister Charlie' [James Baldwin] was premiered down there in the fine arts department.  So, they, they were very, they knew.
Speaker 2: Who--
Speaker 1: But see I was still in that, remember I emerged slowly from the dance department.
Story_ID: 486555
Speaker 1: I wasn't to--totally, I didn't even know I could talk, so I did one of the characters in (unclear) story and they you know offered me that scholarship [to Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  But then again I saw--
Speaker 2: Wait, but was there a dance department on campus?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the phys ed [physical education] department.
Speaker 2: So on the phys ed, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Ed department.  There was no dance.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was in the phys ed department and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --it was connected to that small, washed white modern dance community that they had at Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] on S Street.  I can't, I cannot even remember Estelle [ph.] something.  I can't remember.
Speaker 2: So you're saying the, the, the dance classes were associated with this white dance troupe.  It was mod- or you--is it--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, they were all separate.  I was going from one--
Speaker 2: Environment to the other.
Speaker 1: --environment to the other.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, and comfortably though.
Speaker 1: And comfortably.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I had that talent.  Again, but you take it for granted.  You say, you think, you know you take that or what you know or perceive or learned.  You don't know that that's gonna separate you from other people.
Speaker 2: What about your technique, though, that developed during this time period?  Can you talk about that a little bit just in terms--
Speaker 1: Oh, it was growing, growing at leaps and bounds, I mean, you know if you counted your--
Speaker 2: What technique, well what--
Speaker 1: If you measured, if you measured your progress or your, you know, and, and, and I, I sort of thought of it as plateaus that I would, if I, if I could master this in this way--I challenged myself if I can do this, then I'll go on another step.
Speaker 2: So were some of those steps, George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], as far--
Speaker 1: Learning how to pirouette, learning how to jete, learning basic, rudimentary things that, if I had been studying, you know, since I were a kid over years, yes I would ul- ultimately three or four or five years down the line ultimately get it, but no I was fourteen and fifteen.  I had to get it quick, fifteen, sixteen.  I had to get all these, these things under my belt, but I wasn't really good.  Seventeen, eighteen I'm getting ready to graduate from high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], so where you gonna go?  What you going to do?  Vietnam [Vietnam War] is looming, it's, it's, you know, it's looming, that conflict.  They're murdering people.  What are you going to do?  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this was in--
Speaker 1: --I just got swept away and then--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --you know you're gonna just go to school for a time--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then get--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --into that.  And that, that grueling, getting up aimlessly going to classes.  What are you going to do, where are you going?  And not, you know, oh at the end of this you'll be a dentist or you'll be a teacher, or you'll be something, you know, but I want, I guess I wanted something right now.
Speaker 2: Now let me ask you, how, how much would you practice per day or you know or during a week?  I mean did you have a regiment [sic. regimen]?
Speaker 1: Oh, I would go those class.
Speaker 2: How many?
Speaker 1: Oh, I went to, you know every day after school maybe three to four times a week I would go and be the only guy in class and do the modern dance thing.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay now so you, you come under Owen Dodson and--
Speaker 1: Ted Shine.
Speaker 2: --and right tutelage and the four years--so you're there from 1964 to '68 [1968] is that right?
Speaker 1: Right, no '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Sixty--
Speaker 1: It can't be '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Wait sixty--when did you--
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966] because I had been, come out of school.  I have to--I was going from fifteen--
Speaker 2: Oh that's right, that's right, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: --I'm going from fifteen to the physical education department--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) learning how to dance--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --on the Mary Allen [Maryrose Reeves Allen], and A--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Adams [ph.].
Speaker 2: No you're right it was '66 [1966].
Story_ID: 486556
Speaker 1: 'Cause you saw a program, you saw a performance of Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ailey.  Well, no, a friend, a buddy of mine says, "Look at this."  Alvin Ailey and the guys have a spread.  I had never seen anything so sculpted, so beautiful, so controlled, so, something--you know the photographs from, from, from 'Revelations' [Alvin Ailey], classic, beautiful, the dance that I'm dancing.  I didn't know I was dancing his dance.  You know what I mean?  That--the movement.  So, they come onto the stage everything from Talley Beatty in 'Congo Tango Palace' is breathtaking.  Every--'The Road of the Phoebe Snow' [Talley Beatty] is so much like 'West Side Story' I begin to wonder later finding out that yes, there was some thievery going on and yes because you know if you see 'West Side Story' it's about gangs and men, women, and so, and you, and it's so much like that, but it was 'Revelations' that's just nailed me.  That's what I wanna do.  And I left school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] the next--
Speaker 1: To, to pur- to pursue it--
Speaker 2: To pursue it.
Speaker 1: --to pursue it.  Okay, now was Alvin Ailey there that time, you know the--
Speaker 2: No, I go to New York [New York], my mentor says--
Speaker 1: But who was--
Speaker 2: --oh but [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell is going to--
Speaker 1: But wait a minute who was performing the night you saw it okay, okay, okay (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh, [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison, Miguel Godreau--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Dudley Williams, Morton Winston who had, had he been anybody else would have probably been in a ballet company or something.  They were magnificent, magnificent.  Kelvin Rotardier, Takako Asakawa, this Japanese girl who was with Martha Graham and all of that and--
Speaker 1: Now.
Speaker 2: Oh my god.
Speaker 1: How, how--
Speaker 2: Much longer did I stay there--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Well, I know you said you left the next (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Well, I contemplated.  I had to, I had to think about it.  I didn't know--and then Louis [HistoryMaker Louis Johnson] who was doing 'Jamaica' [Yip Harburg and Fred Saidy], an Ira Aldridge [Ira Aldridge Theater, Washington, D.C.] student production of 'Jamaica.'  We were doing all that and I got the leads in that, his piece and so forth.  I, he said, he called me one night, "They are auditioning in New York."
Speaker 1: For Ailey?
Speaker 2: For a--no, for Arthur Mitchell.  They're forming a new company.  You should come up and audition for that company.
Story_ID: 486557
Speaker 1: Well, I auditioned that one weekend.
Speaker 2: You went up to New York [New York]?
Speaker 1: Went up to New York, auditioned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this is, this is 1966?
Speaker 1: This is 19- yeah '66 [1966] and they [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] are going to Dakar, Senegal for the First Festival of Two Wor- Worlds.
Speaker 2: FESTAC, the FESTAC?
Speaker 1: No, not FESTAC [sic. FESMAN].
Speaker 2: It wasn't, wasn't--
Speaker 1: Festival of Two Worlds [sic. First World Festival of Negro Arts, Dakar, Senegal].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Senghor [Leopold Sedar Senghor] was the president--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --and who was a poet and all of that I later found out when I went in '67 [1967].  But, in, in '66 [1966] I go to New York I got into the Arthur Mitchell company that's going to Africa.  I have never taken, in the end what I see what they're doing, what I was taking was not a ballet class.  I had never seen black dancers so well trained or the, the level of professionalism in my life.  Here was Claude Thompson, Paula Kelly, the best of who we are that were working in New York.  They were teaching in New York.  I mean the best ever, and here I am scrawny, skinny by comparison.  'Cause here they are buff, they are made into the machines that they are, and they're doing works by Talley [Talley Beatty] and [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham and, and it's like dizzying and, and being taught by Vanoye Aikens, doing things I didn't think the human body could even do.  I'm thrown in here, and we have to take a class before all of this.  I was staying with my relatives out in Brooklyn [New York].  I go back, well after the audition I get--
Speaker 2: Is this with your aunt, your, okay aunt and uncle?
Speaker 1: After I get the, the call to come and I, I'm going and my mother [Agnes Crockett Faison] encour- "Yes, go on."
Speaker 2: Oh, she did encourage it?
Speaker 1: Right.  No they don't, you know they just say yes, because if you're going you're going anyway.  And well I left then and never came back.
Story_ID: 486558
Speaker 1: And this is another little story that I--that I just have as an aside.  Not until like last year, I'm at a party and we're having a conversation with a man that is going to marry, that married later Maya Angelou's niece [Rosa Johnson Butler] and we're talking, and I tell him where I grow up and he tells a story about this family that grows up on 3rd Street.  I live at 1521 3rd Street, he lives 1521 New Jersey Avenue [Washington, D.C.].  We never met.  I could walk out of my house through the other building and into his house on the other street.  So he's talking about this boy that has two brothers that lives on 3rd Street, and how they were all so upset when he went off to New York [New York].  (Crying) Life.  How did I make it?  How did I do it?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: But it was destined in many ways.
Speaker 1: Ah, it's--you know and he, and he said this and told the whole story, described my family, my brothers and everything, and I said, "That's me," and it was.  He told my whole story and we're saying, we're just talking about this person and then it, and what they thought.
Speaker 2: Well what did they think?  What did they--
Speaker 1: They said it was incredible.  He left.  He wasn't but so old and this and that and the other and he, he, you know, and, and because we were probably the same age and he left, he got up and went and here you know after all the success and you know I'm sitting here talking to somebody that knows me, or who--
Speaker 2: Knows where you came from.
Speaker 1: And this so close and this family and we're just sitting around talking and he tells my story.  And he was just as shocked as I am.  So it was just like that, that was amazing.
Speaker 2: But he did not know that he was telling your story is what you're--
Speaker 1: No he did not, no.  That he would say.  That I, I had to tell him those are my brothers, and that is me.  And he told me about what the neighborhood and all the people in, in the community had thought.
Speaker 2: Well what did they think?
Speaker 1: They thought, it was just like how bold is that.  He went, he went away and, and didn't come back and became you know me, George Faison [HistoryMaker George W. Faison].  It was amazing.
Story_ID: 486559
Speaker 1: So now--what was it? Like, can you describe when you saw that, that production of 'Revelations' [Alvin Ailey] how it struck?  What (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I could be, I could be anything.  I could do anything and dance too because that's what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: So it freed you up, no?
Speaker 2: No, I recognized, I was already free, but where was I going to land?  What was I going to do?  And then that was it, that was the way, that was what I was going to do.  But, I didn't go to New York [New York] and immediately join the Alvin Ailey company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater].  I met with and joined the Arthur Mitchell company, but that disbanded because of money and they took Alvin Ailey who was in Europe and on hard times to, to Africa, to Senegal, so--
Speaker 1: Wait the company--so you audition--
Speaker 2: That wasn't, for a company that was supposed to go.
Speaker 1: But by the time it was time to go--
Speaker 2: Time to go we didn't go and Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell], Arth- that was one of the companies that Arthur had to disband because of money and they then took the Ailey company who was touring in Europe to Africa.
Speaker 1: And you went with the Ailey company?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: I didn't meet Alvin that year.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't meet Alvin that first year.
Speaker 1: So you, so, so let me ask you, so--
Speaker 2: I just went to New York after I saw New York and I, I was asking everybody.  So when I went to that first audition for Arthur Mitchell I said, "How can I, where is Alvin Ailey?  Where is his school?  How can I meet him?"  "Oh they're out of town, they're in Europe, they're touring."  "When will they be back?"  "Oh they won't be back for a year," but that wasn't true, but, "They won't be back for a year or something like that."  So and this company had disbanded, what am I gonna do.
Speaker 1: So how long was it--
Speaker 2: A year.
Speaker 1: No, a year.  Oh, so the company disbanded quickly after you got that.
Speaker 2: Got, got, got there, so--
Speaker 1: And got--
Speaker 2: Then there was another audition that I would have that, that just (laughter)--here I am.  I auditioned for the first integrated, which I didn't know, first integrated TV show ever in America, which was called 'ABC Stage 67.'  Which was--starred Lauren Bacall and John Forsythe, Channel 7 [WABC-TV, New York, New York].  I got that job, because somebody arrived late.  So the audition happened, I got chosen, and then whoever was late walked in the door, Tommy Johnson of the Tommy Johnson Trio.  Who, they, if, these were people (laughter) don't--these were professionals.  I mean these were really dancers.  They were, you know, but I got that job, and it was my first job.  And then during one of the breaks in filming I asked Ms. Bacall could, would she take a picture from, fr- fr- with me.  We took that picture, it was published in Jet magazine.  So how could I ever go back home, ever?  (Laughter) They thought I had made it.  Then, but I had to live beyond that.  I mean that paid more money than I had ever seen in my life, so I--
Speaker 1: How much did that pay?
Speaker 2: I don't know six hundred thousand dollars in '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: No, no not '6 [1966].
Speaker 2: Yes it did.  That was a profess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wait a minute, well no '6 [1966]--
Speaker 2: This was a TV special.
Speaker 1: No it was six--
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], '67 [1967], no but it was called 'ABC Stage 67.'
Speaker 1: I know, but how much did it pay?
Speaker 2: Like six hundred thousand dollars.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay that's a lot of money for, that's right.
Speaker 2: In the '60s [1960s], right there.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's a lot of money.  Okay and this is nine, this is still 1966 or sixty--okay.
Speaker 2: Right, '66 [1966], but they called it 'Stage 67.'
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 486560
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this.  I wanna just get a sense, you know 'cause this is historical right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So I'm trying to get a sense of context.  Who--what is the dance community here?  Can you describe the dance community that you come into (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh stellar.  These are all of the people--
Speaker 1: Now it, can you I--
Speaker 2: These are people past and present that had been in the Dunham Company [Katherine Dunham Company], Pearl Primus.  Everybody black was in this community.  The Donny McKayles [HistoryMaker Donald McKayle], the Alvin Aileys, the oh--who--Eleo Pomares [HistoryMaker Eleo Pomare], the, everybody that danced, that was somebody in the dance world was there.
Speaker 1: And so you, do you, who do you meet at the very beginning?  Who are you, you know, socializing with?  Who are you getting to know?  I mean how, you know where are people living?  I'm just trying to get a sense of context.
Speaker 2: I, well I came here I met some people with the De Paur choir [Leonard De Paur Infantry Chorus], which taught, which included all the opera singers, the black opera singers of that time.
Speaker 1: So who, let's talk about who, like who?  Was it Wil- was William (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wil- Wilke- Wilke--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was training Roberta Flack.
Speaker 1: Was [HistoryMaker] William Warfield here then?
Speaker 2: Warfield was married to Leontyne Price.
Speaker 1: Leontyne Price.
Speaker 2: You know it was very close.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think.
Speaker 2: Hey T!
Speaker 1: Maybe T can help us.
Speaker 2: No, he can't help us.
Speaker 1: Oh, (laughter).
Speaker 2: I didn't know him then.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay go on.
Speaker 2: Every singer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --know, you know that you could know.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Every dancer.  It was close.  It was still--
Speaker 1: So, where were people living?  Where are you living?
Speaker 2: They're living in Brooklyn [New York], in Lincoln Heights [New York].  They're living in Harlem [New York, New York].  They're living, they're living everywhere.  You know and they're all over the place, I mean it was a community, but you would meet them at all these new dance groups.  Clark Center [Clark Center for the Performing Arts; Clark Center NYC, New York, New York] was a hub for, you know--which was an affiliate of the YWCA [Westside YWCA] down at 51st [Street] and Broadway [New York, New York].  There was the New York City Ballet, which we would rehearse it with Arthur [HistoryMaker Arthur Mitchell] at night.  There was New Dance Group.  There was everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: New Dance Group.
Speaker 1: Now Arthur he was what age at that point 'cause he's, he's older.  He's about ten years--
Speaker 2: He's [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson's age.
Story_ID: 486561
Speaker 1: The community was huge.  They hadn't migrated to California yet.  [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll, Josephine Premice.  There was, oh god Diane [sic.], 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry].
Speaker 2: Oh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sands, Diana Sands.
Speaker 2: S, Sands.
Speaker 1: There was all of that whole community and I'm like (gesture).  Al, Albert Popwell.  I remember going to a party at [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell's house.  It was incredible, the who's who.  They later all migrated to California.
Speaker 2: After opportunities opened up right?
Speaker 1: Right, that same (unclear), yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  Now were you aware of [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham when you were at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Well, everybody had seen--
Speaker 2: Every, Dunham--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: What is it? 'Stormy Weather.'
Speaker 2: Right, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: But I never thought I would have the opportunity to dance with, with Katherine Dunham and her company [Katherine Dunham Company] and so forth.  And we did the actual last performance. I was part of the group that did the actual last performance of Katherine Dunham in the city before they moved to East St. Louis [Illinois].
Speaker 2: I see, okay, okay.  Now, she, was she here though at the time?
Speaker 1: She wasn't here.
Speaker 2: At the, she was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was scattered and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --trying to make a way.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She was partially in Haiti--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and they came back--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --and you know the company had all for all intents and purposes had disbanded, they were--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --remnants of their former selves.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: I wanna understand, okay Arthur Mit- Mitchell where was he in his career at that point?
Speaker 2: Is that too loud?
Speaker 1: It is.
Speaker 2: T, it's too loud.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Where was he and I wanna know and--
Speaker 2: He was at the New York City Ballet--
Speaker 1: Ballet.
Speaker 2: --still dancing with the New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Arthur was still dancing with the New York City Ballet.  It's too loud.
Speaker 1: So was this his first, when you auditioned, was that his--
Speaker 2: I think that was his first at--
Speaker 1: First attempt at a company.
Speaker 2: --at, at a company.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay, first attempt at a company okay.  Now, I shouldn't have been over-talking you.
Story_ID: 486562
Speaker 1: Now, the other thing where was Alvin Ailey's company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]?  Where was he in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was based out of Clark Center [Clark Center for the Performing Arts; Clark Center NYC, New York, New York].  Clark Center had given him the space, but all the time and then I--Thelma Hill who had danced with Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] who was in the first Negro ballet company to tour.  She danced with Alvin.  She was a great teacher, and she had an outreach program called, which was part of the HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay right, right.
Speaker 2: So, she took me under her wing at HARYOU and I then got intensive training in the Lester Horton technique, which was the technique of Alvin Ailey, and I studied there diligently and we, we danced around.  She got us trained and prepared us for the Alvin Ailey audition whenever he would come back, and you know it was like all the time he was away I was just training, training, training, training, getting myself together to be in the Alvin Ailey company, then supporting myself and working with HARYOU-ACT, Harlem youth organization.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now how were you, how were you supporting yourself?  Were you working at HARYOU?
Speaker 2: Yeah, HARYOU-ACT.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay can you talk about how that even got started or what, do you know the genesis of HARYOU?
Speaker 2: Section 8.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: All of, HARYOU and all the--was Section 8, all of those antipoverty programs.  It was part of that training actors, training dancers and, and so forth.  Not that they would become dancers, all dancers and actors, because later they became la- lawyers, they became teachers, they became doctors, and some of my class had actually become doctors.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486563
Speaker 1: Talk about Thelma Hill and, and--
Speaker 2: Thelma Hill, Thelma Hill wasn't what you would call your, your quintessential dancer, but she had the personality, and she had the technique that she diligently worked at, too.  A very loving, very giving, and a total artist, very theatrical.  Died tragically on, you know, at, you know from the gas being left on in her apartment and we were waiting for her at, you know, at a program, at a Renaissance Ball- what was the Renaissance Ballroom [New York, New York] before it closed and at a, some pro- program.  And, but she taught us everything.  She had worked with [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade and [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder.  She was in the first, the Negro Ballet Company [American Negro Ballet Company].  She was with Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] and everything.  So she epitomized everything good that you could get out of, of, of the dance and not--and then atypical dancer.  You know, which was, which I considered myself, but you know, I had all the--
Speaker 1: When you say atypical, you're talking about in terms of form (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She, she didn't have the form, the form and the figure--
Speaker 1: The body type.
Speaker 2: --but you know like it was more, I had more of a dancer's body than that, but she trained us, got us ready, taught us things, toured with us, and, and, and really got me acclimated to New York [New York].  You know I felt like, you know, and then all of the people and we were around.  We really felt like New York we were part of it, although still segregated, you know, from the, from the other, you know, part of what was happening in New York.  But never feeling that much because we had such, we have such a rich history and we're coming back to that today, you know, but we've long abandoned all of the things that are pressed between the pages of a book, but we don't open books.  We don't know what we've done.  We don't talk.  We don't tell, and this is why this program is so great--
Speaker 1: That's so--
Speaker 2: --because you're telling us our history, and this is what I try to encourage people, the young people that I have right, right now.  So Thelma did that, what you're doing to us.  So, she taught us the history.  She, you know, of the styles, what we were gonna meet and so forth.
Story_ID: 486564
Speaker 1: So when Alvin [Alvin Ailey] in fact came back to America and had auditions for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was in, was that '67 [1967] then?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: And the, and then we took off for Africa.  That was his first tour.  Europe and Africa was the first tour I went.  And then I remember--
Speaker 2: Can we, wait can we, okay let's just--you went, so you had been practicing this all this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A year or so.
Speaker 2: A whole year.
Speaker 1: A year, a year.
Speaker 2: And, and you had the--
Speaker 1: Working.
Speaker 2: And you had worked and you had the Lauren Bacall--you had been on ['ABC Stage 67']--
Speaker 1: Alvin, Alvin Ailey is who I'm gonna audition for.  Alvin Ailey, right.
Speaker 2: So, so when you go to your audition can you just describe the--do you remember the day?  Can you describe it?  Can you describe who was there?
Speaker 1: Well yes, yes.  Alv- but see Thelma [Thelma Hill] had taught us some of the choreography, so we had been practicing, but we would, we had studies this Horton technique, so it was already, this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can you talk about, oh I--
Speaker 1: Lester Horton, Lester Horton--
Speaker 2: Please talk about Lester Horton.
Speaker 1: Lester Horton was the teacher for Alvin Ailey out in California.  So when we--
Speaker 2: And Lester Horton, tell about his background.
Speaker 1: Les Horton was a choreographer in--
Speaker 2: Dunham, Dunham.
Speaker 1: --in California.
Speaker 2: But he had been trained by Dunham.
Speaker 1: And trained by Dunham and so forth, [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, but developed his own technique, a very angular kind of form of Martha Graham, a melding of Martha Graham and the Caribbean and, and Afrocentric dance and so forth, but the kind of formalized modern dance that Alvin Ailey turned later, turned into his own.  You know so all of those, those shapes and forms are true to Lester Horton and Alvin Ailey.  So, when Alvin and Maya stopped dancing, Alvin went under the tutelage of Alvin Ailey after they stopped dancing with that one sequence and that feather in all of those little social clubs Alvin and Maya (laughter), [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou.
Speaker 2: The--?
Speaker 1: The, the Maya Angelou right, right.  After they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was dancing?
Speaker 1: She was dancing with Alvin Ailey when they were in San Francisco [California] with teas and dinners at nightclubs on concrete floors and they would get out, they would do their dance and so forth.  So they did that, and she would sing and she would become--what is her name?  She was the queen of calypso or something, right.  There are pictures of her and all of that, but, but yes so and with Alvin then under the tutelage of, of Lester Horton--
Speaker 2: Lester Horton.
Speaker 1: --met Jimmy Truitte [James Truitte] and [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade they developed that, that, that technique, but left when they came east to be part of 'House of Flowers.'
Speaker 2: Okay that's the thing (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hou- 'House of Flowers' with Pearl Bailey and--
Speaker 2: Carmen De Lavallade was in it.
Speaker 1: Carmen De Lavallade.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder, I think was--
Speaker 1: --and what that--?
Speaker 2: He was in--
Speaker 1: Juanita Hall.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Wasn't Geoffrey Holder in that too?
Speaker 1: I think that was 'Jamaica'--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Which was Les--
Speaker 2: But wasn't that--
Speaker 1: --and then, but that's--
Speaker 2: --'House of Flowers'?
Speaker 1: --brought him contact with Jack Cole--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll.  Sorry.
Speaker 1: --which is all of the other part of Alvin Ailey and, and that kind of movements (unclear)--
Speaker 2: So, you're saying Alvin Ailey is an amalgam of Lester Horton--
Speaker 1: Horton, Jack Cole--
Speaker 2: --Jack Cole.
Speaker 1: --Katherine Dunham--
Speaker 2: Dunham, okay.
Speaker 1: --and all, you know, and his own style.
Speaker 2: And his, okay.
Speaker 1: In perfecting his own style, so.
Story_ID: 486565
Speaker 1: So you were describing the day you came for the audition.
Speaker 2: The day, the day I went to audition.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what time of year it was or do you remember even--?
Speaker 2: It must have been spring.
Speaker 1: Of '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: Right, because we later took off like in June or something for Portugal, which was the first place.  We went to Europe first, and then we went to Africa.  So I had--you know, that was another world of all the cultures and, and people.
Speaker 1: But wait you have to describe your day of audition.
Speaker 2: The day of audition I was nervous like everybody else and trying to get through it, just trying to make my way clear, so that all, and make them notice me and not hang onto all the other people that were auditioning.  I had to project who I was, so I danced my heart out, danced my best.
Speaker 1: And did he [Alvin Ailey], was he there at the audition (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes he was there at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now who was assisting him?  Who was--
Speaker 2: Jimmy Truitte, James Truitte--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --who was another exponent of (unclear).
Speaker 1: And so you got accepted.  Well, how many were accepted that day do you remember?
Speaker 2: One or two.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they have two troupes at that point in time or was it just, just--
Speaker 2: Oh no, we were only twelve dancers.
Speaker 1: Oh my goodness, so who were you re- okay, so who was--
Speaker 2: I was replacing Morton Winston.
Speaker 1: I see okay.  So, so who were, do you remember the names of all the twelve dancers?
Speaker 2: They went off with, he went off with, they went off with Harkness [Harkness Ballet] for a while.  So there was [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison--well of the men Miguel Godreau, Kelvin Rotardier, Dudley Williams, myself, and Albert Watkins [sic. Albert Watson], Albert Watkins, and was there one more guy, and Ernie Pagnano [Ernest Pagnano].  Or was it Ernie Pagnano?  Well, it could have been.  Then the women were Judith Jamison, Consuelo Atlas, Sharron, Sharron Miller, Lynne Taylor-Corbett and I keep coming up--Loretta Abbott and Michele Murray.  That makes six of the women. Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you got your--
Speaker 2: There were only twelve of us, but I don't know I've forgotten some.
Speaker 1: But that's sort of a lightning speed when you think about it.
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: And I mean that's, you got your dream like you saw and then--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --almost a little over a year later you were part of--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and headed to Europe.
Speaker 2: But I had said that, "I'm gonna be in this company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]," as I said in that auditorium at Cramton [Cramton Auditorium, Washington, D.C.] looking at that stage.  "I'm gonna be in this company." 'Cause I decided that is wha- I had never not seen what I wanted to do.  That was what I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 486566
Speaker 1: Now let me ask, like how long did it take you to head to, you said you went to Portugal [with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater].  Was that what you--?
Speaker 2: Portugal, oh where--Europe.  What is that? Portugal--
Speaker 1: Spain (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Amsterdam [the Netherlands].
Speaker 1: Did you go to France, no?
Speaker 2: We didn't go to France, but we, you know, touched--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --on France.  We went to Yugoslavia.  Oh God, Ljubljana [Slovenia], Split [Croatia], Sarajevo [Bosnia and Herzegovina], Zagreb [Croatia] and that's all now, that's all different now because you got Kosovo--
Speaker 1: That's right and it's all--
Speaker 2: --all of that other business.  Dubrovnik [Croatia] was absolutely magnificent, magnificent.  Apulia [Italy] you know where you could, that's on the Adriatic Sea.  And the food and the people.
Speaker 1: But let me ask remember how you were saying when you were young and your one teacher I think it was in elementary school introduced you to National Geographic, I think you were saying.  You know you--
Speaker 2: That was, no, but that was when I was in the third grade.
Speaker 1: Grade okay, well I said elementary school, yeah.  And here you were I mean all of a sudden your world had changed from Washington, D.C. I don't, you know in the South to the New York [New York] and then to Europe, and I'm just wondering how you were taking all this?
Speaker 2: But remember the American Light Opera Company you learned from--
Speaker 1: Oh that's right (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --people everywhere, you know, so white people were not alien to me.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: But remember all of that experience, and it was regular day to day experience through, through friendships and prejudice and you know all of the things.
Speaker 1: But you hadn't had really too many disappointments up to that point really?
Speaker 2: Not with what I wanted to do, no.
Speaker 1: No, that's right with what you wanted to do, right.  So, talk about the--now, now, the tour that you took, how long was it?
Speaker 2: That was like a six-month tour.  We, it was six weeks (unclear).  What is it, six weeks?  I don't know, but it was, it was a long tour, and we had gone to Washington getting our shots and this and that and the other and then I, I was saying goodbye to my mother [Agnes Crockett Faison], you know, for real because we were going to the world now.  And it--and she came down to meet me, you know, to say goodbye.  Got on the bus and we travelled back to New York to get on the plane to go to Europe.  It was in, in incredible, the world.
Speaker 1: Now, so tell me how the touring was like how, you know, when you would--
Speaker 2: Fantastic, I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --had my own room, a new fresh room every night, you know, dinner eating out.  What?  Celebrated.  We were already exotic.  We would walk down the street, people would stop and gawk.  They would rub our heads, you know, "Who were these people?  What are you?"  We were special.
Story_ID: 486567
Speaker 1: And then I came to Italy.  I'll never forget the day.  Here we stand in front of the Piazza Duomo [Piazza del Duomo, Florence, Italy], the most magnificent church and plaza, piazza you wanna stand there, surrounded by all of this classical architecture.  I get a paper, I open it, a double play, page spread of Detroit [Michigan] on fire.  It is like, you know, the world, what are you living in here and here, and you look up from the paper and here is this magnificent church.  It is like and then there's Detroit in fire, you know, on fire and then you know who died.  Somebody, what, some, the Detroit riots, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, I don't know if someone died in the Detroit, but people--
Speaker 1: It was a huge, horrific--
Speaker 2: That's right--riot.
Speaker 1: And you're so far away from home and--
Speaker 2: Well did you wanna be a part of it?
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: Did you, what, what were you feeling at that point?  That's what I'm trying--
Speaker 1: You're torn between every, the feeling, the feeling you're not at home, you're not solid with your brothers and everything, all this turmoil.  I was telling you those murders, and it seemed when we were going through hit they were right one, right behind the other.  One, you know, Kennedy, Malcolm [Malcolm X], no Schwerner [Michael Schwerner]
Speaker 2: Ch- Chaney [James Chaney], right Chaney, that's right--
Speaker 1: Ch- Chaney and Goodman [Andrew Goodman] and Schwerner, Liuzzo [Viola Liuzzo], Malcolm X.
Speaker 2: The four little girls, right Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 1: The four, the three little girls, the Birmingham bombings, the bombing of Gaston [A.G. Gaston Motel, Birmingham, Alabama].  You know something when I went back to go back to get that, all of that information, for the musical, 'If This Hat Could Talk' ['If This Hat Could Talk: The Untold Story of Dr. Dorothy Height,' George Faison] it was like rediscovering all of the, all, all of the great literature we already have, that we already have.  Open a book it's all there.  Our greatest dramas are there, and we did it as Americans.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You know we don't have to make anything up.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  (Cough) My feeling exactly.
Story_ID: 486568
Speaker 1: But this--tell me what you were learning about Alvin Ailey as a creative person, and I mean it's one thing to want to be part of something, but--
Speaker 2: He fulfilled everything, the learning, the education he had, the languages.  He had knowledge of the art that, that he understood and could interpret.  This was an incredible mind, an incredible mind.  But without the emotional stability of having a relationship that he could live out loud, or just saving some of that fame, of relishing some of that good fortune and all of that for himself to have a life of his own that he could really enjoy and not--.  I'm not saying that he didn't enjoy the life that he was living, but an artist of that magnitude and importance when there's so many things missing and being a man and not really being used to expressing one's self and not talking about the personal issues that would allow him to kind of seemingly enjoy a better life, being estranged from the mother and so forth.  Because you know you're not supposed to, and being black and coming up, you're not supposed to be a dancer.  But when, but when dance can fulfill art that, that emotional void in your life, that is the other part of it.  You know no matter how you're living it.  You know you might be fighting and fussing and you--or, or in turmoil all of that time, but you do have to save a piece of yourself and to be able to do that.  I don't think he was able to ever do that, or even save a piece for himself, because it was always the company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] and making every sacrifice that he had to for that.  I don't think he could--and you're fulfilled to a certain extent, but that's all your life.  And I don't think that that can be all of your life.
Speaker 1: But he was a founder.  Maybe that was hard.
Speaker 2: Yeah and that's, that's hard--and being a founder as well, and then the communication between the, the, the, the barriers between dancer and then academician or educator or intellectual they think is separated by something, but it's, it's not really.  Or being able to just talk to other people and find some sort of common ground.  Everybody is scratching and trying to make, make a way, separately and you can't 'cause it's not about you in the end.  Somebody said that to me a long time ago, not too long ago, and I, I started to take an affront, "What do you mean?"  And I think once you get over that, you can really, really live.  And people telling me how great you are, but it not manifesting itself in anything tangible, anything, you know he had built all of this, amassed all this work, but in the end am I there, is it, is it all, is it all there.  You know that struggle part.  It's rough, but you have to save a piece for yourself, you have to 'cause they'll beat you up every day, you know.  They'll deny you.  And now that they are huge and, and ev- and everybody else is benefitting from what he had done.
Story_ID: 486569
Speaker 1: I can only, you know, tip my hat, because I had, I have, I've learned everything about, you know, being an artist, being on the stage you know from him.  You know I was able to find, you know refine what, what I do.
Speaker 2: Tell me what you mean by that, though, "I learned everything from him," by being--
Speaker 1: How to be on the stage, how to be.
Speaker 2: What would he say about that or what would he instruct you or say was, was necessary?
Speaker 1: Well, he would give us the parameters in which to exist on the stage, and then I would one, I would, could always go one step further and make up a story that brought me to this point.  And I told him that and, and I told him that one day that you know I could make up a story that would bring me to this point, and then by the time that--you know, so that I could dance it with another kind of realism with another kind of emotion that would allow me to become, you know, be, to be.
Speaker 2: So are you saying, okay I'm just trying to, to understand what you just said.  Are you saying that he taught you how to be on stage and he gave you sort of the context for what was happening, but then you on top of it brought your own context?
Speaker 1: Oh, my, my, yes.
Speaker 2: Is that what you're saying?
Speaker 1: And e- even dancing his own, his ballets, so that angst, the pathos, the passion, the pain of his works, 'Blues Suite' [Alvin Ailey], 'Revelations' [Alvin Ailey]. I could bring, I could bring what I have to that.
Speaker 2: But I want you to be very specific about, you know, either give me an example as it relates to 'Revelations.'  Give me examples as it relates to 'Blues Suite.'
Speaker 1: Or the, let's, let's talk about the opening bells in, in, in 'Blues Suite,' the tolling of those bells it's either the, the beginning of morning or the death knell at night, and all through that day, something was happening.  Either I was standing by the railroad tracks looking d- looking at the train--see my father [George Faison] and all that train business looking at them, and Alvin [Alvin Ailey] personified everything connected it, you know, for me.  And you know my father took us physically there to the railroad and then you know kind of your destiny maybe way down those tracks or beyond this place where we start Alvin's, "Here you are I'm starting you at this place, your, your dre- to realize your dreams, your aspiration is on down there beyond me."  So then he, he could really talk to me.
Speaker 2: Alvin Ailey?
Speaker 1: Yeah, because I think anybody you're mentoring you're just trying to grow them up so that you can really talk to them about how you feel about things, life, and things.  And so when I told him that I made up stories about where I was before the curtain went up or was I that character I could then take on his, his characters, you know, the, the one that was pent in and held down, deprived and all of that.  I could make up that story, and I could live it, and I could leave it there and then go on and have my own other experiences, but I could live it there.  Like an actor, I could prepare.
Speaker 2: Well do you that separated you from some of the people in the troupe [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]--
Speaker 1: Yes, I know it did.
Speaker 2: --because not everyone can do that--
Speaker 1: I know that.
Speaker 2: --I mean a dancer is a dancer--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that's form and structure.
Speaker 1: Right, not but that helped my dancing.  You know, you won't, you don't believe that oh I don't have the 6:00 stretch.  My legs are not gonna do that, but on the stage, it--under the light you can be anything, and that's what he did.
Story_ID: 486570
Speaker 1: But you're s- you're also saying about him [Alvin Ailey]--do you have a favorite story about him?  Do you have one that sort of sticks out?
Speaker 2: No, he was funny.  You know he was hip for, he was older than we were, but it was like--
Speaker 1: But not that, about ten year, ten or twelve years yeah.  He was born in 1930.  You were born in 1940.  He was like maybe twelve--but anyway he was, he seemed older.
Speaker 2: Right, but maybe it was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But we were--with our age, we're in the '70s [1970s] and psychedelic and, not to say he wasn't either (laughter), it's like--and it was mescaline.  It was THC.  It was--
Speaker 1: C, PHC.  Was it THC?
Speaker 2: THC.
Speaker 1: Okay, right (laughter) that's okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It was grass.  It was beads.  It was California.  It was, you know psychedelic.  It was fun, sex, fights, this, that, other, death, murders.  I mean it was all this life we have lived, we.  I'm including you in that.  Anybody close to my age, this life that we have lived has been bizarre.  You know, all of the things that we have done, and there're very few people--I can call [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson of Ashford and Simpson and I can say, "Valerie what kind of life have we or are we living?"  And then we experienced Maya [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] and Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] and all of though--all these, and it goes on and on and on.  And that, that's why I think a lot of people think I'm older than I am, only because I came at the end of an era, a very definite end of an era and the beginning of something that was totally new.  And so making that transition, I was just tran- I, I was traversing over this whole universe with my peers, with my generation.  We were crossing over that whole change of time, change of mind.  Remember there was--Billy Strayhorn died, Langston Hughes, you know, all of the W.E.B. [W.E.B. Du Bois].
Speaker 1: Du Bois.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Du Bois.
Speaker 2: Du Bois.  No, I wasn't trying to think of his last name.
Speaker 1: Oh, who else were you--you were just trying to think of someone else.
Speaker 2: You know, all of those, all of those people.  We were, it was def- definitely a different mindset.
Story_ID: 486571
Speaker 1: Now, how was the company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]?  Were you--did you all get along pretty well or were you like fighting brothers and sisters (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah we did, we did because we all had to have each other's back.  Twelve people, where are the understudies going, gonna come from, what were we gonna do?  This was the show.
Speaker 1: So how, what were the stories behind that?  People, did they--
Speaker 2: Oh, we had great stories, I mean about living, about life, who you would meet, the parties you would go through, the embassies we got thrown out of.
Speaker 1: So, but no, no but how--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) 'Cause Alvin [Alvin Ailey] was very political now.  In order to, because we were--
Speaker 1: Make the trip, make--
Speaker 2: --try, in order for us to do all of these things, he was still a gamble as far, you know all this black pride.  James Brown was screaming, screaming in one ear, "I'm black and I'm proud," and, and Alvin and we were singing, "This little light of mine, I'm gonna let it shine," you know, in spiritual.  So, it was like here we were the best, the best.  I was talking to Judy [HistoryMaker Judith Jamison] the other day, and she, you know--and, and we had our differences of opinions and what, because I keep telling Judy that the audience is gonna decide who's gonna be great.  We don't decide it.  They are gonna decide what ballets are going to be everlasting, we don't.  So, any competition we could have or anything is out of the question because the people are going to decide, not us.  And that why, 'Otis' ['Suite Otis,' George Faison] has been able, is now--when I created that 1970 it's like, it sold and people still love it and responds the same way like I just re- did it.
Story_ID: 486572
Speaker 1: I want, you--I wanted to hear--I was asking you about--you were saying that, you know, there was James Brown saying, "I'm black and I'm proud," and you had Ailey [Alvin Ailey]--you know you were singing, "This little light of mine" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] saying, "We shall overcome."
Speaker 1: Now what, do you, what, at what point were you in the troupe [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] like in the troupes, you know, like you know troupes go up and down, you know, and so where were you, how financially secure was it?  What was the height of it?  How long had--
Speaker 2: Oh, no three, I had three good years there.  I thought it was, I thought, but I, something else was calling me again.  My experience in Africa, so Alvin gave me--you know that tour that we took.  The 'Gazelle' [George Faison] is a, is a ballet that resulted directly from my seeing a herd of gazelle in, in the, in the game, in the reserve in Kenya.
Speaker 1: So what I'm asking though, was, were you aware of any financial problems during that time with the troupe?
Speaker 2: Oh we were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, we had--
Speaker 1: Because it's, it's hard.
Speaker 2: It is hard.
Speaker 1: But you had, but you had foundation funding right?  Was there, did you have--
Speaker 2: Alvin, no he didn't.  No, he had to tour.
Speaker 1: He had to--
Speaker 2: He was given a few grants, but that was through Columbia Artists Management [Columbia Artists Management, Inc.].
Speaker 1: So you weren't te- there was no--
Speaker 2: There was no school.
Speaker 1: No school, there was no school at that point--
Speaker 2: No school.
Speaker 1: --so it's all through the tours.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: That was much later.
Speaker 1: But did he have--
Speaker 2: That was after, that was when I had done 'The Wiz,' I mean, I went and, you know, and then he's got the school and then they were doing all of that.
Speaker 1: Oh I see okay, so--
Speaker 2: I left there, but he was still--the twelve, there were only twelve.  He had to get to twenty-five.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: He had to get to sixteen.
Speaker 1: So what happens though when someone got sick?  That never--
Speaker 2: No, no it didn't happen, except Michael Peters did sprain his ankle one time.
Speaker 1: And then what happened then?
Speaker 2: He was later fired, because he went to Paris [France] when we had to go on and do that show with nine people.  We were appalled, right.
Speaker 1: Wait, he went to Paris--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: But there were twe--
Speaker 2: --and with Lester Wilson--
Speaker 1: There were three of them that went to Paris.
Speaker 2: Lester Wilson wasn't in the company, but he, you know, we left him there thinking he was bedridden, and, and you know and he was gonna just nurse himself back to health with this other.  No, he got on a plane and went to Paris, and told us about it.  I was finished with his ass.  Shit and all of those shows we had to do because it had been only five guys and we were all doing three, more than three ballets a night.
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was no fun.  Then he fired him.
Speaker 1: Okay, but the tour, had the tour ended by the time--?
Speaker 2: No, we had a whole tour to go.
Speaker 1: And you did the tour with the nine remaining?  No two--
Speaker 2: Right, nine--
Speaker 1: Ten, ten.
Speaker 2: --and then a replacement came from somewhere, I don't know where the replacement came.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, so this is--so basically how often were you performing throughout?  What was--?
Speaker 2: Danny Strayhorn was probably a replacement.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how, how, how often were you--how long was your season I'm trying, that's what I'm trying to understand?
Speaker 2: No, we had a season at the Billy Rose [Billy Rose Theatre, New York, New York].  That was the first time, one week.  What are you talking about?
Speaker 1: You mean you were all, it was all touring?
Speaker 2: It was all touring.  We--I saw America three times, maybe Europe three times in three years.
Speaker 1: But when you would tour would it be for six weeks or months?
Speaker 2: Right, six weeks, eight weeks.  We went all the way to California, come all the way back.  Oh, but we were a country, optimistic, fabulous.  California, it was virgin, was magnificent.  Oh going through the Big Sur [California], and partying up in Hollywood Hills [Los Angeles, California].  You could go to a party at, in the Hills and see movie stars, Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.], all of them.  That's how it was.  It was fan- fantastic.
Speaker 1: Because everyone related to the, to the--
Speaker 2: Right.  Europe, the best of everything.
Speaker 1: Now so what, what was significant about those three years though and why did you, you said that--was, was Africa the last tour is that--
Speaker 2: No, that was the beginning.  Africa was the first tour.
Speaker 1: I thought Europe was the first tour.
Speaker 2: We went to Europe and then Africa.  We went--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay I see.
Speaker 2: That was one whole trip.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Then we came back here, then we went across America several times, then back to Europe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now how were you supporting yourself otherwise then?
Speaker 2: Oh, there was enough to support me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To, to, oh there as okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now okay--
Story_ID: 486573
Speaker 1: So now, why do you decide to leave [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], though?  Or what happens?
Speaker 2: I really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why are you looking at me like that?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, but I was just looking.  I really had something to say, and it was time to say it.  So you either stay there like the rest of them, the Dudleys [Dudley Williams], the Judys [HistoryMaker Judith Jamison], and so forth and complain about your lot.  You could stay there and wait for Dudley to break his ankle and then replace him in a ballet that everybody has seen already, or you get up and you get to work.  There was too much that had to be said that wasn't exactly Alvin [Alvin Ailey] was saying.  That was, that was the beauty of what we used to do and the originality of all of the choreographers and people that had passed before us.  They were originals.
Speaker 1: But there's a difference, George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from being a dancer and being a choreographer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Not every dancer can be a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I had something to say.  I, I guess I learned those lessons.
Speaker 1: But that doesn't mean you could be a choreographer.  I, I--
Speaker 2: I took what--
Speaker 1: Because there's a whole process.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, I mean to, to developing a dance there's a process.  Why are you looking at me?  Am I saying the wrong thing?
Speaker 2: I'm saying, because I'm not, sometimes I don't prepare.  Sometimes I didn't--who has time to sit around and prepare sometimes?  Excuse me?  You gotta do it, and sometimes oh this is what I'd like to do this piece and then there would be, I would go, I'd make a sketch right there, period.  Sometimes a sketch became the real thing.  What do you say about that?
Speaker 1: So you're saying your, your style is instinctive?
Speaker 2: Spontaneous and instinctive (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Speaker 2: I'd never heard--yeah, yeah it is, it is.
Speaker 1: So, you left--so tell me the--
Speaker 2: But then I had music, remember.
Speaker 1: You, you had--
Speaker 2: The musical form--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --I played from sheet music on a page or you sing with a choir and you want to save yourself in the design of the whole thing.  You're a piece of the whole puzzle.  You're not the whole thing.  I'm glad that person reminded me of that, that it wasn't about me.  And you know, and I was, I could hear it.  You know that'll keep you grounded, won't it?
Story_ID: 486574
Speaker 1: So, what happened though?  Explain your, the separation from Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], how it happened.  You said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ailey?  Well I felt that it was a dilemma.  We were up at Skidmore College [Sarasota Springs, New York], I'll remember.  We all had a meeting, a company meeting here.  He was having more financial difficulties, and then he replaced, then Judy [HistoryMaker Judith Jamison] got, Judy got to do 'Reflections in D' [Alvin Ailey], which was a solo that Dudley [Dudley Williams] had done and she did it, but I think it was a man solo and she, he later, you know, some years later really choreographed it.  But, I, I, I was talking to my--and, and then he did 'Masekela Langage' [Alvin Ailey] on me.  I was the fugitive in the end, in the, in the closing section of that ballet, which I really loved doing, but Alvin [Alvin Ailey] changed the end of it.  In the end, after describing South Africa and apartheid and, and the same prejudice and the same se- segregation that South Africans hand at that particular time that we seemingly had just come through because we could, you know we taught the world how to sing, 'We Shall Overcome,' and we were the example for the world, for the Irish, for the, you know, the IRA [Irish Republican Army] and all of those people of South African and so forth.  At the very end, at the close of the ballet, and we were at Co- Connecticut College [New London, Connecticut] and I would, I'll never forget it 'cause so many things happened.  It was a time when things should have been open.  Charlie Reinhart [Charles L. Reinhart] was trying to keep us separate and exclusive.  There's Debbie Allen and them with their noses pressed up against the glass, "Can we come in, can we come in, can we be a part of it?"  And there's--and dance was not having the explosion like it needed to right then.  We didn't have the openness, so Talley [Talley Beatty] was one of greatest was teaching classes and not choreographing for somebody major and the same injustices.  You know I had enjoyed being, becoming free and being freed by the Civil Rights Movement, but then freedom, that internal freedom to be, to imagine, to dream I, I still have, I had that.  Alvin was succumbing to the pressures of conforming and being a part of all of that, so I could be brash, rude at times without any consequence because I still had it, you know, ahead of me to do and all I had to do, and I had to prove it.  And I wasn't gonna prove it there, so after he said, "Oh we'll pencil in 'Gazelle' [George Faison]," 'Gazelle' becoming my great, one of my greatest pieces, he was gonna pencil me in, so, so--
Speaker 1: Wait, had you developed the piece at that point?
Speaker 2: It had developed in my mind.
Speaker 1: I see.  And you wanted, you wanted to do that piece.
Speaker 2: I had to do that piece.  I had to get it out.
Speaker 1: And when he said he would--
Speaker 2: But you know what--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --there are physical manifestations, that when you're not supposed to do something there's a physical manifestation of that that occurs to you that you can either recognize that as a sign or you can continue to ignore it.  I got a bump on my knee the size of a baseball every time I came near them.
Speaker 1: Near Alvin, Alvin Ailey.
Speaker 2: It would grow.  It would, it would come up.  And then when I was away from it, it would go down.  It, it, yeah there are things, you know that rather than break your complete heart, maybe something else'll happen and then, and then you know eventually.
Story_ID: 486575
Speaker 1: Was that typical though, George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], that--were there people who actually were able to have their own pieces come as a part and was there (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were thousands of us, not, not thousands of us.  There were at least twenty different companies.  There was room for everybody, because the creativity was out there.  We would see--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, no I wasn't talking about--
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: --that--I'm talking about within Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] you couldn't su- could you suggest pieces and were they--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --were there things--
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't there yet.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay 'cause--
Speaker 2: He wasn't there yet.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay that's what, okay, right, right.
Speaker 2: To give us free rein--
Speaker 1: Okay I understand.
Speaker 2: --no he wasn't there.  He was still trying to find his own way.  And he was still trying to find money.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I think he was quite honest.  See, that's why I say Alvin [Alvin Ailey] and I could really talk.  I said something about, "Somebody should do something, you know.  You're older, somebody should do something for me."  And Alvin, quite frankly, "Why should I do something for you?  I hired you.  I'm giving you dances to do."  And that was like another reality check.  You know, you gotta really listen to what people are saying, and it didn't have anything to do with friendship.  "I've given you this.  Why do I have to give you anything else?"  And I think that we forget that as we grow up, as we get older, as we have to make a way in the world.  You do not deserve anything.  Your being given anything, outside of you know what you already have, is a gift.  Now, if he couldn't, and he had already given me probably the most precious part of himself already.  So, now he's gotta produce me, too.  I don't know, I don't think so.  I think that's where we get it really wrong, that, and all that I stand on the shoulders.  Well, my shoulders are tired.  And we should, we need to stop doing that, because we haven't opened a book or read any of the philosophies or dealt with any of the issues that say that you are standing on your, on, on their shoulders, that you have learned enough, you've acquired enough to be able to even stand next to them.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Why do, why we stand, why are we, we pretending that they're dead and buried when they're not?  They live on bookshelves.
Speaker 1: Well, I, I agree completely with that because there's a, there's a vast amount of things that we don't--now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my god our history, our, our future theater is lying on those shelves.  It's right there.  It's already been said.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: You know like we're not inventing anything new.  We're just innovating what is already there--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --and moving on and, you know.
Speaker 1: That's, right, that's right.
Speaker 2: And then some, you know half of us we don't really deserve genius and all of that.  No, you're just putting together with what somebody else said or d- did or done.
Story_ID: 486576
Speaker 1: So you're, you're feeling--you've got this burning desire, you know here you've already gotten your dream, the pinnacle of what would even be, you know, the thing that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --unleashed you from (laughter)--
Speaker 2: And three years later I'm like--
Speaker 1: I gotta get out of here.
Speaker 2: --I gotta go.
Speaker 1: Right and so what, how did 'Purlie' come along?  That's what I'm wondering.
Speaker 2: Well, again [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson.  So, I got one of the feature parts in 'Purlie,' and I needed--so if I--no Alvin [Alvin Ailey] was struggling enough.  How was I gonna get money to, to even make my dream come to life?  I had to save my money, hire the dancers, make the costumes myself, rent the hall, send out the notices to the few critics that were, were around at that particular time, and I did just that.  I got noticed.  The notices appeared in The New York Times, and I was a choreographer, listed with Martha Graham--
Speaker 1: Well, wait--
Speaker 2: Who were, who were they, Merce Cunningham.  They named another one: me.
Speaker 1: But wait, George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], wait, how, wait this is after--
Speaker 2: For choreographing a full length ballet, full evening ballet.  That took me out of the realm of just being, just anybody.
Speaker 1: That was after 'Purlie?'
Speaker 2: That was--no, during 'Purlie.'
Speaker 1: That's during?
Speaker 2: During the, during our breaks and in between shows I would get dancers from 'Purlie' and I would put together 'Gazelle' [George Faison], 'Slaves' [George Faison] and 'Suite Otis' [George Faison].
Speaker 1: So tell me what this vision was in your head with 'Gazelle.'  I mean what was 'cause this vis--
Speaker 2: No, (unclear) it was--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --a couple of pieces.  What was the vision?  The vision was, it was an incredible vision of--now the gazelle don't move like this, but in a herd and when they're going over terrain they all move over the kerrain--terrain at different places.  So, that gave me movement about the darting and moving of a gazelle in the wild.  Then, how was I gonna use this as a ballet or basis for a dance?  So, the hunters that I introduced that would hunt the gazelle who, and there was an episode, so you see the ga- gazelle of the spirit of freedom, spirit of life going through the forest and just being a gazelle.  Then you see the hunters wake up, leave the village.  The women come on, go down by the water and so forth and, and do village life.  The men would, would be, then we, we would flash back to the hunters and then the gazelle would be fleetfully going past.  The men would be go, moving a little bit quicker, ah then tracks, you know, tracks and we would fine, then we would see where the tracks would lead, then oh we're in the vicinity of it.  We would then do a big dance and then we, we would hide out in the wings.  The gazelle would come into this clearing.  We pounced into the clearing, killed the gazelle, take it back to the, to the, to the village.  And that first, that prologue ends with the, the, the, under the tent of, under the roof of the hut.  They would skin, clean, and, and eat the gazelle and that was the life of the Africans at that particular point.  Then, what I'd learned, your brain academia, you know, your education, the spirit, no how did that come, the hunters then became the hunted and that's how I got to the 'Slaves' story.  And it's about a slave ship that doesn't make it to America.  The slaves revolt at the end.  I didn't realize I was doing Amistad until I read it.
Story_ID: 486577
Speaker 1: So that, I had done that right after having left Alvin [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], and while I was doing 'Purlie.'  So, and then--
Speaker 2: Now you said you took the dancers from 'Purlie' and--
Speaker 1: They were, right.  In between shows--
Speaker 2: But yeah this is, you said this is a ballet though.
Speaker 1: --I paid them fifty dollars, right.  I paid them, and we were just rehearsed.  We rehearsed a little bit now, rehearse another, then I took my little money went over to the YMHA [92nd Street Young Men's Hebrew Association; 92nd Street Young Men's and Young Women's Hebrew Association, New York, New York] at 92nd Street, asked for the people, "Who do I rent the hall from?"  Paid them with my money--there's not grant now--paid them with my money that I was making.  I was on Broadway.  I was making money.  I saved it 'cause that's what I wanted to do.  Saved it, made the costumes, rented the hall, got somebody to make me a poster, passed the poster out, rented the hall, invited the critics.
Speaker 2: And that happened while you were in 'Purlie'?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Thus--
Speaker 2: So it got well reviewed and then you became a choreographer overnight.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Huh.  Now (laughter)--
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: No, I mean--
Speaker 1: Is there another way to do it?
Speaker 2: No, well you a have certain (laughter)
Speaker 1: You rent the hall (unclear), and you--
Speaker 2: Most people, I don't know most people, I don't know, I see--
Speaker 1: I took my money and did it.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: And I'm still using mine.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, it's like--
Speaker 2: Right, so now let me ask you--
Speaker 1: Because I have to progress at a certain level.  I, you know you have to progress.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know what I mean?  You have to move on.
Speaker 2: Now did you do that under the aegis or was that the beginning of the George Faison Dance--
Speaker 1: Dance Ensemble [George Faison Dance Ensemble].
Speaker 2: Ensemble.  So that was the beginning.
Speaker 1: Dance Ensemble was the beginning.  The Universal Dance Experience [George Faison Universal Dance Experience]--
Speaker 2: Came out of the--
Speaker 1: --was still me getting bigger.
Speaker 2: I see okay.  So that, that dance ensemble, really those were dancers from 'Purlie'?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 486578
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask.  In, in the whole 'Purlie' experience was there anything significant about that because that play was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We bonded with--
Speaker 1: Os- Ossie, wasn't Os--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis--
Speaker 1: Davis right.
Speaker 2: --wrote it and, and--
Speaker 1: And, and [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore was--
Speaker 2: Melba Moore and Cleavon Little starred.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And I got one of the coveted roles of, of the, what is that field hands that backed up Sherman Hemsley.  I was the tall, Ted Ross was the fat, and Al Perryman was the short.  I was tall and skinny.
Speaker 1: So, you said you bonded?  You said, you said, I said what was--
Speaker 2: With Melba Moore--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and Cleavon Little.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We became really good friends.
Speaker 1: Real good friends, okay, okay.  But that was significant too, I mean in terms of black theater on Broadway.
Speaker 2: Broke all the records.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: They won Tonys [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] or the male and female leads of a musical.
Speaker 1: But what--can you--like because when you look at plays that had had success--
Speaker 2: That was groundbreaking.
Speaker 1: It was, right, right.
Speaker 2: Groundbreaking.
Speaker 1: Did every--did anyone know that it was, you know, that it was gonna be received and how did the critics at the time--did the critics pan it?  Or did, no.
Speaker 2: You never know what they do, but the people brought, I tell you the people decide what, what's going to live and what's going to die.
Speaker 1: Well that was also definitely of 'The Wiz' too, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So let, let's, so you begin in 19--well because they got panned, right, 'The Wiz'?
Speaker 2: Partially, but we did--
Speaker 1: Partially, but, but, but people started coming they--I loved 'The Wiz.'
Speaker 2: Once they saw it.
Speaker 1: It was so wonderful.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was really quite wonderful.  So are you saying--
Speaker 2: Seven Tonys later.
Speaker 1: I know this was, okay see (laughter)
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  That sounds like Salmon, Simon Cowlie [sic. Simon Cowell] and that Jennifer Hudson.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: And it's the same thing.
Story_ID: 486579
Speaker 1: During the time, so you have this experience with--
Speaker 2: The dance company [George Faison Dance Ensemble; George Faison Universal Dance Experience].
Speaker 1: With the dance company.
Speaker 2: And then I make that happen.
Speaker 1: Okay and that gives you, you know, because your name appears in the paper you're officially a choreographer.
Speaker 2: Well, and right, and then and I did--
Speaker 1: Now what is the, what is the--is Thelma still around at that point, Thelma Hill?
Speaker 2: No, she died.
Speaker 1: She, oh she had died before that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She died while you were in Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]?
Speaker 2: No, while we were in the HARYOU [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York] just before--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I had just joined Ailey, yes and we were meeting her that night for a little light celebration.
Speaker 1: So she never saw your, your dance?
Speaker 2: Yeah she did.  She saw me, yeah she did.
Speaker 1: In, in Ailey, okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know she said she would, she did come back, "Why don't you, why didn't you change?"  I said, "What was I gonna change into?"  You know like most of the people when they come back from Europe they got all these ai- airs that, attitudes and this and, and so forth and it's not true for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, she wanted you to have that.  Did she want you to have that?
Speaker 2: No, but she was, I guess she was pleasantly surprised (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Surprised okay.  So, now you then--
Speaker 2: Can I have another tissue though?
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, okay, now, okay you during this time, so this is 1971 and there is--talk about some of the dancers that worked with you, you know that start working with--you become the Universal Dance Experience, right at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay and--
Speaker 2: No, wait a minute hold it, wait a minute, wait a minute.
Speaker 1: And your association with Miles Davis and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --WNET [WNET-TV, New York, New York] and 'Soul!'.  Am I in the wrong--
Speaker 2: Sixty, yeah '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971].
Speaker 2: Seventies [1970s].
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971].
Speaker 2: Right '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Seventies [1970s] okay.
Speaker 2: And I do a, a ballet called 'Poppy' [George Faison], which is about drugs and so forth and I use Miles' opening music to, as the opening (unclear).
Speaker 1: Now how did you come to know Miles Davis or when do you know?
Speaker 2: Oh wow.
Speaker 1: Or how had he come to know you?
Speaker 2: I went over to Miles' house with Finney who invented that kind of braiding things that Roberta Flack used to have and [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson.  He started all that braiding before (unclear).
Speaker 1: What's his name? Finney?
Speaker 2: Finney, al- James Finney was a hairdresser and he did Miles' hair too.  So he says, "I'm going over the Miles Davis' house."  "Oh I'd love to meet him.  Could I go over there with you?"  He says, "Yes."  And we go over to Miles Davis' house, 'cause Miles is famous.  So we--Miles (laughter) answers the door, and it is he, Miles Davis.  So Miles opens the door and the first thing out of his mouth, mouth is (whispers), "Hey motherfuckers, what y'all doing?"  And so I'm like, "Are we going in (laughter)?"  So, we go in.  There's a waterfall in the house.  It is completely like a California hacienda (laughter), and you know like Miles is talking about you know they're, they're doing things fusion this and they, working with the band and they've been, they just got back from Japan, the Lamborghini.  He just got, bought, you know, the Italians gave him a Lamborghini or something like that.  I don't know how he got it, but anyway he's gotten it and you know, I thought everything was gonna be fine.  The next thing I know he says to Finney, "You messed up my hair."  It's like (laughter), they start, they--well first we're touring let's see the bedroom, no, the dressing room with all the belts and Issey Miyakes and all the shoes, and you know Miles was really out there with the belts and silk shirts and the Versace, so he was doing all this before anybody had all that.  So we're in this room with, and boots and you, you know celebrity down.  So, they start arguing (laughter) and Miles shoots at Finney, gunfire.  I'm like, "How can I get out of here?"  I'm looking around the room (laughter), wait a minute and it's just a sheet of plate glass.  There's no window you can open.  I'm wondering how can I break open this (laughter) door?  So, Finney, so Miles has chased Finney out of the house and through the front door.  I'm saying, "Well I'm still here (laughter).  What am I going to do?" Miles comes back upstairs, I'm terrified.  He says--now Finney is gone--
Story_ID: 486580
Speaker 1: Miles [Miles Davis] comes back and he says, you know his usual expletive (whispers), "That motherfucker fucked up my head."  And now Miles has all but two strands.  Finney [James Finney] has knitted a cap, so it looks like he has hair (laughter).  He has lost, you know like so the, but it's like--he said, "Well okay.  Well what do you do?"  And I tell him, you know, I'm a dancer, I love his mu- his music and, "You ain't heard this," and he puts on some music and that's how the evening progressed.  And so he plays the music and we're talking and we talk until I leave, which is like hours later, like four or five hours, three or four hours later.  And I leave, and we become very fast friends and I later go over there to visit Miles and he then says, "I, I want some of my work done, choreographed," and so forth.  He has suggestions and so forth, but we, we become friends and then he--you know the whole exp- Miles Davis experience through all of whatever.  I was out with, who was, I was touring with something and wasn't able to go to his sixty-fifth birthday that he had in, in the park [Central Park, New York, New York] at the Boathouse [Boathouse Restaurant, New York, New York] and then the last time I saw him he was very deathly ill, which was a week before he died and he was in his pa- apartment on Central Park West.  He had moved from by that time to an apartment on Cen- Central Park West, and that was the last place I saw him.  But, on, on 5th Avenue and he had lived there with Cicely [Cicely Tyson] at 5th Avenue and 79th Street and I had taken Judy [HistoryMaker Judith Jamison] by there to meet him at one time.  Nothing exciting like that happened on that visit.  That was kind of a subdued meeting (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, what happened with Finney?  What happened?
Speaker 1: He continued to be his--
Speaker 2: His hairdresser.
Speaker 1: He came back and knitted him another cap that he wore his hair, so it was fine.
Speaker 2: So, so but isn't that an amazing story?  That's an amazing story.
Story_ID: 486581
Speaker 1: So you worked with his, his material though?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: That is one of the first--Mi- Miles Davis creates interior spaces, in that you, you know, when you first thing I think experience that you, you feel that there's no line, no real line or thought process to some of the, some of the music, but he was taking--he took, takes you on an incredible journey through this interior, these interiors, landscapes that of, of human emotion, interior landscapes of human emotion, and I was able to forge a story out of a couple of his movements, atmospheres and ambience, ambient spaces.
Speaker 1: But that was different for you wasn't it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Working with that type of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, that's definitely--
Speaker 2: That, yeah I had no, sometimes it had no meter, no form in a sense and he had always had great musicians, so that was really truly fulfilling collaboration.  And we, and we, you know, stayed in touch.  We continued to talk and so forth.  He stayed, he remained Miles to the end, and I gained something there.
Speaker 1: Now what was that?
Speaker 2: That was, you know, that was part of my first concerts.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So it's all the same time.
Speaker 1: Right, right, so that even that affiliation--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --would, would set you apart in a different way.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But when you--I'm just wondering how you dealt in those internal spaces like because a lot of like when you said and I, the only reason I'm going to this is that when you said that you know with the Ailey [Alvin Ailey], oh you were talking both about 'Revelations' [Alvin Ailey] and 'Blues' ['Blues Suite,' Alvin Ailey]--
Speaker 2: Lester Horton and--
Speaker 1: No, you were talking about how, you know, what you were envisioning, you know, and then when you talked about 'Gazelle' [George Faison], you know you talked about what you were envisioning.  I'm just wondering how you did that with, you know, Miles Davis' pieces?  You know how you, what you, how you would do that and then how you would communicate it to your dancers (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's the subject as well.  It's, it's the subject as well. Poppy is the plant from which you--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --heroin is derived from.  And we were talking about drugs and that, we were in this society where that--
Speaker 1: Was.
Speaker 2: --was, listen what is dance supposed to do?  Illuminate our lives and that's all I was, that's all I had to do was bring that experience to the, the front.  Nobody had done it, not drugs like that, and that was the personification of that, and, and through different exp- human experiences or human circumstances would it--would that drug be introduced and manifest itself.
Story_ID: 486582
Speaker 1: Now when you turned to choreographer are you dancing still?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're still dancing and choreographing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did, did 'Poppy' [George Faison], did it air on WNET [WNET-TV, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was--
Speaker 1: Was it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, so it was on 'Soul!'?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and that was El- Ells--
Speaker 2: Ellis Haizlip.
Speaker 1: Haizlip okay right, right.  He's dead isn't he?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's too bad 'cause he did some--that program--
Speaker 2: Groundbreaking.
Speaker 1: Right, that program was--
Speaker 2: And I later choreographed Stevie Wonder for his program too.
Speaker 1: So, how many times were--I think I read where you were on that program about three, was it three times?
Speaker 2: Three or four times.
Speaker 1: Times okay.  That program was unique in that it was very artistic in ma--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --many ways in--
Speaker 2: Oh, and all he brought forth.  All those poets.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Amiri Baraka, [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Back there when I was working on [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni's program--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --we did, there was a wonderful two hour interview that she did with James Baldwin.  It was just, it's, and it's stuck in archive someplace, I mean, a one, two, two hour interview--
Speaker 2: Where is it?
Speaker 1: It's owned by the stock footage house.  It will never see light of day.  I mean happen, I, I couldn't use it because it was, they wanted to charge like I don't know a hundred dollars a second.  It was some outrageous--so I couldn't use it, but it was a beautifully, I mean beautiful, beau- shot very artistically.  You know she's young, he's in his forties, you know.  She's very, sort of idealistic but challenging him.  You could see she was somewhat intimidated at the beginning.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, sorry it's not about me, okay.  But anyway I, you know 'Soul!' I thought was, and I, someone had told me, oh in fact this place, this stock footage house owns all the 'Soul!', you know, what was remaining of it, of those, of that series.  It's MPI [MPI Media Group] video or--
Speaker 2: NPR [National Public Radio].
Speaker 1: No, no, it's in Chicago [sic. Orland Park, Illinois].  I think it's MP--I forget the name, but they own all the copies now.  Now, during this time who are some because you com- you know, your--Debbie Allen co- I don't know when you met her.  Is this--
Speaker 2: That's later.
Speaker 1: It's later, okay it's later at this time okay.
Speaker 2: Because before that, I'm asked to do the choreography for 'Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope' [Micki Grant].
Speaker 1: Okay, now did that come, how did that come to you the, being asked to do the choreography?  How did that come?  Did that come from--
Speaker 2: My repute- by having built the reputation--
Speaker 1: Reputation okay.
Speaker 2: --for--
Speaker 1: Now, did you--so tell me who approached you?  Tell, tell that story.
Speaker 2: I think Hope Clarke, dancer, you know Talley Beatty had quit that show, and they were looking for another choreographer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so I replaced--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Talley Beatty, I don't know how you replace Talley Beatty, but, well I was the next choreographer for that job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so tell me what, wait--
Speaker 2: All of these things--
Speaker 1: But see, but you know what's interesting about that--
Speaker 2: --everything has a social conscious base.  You know, it's how we were moving through.  All I had to do was do what we were doing in society.
Speaker 1: I understand, but I'm saying you were, you were dancing in 'Purlie' by the time this, 'cause this is really the next sort of major hit on Broadway.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I may be missing some, but the thing is that now you're, you're choreographing for it, so was, how was that as an experience that's different than doing, you know, individual dances or--am I wrong?
Speaker 2: Being the choreographer.
Speaker 1: For, for--
Speaker 2: But I'd already started choreographing.
Speaker 1: No, I understand.
Speaker 2: So, but I was used to Broadway or the concern--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so I didn't--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --by not making--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --a, a, a distinction between that and being able to flow, I was able to support myself on all, on a commercial level or the, on the concert level, and then on the social commentary level.  So, it's like I had all of these avenues of, of expression.
Story_ID: 486583
Speaker 1: But now with, did 'Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope' [Micki Grant] did that become before 'Suite Otis' [George Faison] or after 'Suite Otis'?
Speaker 2: That came--
Speaker 1: I thought it came after, no?  Was 'Suite Otis' in '71 [1971]?
Speaker 2: What was 'Don't'--'Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope' '67 [1967]?
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 2: Oh, it was '72 [1972], after 'Suite,' 'Suite Otis.'
Speaker 1: Okay, so let's talk about 'Suite Otis' because you know you were, you had just mentioned that about, you know, how it still resonates with people--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --today as it did back then and that the audience, you know, will find it's piece.  So, can you talk about how that, you know, that really developed and then I wanna also have you talk about Gary DeLoatch a little.
Speaker 2: I wanted to do a piece, you know 'Gazelle' [George Faison] and 'Slaves' [George Faison] were still barefoot and ethnic and so forth.  I wanted to add a bit of classicism to because I thought that Otis Redding and, and 'Try a Little Tenderness' was just the classic of all times, so I, so I started, you know, with these five, six sections, selections of music that I would use, not knowing which, how they would fall out, but I had met his wife [Zelma Atwood Redding] and I--that's how I started.  I star- "One More Day" ["Just One More Day"] is the day of the widow.  She's in black with a bouquet and under a veil, and that's his wife.  He's singing about wishing for the one more day, that he could have one more day with them and with her, the family and, or he was just singing it of having one more day to do the kinds of things that he wanted to.  So, that piece was simple enough.  We all lost him.  She lost him too.  So then, the next piece was "Can't Turn You Loose", ["I Can't Turn You Loose"] which is like a mir- kind of remembrance of just generally how men and women meet, you know, or how, you know, how the guys try to pick up a girl.  Then, the next piece is a duet called "Lover's Prayer" in which these two unlikely people are dancing and the girl is saying, "No, yes, no, yes, no, yes, no, yes," and I could do that over this little two minute, three minute dance until they go off triumphantly together.  The next piece is "(Can't Get No) Satisfaction" ["Satisfaction"].  The girl's gr- disgruntledness with the men, you know, taking advantage of them or not paying enough attention.  They pushed him off stage.  "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction" and we do that.  And then "I've Been Loving You Too Long," and then the last piece just fell into place, "Try a Little Tenderness," which started with the women and ended with the men in, in what, what you think I'd be doing the boogaloo or, or some other things and we're doing pirouettes and arabesque and jumping and jete-ing in the most classical way, because it's a suite, like a superimposed, the classical structure over these rock n roll songs.  And that's why I think it really endures 'cause of the structure.
Speaker 1: Now where did that premiere?  Where did that, where did--
Speaker 2: Premiere at the Manhattan Theatre Club [New York, New York], (laughter) on--when it was on East 74th Street.
Story_ID: 486584
Speaker 1: Who, who da- who were your dancers then for that?  And how were you choosing your dancers?  See that's what, I mean I know you were a dancer, but you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, these were all the top dancers of, at, at that particular time--
Speaker 1: At the time, right.
Speaker 2: --at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.  But, do you--
Speaker 2: Before we taught white dancers how to do it--
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.  That's right (laughter).
Speaker 2: --and the Japanese.  Now, we don't even own it anymore, okay, what else are we gonna talk about (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but I'm just saying in that--
Speaker 2: Now everybody's dancing.
Speaker 1: I know that's true.
Speaker 2: Right, so everybody, you know like, but--
Speaker 1: But sometimes, sometimes, sometimes.
Speaker 2: But look I had, I went to Kalamazoo at Michigan [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan] on a residency and I taught them 'Suite Otis' [George Faison], all of these white kids and we're all the same.  We are all the same, all of us.  And they had a ball and I had a ball too, and I invited them later to The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] to do one dance.  So, when the dance turned all white in the middle of it, you know the audience was like what.  So, I had thirty-two blondes, thirty-two do "Satisfaction."  They, they raised twenty thousand dollars at the school, put themselves on a bus and came all the way down there and did a three minute dance.  (Pause) Not all of us was happy about that.  That, you know, I don't know.  We're supposed to be in art because we, we're in art because we share, we're supposed to share it and when we can cross racial lines and we can cross all of those things and have everybody else ex- experience it, celebrate it, and enjoy it like we do or--it's, it's just great because that's what art is supposed to do, you know not, so you know PHILADANCO [Philadelphia Dance Company] was another company that I put it on and they were like, "Why are you doing that?  Why are these white dancers doing--?"  "Doing what?  My dance?"  You know, so I eventually took it from them because they didn't, they, they're not doing it in the right spirit.  They didn't take it in the right spirit.
Speaker 1: Now you took what, what from them?
Speaker 2: 'Suite Otis.'
Speaker 1: Took it from where?
Speaker 2: PHILADANCO.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And now it's going back to Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], but I took it from Ailey because they would--
Speaker 1: Wait--
Speaker 2: They had been doing it.
Speaker 1: Wait can I--
Speaker 2: They're getting it back this year.
Speaker 1: But can you explain to me like--
Speaker 2: Why?
Speaker 1: No, but you okay no not why (laughter), but this--okay you as a choreographer can appoint--
Speaker 2: It was my prerogative to--
Speaker 1: --to, to give.
Speaker 2: --to because it was celebrating black choreographers at this, see but why couldn't I bring them?  Because I, I told them--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, no.  I'm saying though as a choreographer you, do you license or do you give?
Speaker 2: I license.
Speaker 1: You license the right to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for someone to do the piece.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But this is what I'm trying to also understand.  You say your, is this documented, did, I mean people do document dances and you said--
Speaker 2: Well now how you gonna document--look into the camera now you're gonna still be doing Labanotation when you can just get a camera and say, "Five, in five, four, three, two," and there's the dance on film.  Okay come on, let's come out of the dark ages.  A, a triangle and two dots is gonna mean what?  See some things have--
Speaker 1: Changed.
Speaker 2: No, not changed, you know out, outlasted their usefulness.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Labanotation, get a camera please.
Speaker 1: So you never did Labanotation?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, I'm just--
Speaker 2: But what is that in this day when you can film everything.  What, why are we holding on to that?  Why is anybody still trying to get a degree in that?  One we film the dances and then, film the dance and then allow them to be seen by thousands of people.  They shouldn't be locked off in some archive somewhere, come on.  So, well I guess China will change that won't it?  With no copyright laws, I think China will change it.  And when--with them controlling our damn stock market they'll change it okay and we'll wake up too late again.
Speaker 1: Now look I had you on--
Speaker 2: When they invent, when they have, when they have bought every DVD of every movie, out here on 125th street [New York, New York] for five dollars okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, what are we doing here (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I'm--I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay, let's get with the program.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I know let's get with the program here (laughter).
Story_ID: 486585
Speaker 1: Now Gary DeLoatch, why--is it DeLoatch?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about him because he became, you found him right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this was, was he one, what, did you see in him what--
Speaker 2: Oh, he was a magnificent dancer, wonderful, beauty, a beauty and was that.  We, you could train, you could take him, train him, mold him, and the best technique, wonderful personality.  Unfortunate that he would die.  But like a lot of young men of that era it was you know horrible, but he was a magnificent creature made by God.  He was just the best.
Speaker 1: Did you see yourself in him?
Speaker 2: I could, his spontaneity, the, the, you know, such a flexible body, just wonderful.  But you know, that was a muse.  I could, I could, you know like we could, we could, we could go at it, and I'm sure Albert[AB1] [sic. Alvin Ailey] found that same thing in him as well.  And a total concert dancer, that is a true concert dancer, Al- Gary.  So, you know--
Speaker 1: Now how do you define concert dancer?  Can you just--
Speaker 2: Trained.
Speaker 1: Okay I see, okay, okay I see, Okay, I didn't know that's what (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I mean, yeah trained concert dancer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Our gypsy for Broadway or--
Speaker 1: Okay, now, but now you used him in a piece--so, your, I'm just thinking, 'Poppy' [George Faison] was that around the same time you did the Bird, Charlie Bird [Charlie Parker]?  Did you choreograph to Charlie Bird where he played--
Speaker 2: Not me.
Speaker 1: --maybe, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 2: That's Alvin.
Speaker 1: That's Alvin I'm sorry, sorry, sorry.  Okay, so let's talk about--now, but how long did Gary work, did you, did he work with you before he went with Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]?
Speaker 2: Two or three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there ty- let me ask you in the world of a dancer is that sort of typical, you know, the movement or do people go in and out of troupes or?
Speaker 2: I don't, well if you're a dancer and you wanna dance then Alvin is the place.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Okay, I got you.  So, now when you--let's, so, so you're saying Talley's [Talley Beatty] leaving okay--
Speaker 2: Well, Alvin had, well the great thing about Alvin he had a res- a, a repertoire of all, all of us.  He had all of the choreographers, so you could go one place and you would get all of those experiences, so it's, you know, it's not so much as it was when Alvin was here, but that was very daring and, and very new.  And now other people just have works of other, other choreographers and they don't choreograph themselves.  It's just like PHILADANCO [Philadelphia Dance Company] and, and Dayton [Dayton Contemporary Dance Company].
Speaker 1: They don't choreograph, they don't (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No Jeraldyne Blunden didn't choreograph and--
Speaker 1: I see, so they just--
Speaker 2: --and Joan Myers Brown doesn't choreograph.
Speaker 1: So, they just, they just do other work.
Speaker 2: Are a repository for all of that work.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, I see.
Story_ID: 486586
Speaker 1: --You had said Talley Beatty left 'Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope' [Micki Grant] and that opened up, you know, for free.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So where was--was it in rehearsal when he left and you, you--
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know how, I don't know the circumstances.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They just called, you know, the general manager called me and it was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --just come in and do that.  But, I'd always been doing, you know, off-Broadway shows.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and so--
Speaker 2: And American Light Opera Company.  You know it was just, I'm only following what I started out with.  I mean, just--
Speaker 1: Right, I understand.  What were they saying though about the choreography in 'Don't[AB2] Bother Me, I Cope.'  Did, did it get reviewed along with the reviews 'cause you had [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore once again, right, Melba Moore?
Speaker 2: Huh?  No, [HistoryMaker] Micki Grant.
Speaker 1: Micki, oh Micki Grant that's right.
Speaker 2: And, and--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.  Why am I even saying that?
Speaker 2: That gospel singer that, Bradford, Alex Bradford.
Speaker 1: You know but it says in the notes I have here that Melba Moore did concert, staging, and costume design.  Does that sound right for 'Don't'--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I didn't think that, okay, wrong information, okay.  Never mind wrong information.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, but Micki Grant she was the produ- she's one--
Speaker 2: She was the--
Speaker 1: The producer, that's right.
Speaker 2: --she wrote it--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --with Vinnette Carroll the director--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --and writer.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, okay.
Speaker 2: She did the music.
Speaker 1: That's right 'cause I have yet to meet her.  I met her just briefly, Micki Grant, 'cause she's originally from Chicago [Illinois], or her sister lives here.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so then that, let's talk, then you had, you worked on 'Via Galactica' [Christopher Gore and Judith Ross]?
Speaker 2: Right, that was a show--
Speaker 1: Okay that was a short, short--
Speaker 2: No, I went on to do.
Speaker 1: Huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was called in to doctor that a bit--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on Broadway.  It was way ahead of its time.  Irene Cara was the star.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it had technology, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, can I ask--?
Speaker 2: Overwhelm them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And us.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), can, can I ask though were there, when you're doing things like, though you got, when you're doing things on Broadway like that and 'Via Galactica' would have been different, but what are the dynamics of being, you know, of being at that level, you know, and choreographing?
Speaker 2: You get paid.
Speaker 1: Okay, but do you have agent (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's not a g--
Speaker 1: Do you have an agent?
Speaker 2: No, they were calling me at that time, right.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Come in and help us.
Speaker 1: So you don't, you don't have an agent or anything like that, that does the negotiation?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have an agent.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay I see, okay.  But, is it pretty cut and dry the business part of it?
Speaker 2: Right, you belong to the union that, they have standardized things.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Story_ID: 486587
Speaker 1: Let's talk about 'The Wiz.'
Speaker 2: Right.  I was doing--my company [George Faison Universal Dance Experience] was dancing 'Suite Otis' [George Faison] in Delacorte park [Delacorte Theater, New York, New York].  The audience was going crazy, and out of the crowd emerged Ken Harper [Kenneth Harper], the producer, who then asked me would I choreograph 'The Wiz.'
Speaker 1: And can you just talk about the whole story, because this was--
Speaker 2: It was quite something.  [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder was slated to choreograph and direct and costume 'The Wiz.'  In--just days before we went into rehearsal, Ken Harper had a flash saying that maybe it's not so good if I had one person do all of those jobs, and right he was in that there were some great costumes and then there were some costumes that were not so great that actually were hazards.  But anyway, it was the most joyous and the most horrific experience of my life, because--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --I changed the choreography every day for six weeks until we were satisfied with what we had.  It had to be done that way.  I mean, number one everyone had a chip on their shoulder about Judy Garland and then about what we were doing with this little black girl called Stephanie Mills.  And then--
Speaker 1: Are you talking the theater world?
Speaker 2: The theater world and you know some audience people and the disastrous opening that we had in Baltimore [Maryland] in which, you know, it was all, all too much, you know, you know Geoffrey had designed tails for the yellow brick road that stretched up across, how am I gonna do choreography with that?  So I took the tails and folded them over my arm and danced with them.  So, you talk about lemons and lemonade, I was doing that every day.  Because I'd got no help.  These guys were past, you know they were past knowing what we were about, the music was changing, I'm sorry, the music was changing, and that's when I decided that the music for the tornado had to be different from the rest of the show and that's why I now have a song in the show.  In, in, forever in perpetuity in 'The Wiz' the "Tornado" song.  And the tornado is what we, me and the, the, the music, the--what is his title?
Speaker 1: Lyricist.
Speaker 2: The dance arranger--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --and I had come up with for the tornado, but through some trickery and this, and I'm telling you there's plenty trickery, then we would have had two songs.  But we ended up with one song in 'The Wiz' and Luther Vandross ends up with the other one.
Speaker 1: Because he--
Speaker 2: Right and then--
Speaker 1: --he did the music lyrics, right?
Speaker 2: Right for one song.
Speaker 1: For one--
Speaker 2: "Brand New Day" ["Everybody Rejoice/A Brand New Day"]
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And then I did the Emerald City song ["Emerald City Ballet (Psst)"].
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, okay.
Speaker 2: Right and then it all comes down to money, that's all it comes down to, money.
Speaker 1: Oh because you had to pay him.
Speaker 2: No, he had to pay us.
Speaker 1: I'm so confused.
Speaker 2: And we had to be paid.  That's how royalties are paid like that.  See, I'm saying that, that's how you get royalties.
Speaker 1: He had to pay, no he had--
Speaker 2: So the director, choreographer, and the costume, everybody may change, but the book, music, and lyric never change.
Speaker 1: But you changed, you said you changed--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: You added.
Speaker 2: No, before we came to Broadway opened up, but that, we changed the song, but there's no guarantee that your song is gonna open on Broadway.  It becomes solidified after you go on Broadway and those are locked as royalty points, money.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Forever, or ninety-nine years or whatever (unclear) when you're a composer.  So that elite bunch I belong to.  We have a song published on Broadway, so I will forever be associated--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with 'The Wiz.'
Story_ID: 486588
Speaker 1: Ken Harper [Kenneth Harper], the producer of 'The Wiz' came up with the idea for doing 'The Wiz,' a black version of 'The Wizard of Oz' ['The Wonderful Wizard of Oz,' L. Frank Baum] and he--who had--Ken had been a disc jockey, so he dreamt of replacing all the songs in 'The Wiz' with contemporary urban, kind of fresh hip kind of music that would be the basis for a new version or new interpretation of 'The Wiz' story as an urban fable, and he went about, you know, collecting all the people that he thought would make, that could possibly make up this, you know, this creative team that he could later, you know, go to backers and get the money to produce the show, so.  And I was one of those, of those people.
Speaker 2: So, it was he and then you had, he tried to get--when did Luther Vandross come into picture (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh no, that was later.
Speaker 2: That was later.
Speaker 1: Late, late, late.
Speaker 2: Okay, but the core team at the better was Charlie Smalls, okay you had [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder was the--
Speaker 1: Geoffrey Holder was the--
Speaker 2: He was, he was--
Speaker 1: --director and, and the costume--
Speaker 2: Designer.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So how did, had you worked with him before, Geoff?
Speaker 1: Geoffrey--
Speaker 2: I knew you had worked with [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade.
Speaker 1: Through Alvin Ailey.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He did 'Prodigal Prince' ['The Prodigal Prince,' Geoffrey Holder] one of his--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --ballets that I danced and that, that was it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, yes we had.
Speaker 2: But you had not worked like that's a different relationship, you know, dancing someone's piece than really working with him--
Speaker 1: As a director.
Speaker 2: As a director right.
Speaker 1: Well, he actually came at, at the end to replace Gilbert on 'The Wiz,' but that didn't affect what I had already done.
Speaker 2: I see okay.  So, he was the core group at the beginning now?
Speaker 1: Gilbert Moses--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --who was the director, Geoffrey was going to do the costumes.
Speaker 2: Well you said Geoffrey was gonna do the costumes, be the director and choreography (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Director and the choreo- but after some thought I guess the producer had changed his mind from having he do all three and just kind of spread out the responsibility because it was a massive undertaking no matter, you know even if you wore your single hat on as, as far as that, that is concerned.  So, as we went out and it was, you know, like trying to, you know, tame a wild beast because that's what it was.  The costume, you know, it was, the costumes, mammoth set, pieces and, and so forth.  It was just a lot, but you know I had a great stage manager [Jose Vega] who told me he said you know what you see all this chaos around us, "Just do your job and don't worry about the rest," and that's what I did.  So, I, I just concentrated on my work and perfecting what I could do in, in making my piece of it, the choreography, really work.
Speaker 2: Okay, now this is 1970--
Speaker 1: Four [1974].
Speaker 2: Four [1974] okay now what--talk about the--
Speaker 1: Damn, that was quick isn't it?  I thought it was a long, it seems like a long time ago, but it's like--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: It's quick.
Speaker 2: That's right, right.
Speaker 1: It's a lot happening.
Speaker 2: So now it was very quick yes, very quick in between you leaving Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], right.  That was--
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 2: Yeah and you did, right 'Don't Bother Me' ['Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope,' Micki Grant] you did everything in sequence really almost--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --a year apart, yeah.
Story_ID: 486589
Speaker 1: So what was the plan?  So you were doing off-Broadway production [of 'The Wiz'] or p- whatever they call it the--in Bal- Baltimore [Maryland] you said.  Why was--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, the, the Bro- the, the, a Broadway-bound production.
Speaker 1: That's right.  So, why was Baltimore chosen?
Speaker 2: I, I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Though it was just chosen because it was a roadhouse [Morris A. Mechanic Theatre, Baltimore, Maryland] and you could, you know, there are certain houses all over the country that you would go to.
Speaker 1: So how--
Speaker 2: That was out of town trial house.
Speaker 1: So, so how, how long was the run there?
Speaker 2: Three--two or three weeks.
Speaker 1: Okay and what was disastrous about it?
Speaker 2: Oh, everything.  We had Butterfly McQueen was who had--it was big and unwieldy.  It was, you know, and we had Butterfly McQueen doing curtain speeches.  We had, you know, a lot of people hadn't danced and, and no, no, now that's not true, one minute 'cause I got, I really had some great dancers.  And the costumes there were just a lot of material.
Speaker 1: (Cough) Excuse me.
Speaker 2: And just pulling all that together was just monumental job.
Speaker 1: So, I guess tensions were running high, right?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) high, right.
Speaker 1: Okay and how, what did the critics say?
Speaker 2: Why did we do it?  (Laughter) And any other derogatory term that John Simon at that particular time could find to say about it.  But, anyway we were just working to make it work.  We, we, you know so that the audience--and the audience enjoyed it.  That's what was our and we had great performers: [HistoryMaker] Andre De Shields, Mabel King, Clarice Taylor, Tin Man was Tiger Haynes, Ted Ross, [HistoryMaker] Dee Dee Bridgewater, the Good Witch [Glinda].  It was a wonderful cast.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And Stephanie Mills of course.
Speaker 1: Okay and, and what--who--were you dur- were you involved in the auditions at that point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah I auditioned all the dancers.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so can you talk about--do you remember the, the audition of Stephanie Mills?
Speaker 2: It was a really difficult rehearsal, audition process because all, not only did, they had to sing too.  The dancers had to sing so we, that was really a part of, and the more training you had the better.  The more training you had in anything, the better off you're gonna be.  The more versatile the choreography can look, the--everything is a whole, just so much easier.  I mean it's, trying to get all these dancers trained, so it's--I used a lot of the dancers who had done concert dancing.
Speaker 1: And like do you remember Stephanie Mills' audition, what stood, stood out about her?
Speaker 2: She could sing.  The girl had a beautiful voice, a wonderful voice, so expressive.  They didn't write "Home" ["Home (Finale)"] which was a final, the finale until we were in rehearsal.
Speaker 1: So, how many songs were written in rehearsal at that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not that many, but I mean--
Speaker 1: But, I mean you're saying in--
Speaker 2: --when they didn't work, when they didn't work they had to go.
Speaker 1: I see so.
Speaker 2: So, that, that process you know like I think a lot of things failed today because we keep humping something that doesn't work.  You keep trying to make something work when a new fresh idea is appropriate and you just have to be strong and courageous enough to make that happen.
Story_ID: 486590
Speaker 1: So what is the story behind "Emerald City" ["Emerald City Ballet (Psst)"] though, so how did "Emerald City" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, he had a dirge, he had come up with a dirge, and we needed something kind of sparkling, something other than what, what was created and we just rose to that occasion on I guess to, how long is that?  It's almost thirty, it's thirty years ago.  So, it was like thirty something years ago.
Speaker 1: But that was Timothy--
Speaker 2: Graphenreed [Timothy Graphenreed].
Speaker 1: Okay Graphenreed and, and you.
Speaker 2: And, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did the pro- so how did you come up with it together (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I brought Timothy from Washington [D.C.] to be my musical dance arranger.  I think they had other plans, but I had had such a great time with him down in Washington.  We had spent the summer doing 'Inner City Blues' [ph.], 'Inner City,' which was another, is another musical, and we had bonded so greatly, and he was so creative as well.  And we, we were a creative team in ourselves, so when the rest of them weren't talking to each other we, we were busy working.
Speaker 1: And you came up with the song?  I mean, who arranged it, who came up with the music?
Speaker 2: He did, right we did together.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's pretty, okay, you don't usually find that and then what about you had also said there was a story around Dee Dee Bridge- Bridgewater.
Speaker 2: Right, the director then who was married, fell in love with [HistoryMaker] Dee Dee Bridgewater who was married and Charlie Smalls who was married fell in love with her too.  And they fought in the bar over Dee Dee Bridgewater, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who won out?
Speaker 2: Well Gil- Gilbert [Gilbert Moses] got fired, but he later married Dee Dee Bridgewater and Dee Dee won a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], Charlie [Charlie Smalls] one two, and Geoffrey [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Holder] won what costumes and, and direction and I won choreography.
Speaker 1: So now, so you have this disaster story.  What then happens when you go to Broadway that's what I'm wondering?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what oh you just battle it out.  It was just tooth and nail, dog eat dog world out there.
Speaker 1: Now had, had--
Speaker 2: And you just keep doing your work.  Remember I said--I was telling you about the stage manager [Jose Vega] saying just do your job and be done.  That's all you can do.
Speaker 1: Okay, now Ken Harper [Kenneth Harper] what did he produce before this ['The Wiz']?
Speaker 2: No, that was it.
Speaker 1: He had never done--
Speaker 2: Right, he struck gold with his first show.  He had been--well he was working on a couple of more shows, but.
Speaker 1: But what was his background up to that point?
Speaker 2: He was a deejay, music, and he came up with that.
Speaker 1: What about the financing where did that come from?
Speaker 2: Oh that--20th Century Fox [Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation].
Speaker 1: He cut a deal with Twentieth Century Fox.
Speaker 2: Right, and cut deals and got the money and the financing, the good old fashion way.
Story_ID: 486591
Speaker 1: And then, so y- that was '74 [1974], then you opened January 15th in 1975.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you talk about that opening night (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it's fabulous.  We had fun.  You know, we had come to the end of it.  We were all whipped, tired and done.  It was good; it was opened, and there we were.  Now the, the challenge was to get people in there to see it ['The Wiz'] and to, to pay, you know, to, to buy those tickets.  And even though the, the critics weren't as kind as they maybe should have been in hindsight, we persevered and we build over all of that time.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Week after week, the, the grosses started climbing and we were there and were able to stay there for five years.
Speaker 1: I know.  So, let me ask, so how, how long a period of time did it take to get the audience, 'cause a lot of times they say with Broadway productions--
Speaker 2: Four or five weeks, six weeks, you know, they build.  But they built in, in like a hundred, two hundred thousand dollar increments, so that was great.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: And steady.
Speaker 1: Steady?  So who was--
Speaker 2: Steady.
Speaker 1: --doing the marketing then for that?
Speaker 2: Oh one of those--
Speaker 1: And what was the strategy behind getting audiences, do you--well I'm just asking.
Speaker 2: No, I don't know.  (Laughter) The strategy not just put it in The New York Times, go after that black audience.  Yes, right, right so that's what they had do.
Speaker 1: So that churches--
Speaker 2: Marketing, churches, all of the whole thing, which we still haven't done--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to any great success (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what did you consider--now what I--okay it closed in 1979, so it was you know four, it was four years, four years, almost four years and a week. But now you won the Tony [Tony Award for Best Choreography].  Did the--the Tony--was it in 1976 that you won?
Speaker 2: Five [1975].
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-five [1975], oh right because it was in January.  Okay 1975.  Can you talk about how you felt 'cause there's not that, I mean, did 'Don't Bother Me,' 'Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope' [Micki Grant] won too, but you, you won it for, for choreographer.
Speaker 2: You're talking 'Purl-,' 'Purlie.'
Speaker 1: Right 'Purlie' I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right that I won it for Tony, for choreography. Right.
Speaker 1: I think we were nominated, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  So, can you talk about that night and how it felt and?
Speaker 1: Before the reviews.
Speaker 2: Well before--
Speaker 1: It was wonderful, I mean I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the reviews--
Speaker 1: --I was, I thought it was a personal triumph for me because I had saw something.  I was able to realize something that was no more than an idea when we started.  I was able to change dances and do all of the very different kinds of things that appeared there because of my background and my training.  So I was totally prepared for, for this, for this piece.  And then I had all, I had great dancers, so I was very confident that that would--
Speaker 2: Right. Would win out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that would be, yes that would win out in the end.
Story_ID: 486592
Speaker 1: Now what w- what is your favorite, favorite of these (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you know what?  No let's go back there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to Broadway I think that you, Broadway and, and all, all that it's, is, is really like life.  It is life with all the prejudices and so forth.  Now if we do, if we didn't have a black producer, I don't think you would have ever seen a 'Wiz' ['The Wiz'].  And to this day, don't wonder why there are no more black shoes on Broadway.  There are no black producers producing for Broadway, so how do you expect to see yourself on Broadway, okay?  So, and that's what we've been doing and so we're here in Harlem [New York, New York] in this place, in the Firehouse [Faison Firehouse Theater] trying to develop, you know, product that we could, you know, that everybody can actually ultimately participate in, but we are here to see that some of our stories and some of our history is not eliminated through some of the things that we do.
Speaker 1: So, now what happened to Ken Harper [Kenneth Harper] then?
Speaker 2: He died.
Speaker 1: Died, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm telling you like between 1980, what is 'Dreamgirls'? Eighty-one [1981], right '80 [1980] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: And now AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] has decimated the entire community.  I mean all those guys that died in 'Dreamgirls.'  All the die--guys that died in 'The Wiz' and so forth.  You keep discounting what has hap- had happened.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: There was AIDS all over Broadway and all of those people died.  My, from Michael Bennett, you know, Michael Peters.  You name it, that's what happened.  Are we still in denial about that?  I know certain churches are, but we are.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: It's like, so what do you do?  You know, th- create the musicals and the plays and the things, talk about this screwed up condition that we are existing in, trying to rectify some of this and trying to bring some sort of reality to any of these situations.  It's not all that glamour and Tonys [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] and this, that, and the other.  We're trying to, to say something, and I think that that's what I started out doing.  I think that that's what I'm continuing to do.  I can't do anything else.  I mean, you know, like they, they come up with all sorts of reasons to have a Broadway show, and I'm sure to the people that are creating them some of them are good, but I thought some of this musical would, music would say some of the things that the words can no longer--can't say and, and I think that create, you know, continuing to create, you know, some sort of viable, but then viable to whom, the pieces.
Story_ID: 486593
Speaker 1: Let me ask you if you could give me three of your, you know, three stories from the 'The Wiz' and your experience with that, can you come up with three, just anecdotal stories?
Speaker 2: Three.  I already gave you one.  "Mind your business, do your work, and get through it," that's one.  Or maybe that's three right there, no or two.  But I'm just saying that you have to be very selfish about--and not listen to everything you hear.  You know, Ken Harper [Kenneth Harper] fainting after he--somebody telling him to close the show is another story, and that's a story in itself.  You faint, you fall out, and then he didn't and then the replacement of, you know, the, the cha- the, the place where things can really happen.  Broadway is still a magical place where things can really happen, dreams can really come true, and a little boy like Clint--Hinton Battle was able to become a star with me, you know, because of the selfishness of another actor who walked out at that particular, that particular point, which means that you have to stick to it, so nobody gets a day off.  The third is what the story is about: believing in yourself.  That is all what, that's, that's it for 'The Wiz' and, and believing in yourself and believing you can do it.  That is the story, and I think that that is the thing that, that, that got me through it.  I believed the story, and I believed in that, the mantra believe in yourself and everything else will, will happen.
Story_ID: 486594
Speaker 1: Now when you, when--okay, in 1979 this, you know, you closed ['The Wiz' on Broadway], but the Motown [Motown Productions; de Passe Entertainment] acquired the rights for the movie in, in 19--I think '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: They were gonna reinvent.  Everybody thinks they're gonna reinvent.  That's the hardest ass story to ever tell, 'The Wizard of Oz' ['The Wonderful Wizard of Oz,' L. Frank Baum], unless you have all of the money in the world to make something happen, but the, the reason that we are doing anything in this theater [Faison Firehouse Theater, New York, New York] is to create the magic.  Hydraulic lifts and all, yards and yards of material, all add up to, you know, maybe a great production, but in the end what is magic?  What is magic?  Yeah, you can, with a couple of million dollars you can create any kind of magic that you want, but when you don't have that what is theater?  What is magic?  And you have to go back to that.  And what your--
Speaker 1: So what is it?
Speaker 2: What is magic?  Making the unknown and the unseen tangible.
Speaker 1: (Pause) So obviously you didn't like the film?
Speaker 2: No.  They, you know they fell into every hole we did on the road.  Everything that, that could go wrong and see that's what they didn't understand about what we had one and, and the, and, and, you know, and how we succeeded in, on so many levels.  And they fell into every hole, over-production, you know.  Now I in, in the piece that I did four men represent the yellow brick road, period.  You don't have to lay down any linoleum, and then you start reducing the magic to nothing.  Okay, Armstrong linoleum made the yellow brick road, but what does that mean.  That's an inanimate object.  And I don't care how much skipping Diana Ross is gonna do you're not going to make her a dancer.  And I think the social commentary that was put in was enough at that particular point for everybody to be able to enjoy, but just about any, trying to get any deeper it's just trying to, is taking--reducing the magic again.
Speaker 1: Now did they have, in those particular instances or do you know of situations where you know the people who--'cause often the people on Broadway don't make it to the, you know, to the motion, to this film, but was there any consultation at all between the two entities, you know, betw- I mean, between the Broadway production and the film?  Were there any--
Speaker 2: I don't know they got a director for a fantasy, a musical who had done courtroom dramas, Sidney Lumet.  Now isn't that the worse combination?  Sidney Lumet.  Couldn't we have found some--?  I guess he knew how to operate a camera.  That's why they chose him, but that was the worst.  It was the worst.  And so concrete, no ma- there was no magic there.  And it was though the magic the money can, can buy, but it wasn't magic--
Story_ID: 486595
Speaker 1: So after that, like when--let me ask you when, when things like that, when a show (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I had been doing Earth, Wind and Fire--
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: --and all of that in arena shows.
Speaker 1: In the--
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978], no '78 [1978], '79 [1979]--
Speaker 1: So you mean in--
Speaker 2: --eighty [1980], and so I was working.  I did Ashford and Simpson [Nick Ashford and HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson] at that same time.
Speaker 1: Right, but that's why I thought now why did you get involved doing that the R and B circuit?
Speaker 2: Because I can stay--I was riding up Amsterdam Avenue [New York, New York] they, they stopped me in my, in the Rolls-Royce and asked me could I come and work with them for money, okay, like Earth, Wind and Fire.  Yeah, it's a job, what do you mean how could I?  That's why I'm, I don't think I'm too unhappy.  I don't think I'm worse for wear.  I mean, I started concert dancing, but wasn't I supposed to be doing all of that, right.  I dance, all kinds, right.  But why did you, why did you say that then?
Speaker 1: No, no, no because I said, no I didn't mean it in a, you, you're taking it as if I meant it in a pejorative way, and I didn't at all.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no I was asking how did it happen because then you had this whole, no then you start working--?
Speaker 2: No, but look at, go, but look at my life.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: All of my life, I've done all of these things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause it just flowed one into the other--
Speaker 2: Yes it just--
Speaker 1: --is basically what, you know--
Speaker 2: --yes, you, you just keep growing.
Speaker 1: That's right, so that, that's--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --it was not in a pejorative because--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't think, no, I didn't think--
Speaker 1: --because I, 'cause I was, I was looking and I'm thinking god but then he went and worked for all these, you know, R and B artists.
Speaker 2: And Dionne War- Warwick,--
Speaker 1: Right [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick.
Speaker 2: --Roberta Flack, Al B.  Sure!  Some of them I can't remember (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, can I ask you when you're working with artists like that, who've done a lot of, you know staging--
Speaker 2: Right, but they don't know how to walk on the stage, most people to be self-assured, relaxed, walk, breathe, talk even.  That's what I do for them.
Speaker 1: So even though they've been on the stage a lot to perform (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, a lot of them haven't been on, not when Nick and Val--
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, okay.
Speaker 2: They weren't on the stage a lot.  They hadn't been on the stage that much.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And then you know when they want to stretch out and do some other things.
Speaker 1: And do something different.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you enjoy that whole stretch of working with them because that went on for about--?
Speaker 2: That was, no that went to London [England].  That went to Egypt.  That went to Europe all over again, and all those places in the finest hotels you wanna stay in all over the world.  And first class travel ain't bad.  I don't know, what do you (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Nevermind okay.  No, no, no that's good.
Speaker 2: What are we supposed to be doing here?
Speaker 1: Well, no, no I don't know.
Speaker 2: Oh no, carrying around some old musty dance belt and some old beat up shoes.  Oh that's what we're supposed to do.  No--wrong.
Speaker 1: I mean a bunch of people, Ashford and Simpson, Simpson, Natalie Cole, Betty Carter, Earth, Wind and Fire.  Who did you like working with the best of that group?
Speaker 2: Earth, Wind and Fire.  I, I like, I like all.  It's the music.  It is really--
Speaker 1: But Earth, Wind and Fire is the most theatrical of the--
Speaker 2: They put--right, no but they had, we had magic and everything, but we rehearsed on a sound stage, so you'd know.  They had the vocals right there.  The band was right there.  It was, excuse me, it was all live.  You don't get any better than that.  No, the music, the music, the music was incredible, incredible.  That's why I was so sorry that, that, that 'Hot Feet' [Heru Ptah] didn't work, but 'Hot Feet' didn't work because you didn't have the people on stage singing those songs and the musicians doing that music.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 486596
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you tell me--I--back to I just one other thing about 'The Wiz.' When you look at the, the shows, you know from 'Purlie'--was 'Raisin' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry], 'Raisin', right, 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' [Loften Mitchell], 'Dreamgirls,' 'Sophisticated Ladies,' right, and now, now you have--
Speaker 2: 'Hat.'
Speaker 1: 'Hat' right.
Speaker 2: 'If This Hat Could Talk' [George Faison] yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I'm very proud of that, but I think you know it's been so poorly produced that I'm, I'm just hoping it, it can still make it, that it's still viable, you know, but, but it means, it means so much historically and--historically because it's what we have done.  It's representative of what we, black people, white people, Asians, Hispanics, all of the--that's what we forged in history, and it's a celebration of that.
Speaker 1: But with those, with, with 'Hat' why--what resonated with you about that because that's later and I really--
Speaker 2: How, how we as black people can come together and do something really significant.  We could do something that would be for the betterment of all mankind, that we could do something in spite of where we came, all we all come from, our different tastes, the, the diversity of our opinions, of the ways we look and so forth, that we are, can be united, that we are united, although we don't express it or demonstrate any the ways that we, we should, should.  We just, we keep going back to the adage, "Oh we can't come together and we can't do anything."  Yes we can when we put our minds to it.  When we really decide, once we re- decide that the only person that we're fighting is ourselves.
Story_ID: 486597
Speaker 1: Okay I wanna start out by have, you know we're gonna slate it again.  My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us and giving today's date and our location.
Speaker 2: Five, eleven--what's the date?
Speaker 1: Today?
Speaker 2: Five, fourteen [May 14, 2007].
Speaker 1: Ap- May 14th I think so.  May 14th.
Speaker 2: I said that.
Speaker 1: No, you have to say it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what is the date?  Give the--
Speaker 2: May 14th.
Speaker 1: Two thousand and seven [2007].
Speaker 2: Two thousand and seven [2007].
Speaker 1: Okay and your name.
Speaker 2: Two thousand seven [2007] (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you name though.  You're going--
Speaker 2: George Faison [HistoryMaker George W. Faison] (laughter).
Speaker 1: You have to spell it.
Speaker 2: George, G-E-O-R-G-E, Faison, F-A-I-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And the location.
Speaker 2: This, you are sitting in the Faison Firehouse Theater at 124th [Street] and St. Nicholas [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Good, that's right, good.
Story_ID: 486598
Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna go back to 'The Wiz' and I wanna because--I wanna go back a little bit because at that point in time when 'The Wiz' sort of came, that was the same year that you disbanded right the Universal [George Faison Universal Dance Experience] is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we were still out that, that year we still.  I didn't--
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 2: Yeah right, that was in, you know that was in Jan- December.  January came, we opened.  We ran through that, the people that were in 'The Wiz' stayed in 'The Wiz.'  It didn't come up until we, we went to California, the first California company, then I was thinking about disbanding, the national tour--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was in, in--took off at the Ahmanson Theater in Los Angeles [California] I think.  I don't remember, what year was that, '76 [1976]?
Speaker 1: I have it as '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: No, we opened on Broadway in '75 [1975].  We ran--
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah you did that's right.
Speaker 2: --that year without going on the road, so the national tour probably didn't happen until a year after that.
Speaker 1: Okay, well can we go back and talk--you had spoken about the fact that--oh remember there was a relationship and they had a right, you know, this is leading up to, it's in Balt- it's Baltimore [Maryland] was--
Speaker 2: The, the director and the, and the, the director and--
Speaker 1: The--
Speaker 2: --the music, the composer, Charlie Smalls and, and Gilbert Moses.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was at home after a much needed rest from the commotion and chaos of 'The Wiz.'  I was--I can remember so vividly I was asleep, I get a phone call around 11:00, 12:00 at night Gil, Gilbert Moses and Charlie Smalls were fighting in the lobby, or in the bar of the, I think, I think it was the Hilton Hotel down there, and Gilbert got caught, caught over the bridge of the nose with a brandy snifter.  And oh they were just fighting over who [HistoryMaker] Dee Dee Bridgewater was going to be seeing, a married woman, whose husband [Cecil Bridgewater] is a famous musician as well, and they fought and they, and they carried on.  They were, I think everybody was married, although Charlie may have been living with the women that he was living with up on, on West End Avenue [New York, New York].  But Gilbert was certainly engaged, and had a daughter and lived in West Bend and Dee Dee was married, so this was the--you know married folks waltz, you know, and they danced around the issue of adultery (laughter).  No, I'm just joking.  But anyway, they did that and there was just one intriguing thing after the other.
Story_ID: 486599
Speaker 1: Stu Gilliam who was our Scarecrow announced to us the day that out the, the, backers for, for the musical who were coming from 20th Century Fox [Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation] were coming to the matinee.  He didn't care.  He was going to have his day off, because it was rugged.  We'd--you know we went weeks without, you know, having a day off, but this was not the time for Stu Gilliam to take a day off.  Well, he did anyway and so that sent us into a panic, and we had to pluck this young man from the chorus who I had eyed as one of the dancers, Hinton Battle, and he was a dancer and we didn't know whether he could sing or not, but we took him out of the chorus and, and fed him the lines and taught him the songs, did the dances, and threw him on the next day as the Scarecrow.  The image of Stephanie Mills and, and, and Hinton Battle on stage together as the, the Scarecrow and Dorothy was perfect, and he did a brilliant job, saved the day and all of those things.  And I think that started his career, his, his, you know, the ascent of his career, because he won, he went on not to win a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] for 'The Wiz', but went, went on to win three Tonys in the American Theatre [American Theatre Wing], and that accomplishment has only been rivaled by--as an actor--by Zero Mostel.  So that was, you know, that was really, really ga- great.  But to all of those thespians out there: do not let Eve on the stage at all because you will be losing your job (laughter).  You know because there's always somebody sitting in the wings waiting to take your place and don't be fooled by this is show business and that's ultimately what, what happened (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now did Stu, did he lose his, did after, after Hinton did that?
Speaker 1: No, they told him not to come back to the theater and they would send his, his things to the hotel.  I mean I was sor- it was sorry, but it made all of a sudden 'The Wiz' more youthful.  Everybody was, I think, the age of the characters maybe in the movie, but this made, you know, this put youth in the picture, so we could ease on down the road with him.
Speaker 2: Well, you had Stephanie Mills, though.  She had youth, but you're saying, but--
Speaker 1: Right, right, but I'm saying, but you know--
Speaker 2: --the other character.
Speaker 1: --do you meet, did she, did Dorothy really learn this from her peers or did she learn this from older folks?  I thought that they were also on that journey of enlightenment as well.  So, it just made the Scarecrow being young and dumb, fit, you know, or young and smart or, you know, it kind of fit.  So, it was really a good move on our part.
Story_ID: 486600
Speaker 1: Can we talk a little bit about the creative process, you know what happened, you know, in, in the process of building the, the play.  I know that it had been, you know, a play before it was a musical right.
Speaker 2: Well, it was a play before the mu- well it was a musical and Judy Garland was the star.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right, right.
Speaker 2: And our biggest challenge was to get them to fall in love, yes with a black girl, our black Dorothy.  And that was really kind of met with a lot of opposition because all, I guess all white people, you know, thought that Judy Garland and, and Dorothy of 'The Wiz' belonged to them, but we had been watching Judy Garland be Dorothy since 1939 right along with them, even if it were from the crow's nest.  And we fell in love with her, with that same message and all of the other white characters that were in that.  So, you know, in doing it that was our challenge, and then you know they would, you know back then that was 1975 so we weren't so urban.  You know there were a few words out of that, but those were a few words out of 'Raisin' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry] and 'Purlie' and all of the other things that we could, could do or what was on TV in '75 [1975], whatever was on in TV in '75 [1975] which, which would probably have been 'Good Times' right.
Speaker 1: Right, 'Good Times' right.
Speaker 2: With J.J. [J.J. Evans] and all of that and Esther Rolle's family and how smart they could be or whatever blaxploitation film.  But 'The Wiz' actually gave us an opportunity to, to emerge from, from that day to day life and then take on characters that we weren't allowed to take on or subjects, a script that had the coherence that we needed it to, you know, to move on, move on be- beyond slavery or civil rights, move on and be, you know, what, the promise of what being in the theater could really be.  We could dance and sing, have smiles on our faces, wear colorful costumes, wear sequins and beautiful things, silks and velvets and all of those things, and then be characters that were yes not too far from us, but far enough for us to, to imagine something else.  We were emerging from civil rights was like ten years old.  'Purlie' was five years prior to, to all of this.  And then we were joined by 'Eubie!' and other black musicals that kind of kept Broadway alive at that point.  I know they wouldn't admit it, but all they were doing was being wrapped in, in music, you know, musicals like 'Raisin' and 'Purl-,' well 'Purlie,' 'Lilies of the Field' which was that same year and 'Eubie!' and, and 'Bubbling' ['Bubbling Brown Sugar,' Loften Mitchell] and revue kinds of shows.  But this was our first musical.
Story_ID: 486601
Speaker 1: So that's what I wanna talk about now.  Willie Brown, he did the book right [for 'The Wiz']?  Is that the--
Speaker 2: William Brown, William F. Brown (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) William Brown, okay.  Now, what, h- how did he come to do the book?  Is it, you, that was--
Speaker 2: I, I, I, don't know I think that he was asked initially to do the book, you know, a white guy from Connecticut, you know, commenting on the ur- quote, urban experience.  In the end they called in Sam, Samuel Bobrick who doctored the book a bit, who was, you know, a Hollywood or I, I think screenwriter or writer up there, and gave it that kind of juice, but then we would, we had already made our statement since we, my accompanist, who was also the dance arranger, Timothy Graphenreed, we could inject some of that because we, we, we were dealing with the music and that's how we got to write the Emerald City song ["Emerald City Ballet (Psst)"] and also put the backbeat in the, in the "Tornado" and actually in all of the interpretations of all of the characters were there.  So I made the crows a lot more like Gladys Knight and the Pips, you know, backup singers and, and of course the Witch [Wicked Witch of the West] was R and B and the, the, "Emerald City" had a salsa, you know, kind of feel and just experimenting with all of those, those things, and but the, the thing, the advantage I had was that I'd always grown up in theater, that I grew up in theater, my dance was, was theater, so all of those things.  So I'd been through all of the musicals from 'South Pacific' [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II], 'Pajama Game' ['The Pajama Game,' George Abbott and Richard Bissell], 'Show Boat' [Oscar Hammerstein II], you know when I was, I was, while I was still in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.].   And, and I, I had done those dances with wonderful choreographers who were in, came from New York City Ballet or, I was lucky like that.  I just met some of the most interesting people who you know, who I experienced all of those shows with.  So that was, I think that that's the advantage, you know, that I had.  I just was so inquisitive and I was interested in everything, because I guess you could--you can, you can take off, you can fly from your life.  You know, books will take you there.  You know, shows will take you there.  Music will take you there.  It's just a whole lot of things, and I had, you know I had wonderful teachers who, who made English lit really interesting and that, and then having gone to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] early when I, while I was still fifteen and become part of that, the dance department that was, that, that was headed by Mary Allen, Maryrose Allen [Maryrose Reeves Allen] and Carolyn Tate was there and I met a lot of the Washington [D.C.] modern dance community who I didn't know.  And then through, and then Mary Craighill with liturgical dance at Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] church, which was on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.].  So, with the, with the American Light Opera Company who I'd done all the musicals with we rehearsed at the Trinity Church [Holy Trinity Catholic Church, Washington, D.C.], which was attended by John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and, and, and, and, and Jacqueline [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] and then the other church, the church that I did the liturgical dancing in was the, I think St. Mark's [St. Mark's Episcopal Church, Washington, D.C.] on, on Capitol Hill across the street from the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 486602
Speaker 1: I want to go to 'The Wiz' in terms of--the--you got pulled in it at what point in the process?
Speaker 2: No, I started at the very beginning (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At the very beginning, but at the beginning originally, it was gonna be [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder.  He was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right--
Speaker 1: --going to be doing, directing, he was--
Speaker 2: --Geoffrey, Ge- Geoffrey was, was slated to do the costume, the direction, and the choreography.
Speaker 1: But it seems, that's seems unusual.  Is that unusual?
Speaker 2: Well, he is a choreographer--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and he does costumes.  He was called in to be the, well I guess he initially was gonna be the director, but I think that not having you know all of that responsibility in one person's hand and you now the cheers and noise I made at the end of some of my dances out there in the parts with people and I danced to Otis Redding and so forth.  We were having a dance explosion in New York [New York] at that particular time, so I was spr- I sprang on the scene along with Twyla Tharp who was on the same program that I, we kind of opened and closed the program and, and we could ignite a crowd.  We, we, it was exciting.
Speaker 1: So did--
Speaker 2: We were brea- kind of breaking the rules at that particular time.
Speaker 1: So, that's what I'm trying to understand.  Those initial meetings, the creative meetings to talk about, you know, concept (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was, he had an idea, no--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he had an idea, but he didn't have the money, and, and it took him six month, six months after I met him I said you know he came to Delacorte [Delacorte Theater, New York, New York] where we were doing a concert, and--
Speaker 1: Now when you say he--
Speaker 2: Ken Harper [Kenneth Harper], the producer--
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Speaker 2: --came to, to see one of my concerts and there they were.  They had to put the people out of the park because they were screaming and cheering and carrying on, and he made it back and he came with who he was helping, I guess, to be who, it turned out to be 'The Wiz,' Wiz, [HistoryMaker] Andre De Shields with him, I mean so we met, excuse me, and he says, "I'm doing 'The Wiz' and would you like to choreograph 'The Wiz'?"  And I said, "Well what's 'The Wiz'?  Is it 'The Wizard of Oz' ['The Wonderful Wizard of Oz,' L. Frank Baum]?"  You know he told me, you know, what he was trying to do and that to come to a meeting.  Well, I followed that up with a meeting.  He still didn't have the money and so I said that's okay and he told me about his ideas for it, which I found very exciting and the composer that he had, Charlie Smalls.  So he gave me two reel--the reels of the music, which I still have, which is, you know, of Charlie Smalls singing the tunes.  And you know I didn't hear from him for a while and, and then one day he called me, "I got the money and then we're gonna start rehearsing."  And then I met who he thought should be the director, which was Gilbert Moses and so forth and I, I think he hesitated in telling, in telling Geoffrey all of this.  So Geoffrey came to, you know, on the designated day to find out when we were gonna--what we were gonna do and what, and found out he was only doing the costumes and I guess was very incensed and left in a huff, and we didn't see him again until you know that incident in Baltimore [Maryland].
Story_ID: 486603
Speaker 1: Baltimore [Maryland] happened on the weekend.  We were moving to Detroit [Michigan] on the following day to open at the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you remember what, what the timing of Baltimore was?
Speaker 1: It was all in the winter.  It was--
Speaker 2: The winter.
Speaker 1: --it was in the winter, September, October.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think that was October.  We went onto Detroit in the winter (laughter).  You know what that meant, snow up to here (gesture).  But, it hadn't arrived before we arrived, so we were there and then we got caught in a blizzard.  And Geoffrey [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Holder] was brought in because I think that Charlie [Charlie Smalls], you know, was not going to have Geoffrey, I mean Gilbert Moses work on the piece, so he was, he was let go.  And we were, while we were waiting for Geoffrey, Pat Birch [Patricia Birch] arrived and we had dinner and she said, she expressed--Pat Birch did 'Grease' [Jim Jacobs and Warren Casey] on Broadway.  And she says, "You're already--" you know by that time I had done the Tornado, but unbeknownst to Geoffrey, I had cut the gown and split it up and made it short and gave the be- and gave the composition a backbeat, but gave it more like rock and roll, a feeling of rock and roll and something contemporary.  So, when they first saw that twirl out the, out of the wing and, and we put, you know we attached the silk, you know, to her head.  You know what were we gonna do to make?  You know because we had wanted a ball gown for the tornado that's the, the funnel was going the wrong way with the ball gown and believe it or not I took the inspiration from the, the poster that Paul Glaser [sic. Milton Glaser] did.
Speaker 2: The what, the poster?
Speaker 1: Po- the poster of 'The Wiz.'
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: That's the girl.  She had a dress trailing and I just like looked at the visual image and then, the secret to the whole show was right there on the poster.  It was wonderful.  So I know that Geoffrey would like to say that he did that, but the ultimate inspiration has to come from Paul, because I looked at the, you know like in, you know like when you run out of words the director and the musicians are fighting, the head, the head of, of somebody came back and told, the general manager told Ken Harper [Kenneth Harper] who was, and Manny Azenberg [Emanuel Azenberg] to close the show in Baltimore.  He fainted dead away in the lobby of the hotel.  You know all of these adults that, I was like twenty-six at this particular time, and I thought I was, I thought this was the big time.  I'm going to join adults, and I'm going to be working with professionals.  When I got there, everybody was fighting.  You know Tom John [Tom H. John] had designed a set that clashed with some of the costumes that Geoffrey designed that were also going like this (gesture) and it was like yards and yards and yards of material like he had a vendetta.  He gave, you, you know like how do you dance with fifty yards of material?  So, you know, and it was silk and all of these wonderful materials.  And we were supposed to, how long was that supposed to last our dragging the material around the stage?  So, I had the boys pick the yellow brick road who wore long tails.  So, on a drawing the ta- it looked fine, but you know they weren't practical because they were gonna be the road.  Wherever they went they were the road.  So, I had solved my own problem of having a road, road, oh lets roll out a road, how, how mundane is that?
Story_ID: 486604
Speaker 1: I'm from dance and from theater, you know, pick up though that material and they had the staffs that, that I used in another piece that I did on my own called 'Gazelle' [George Faison] in which the warriors pole vaulted and, and, but you know, but here we were in a fantasy, so I just borrowed from myself and, and put these, these things there because I had those staffs from 1970, you know what I mean, so I had done you know pole, pole vaulting and, and all of the things and since I could use that as a prop I could get, you know because I could--they could push along like they were on a boat.  They could make a gangplank.  They could make a hut.  You know, all of the things.  You go back in my work and you'll see all of it.
Speaker 2: What (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so that was that part, but, you know, there were re, really a lot of obstacles in--
Speaker 2: So, the--
Speaker 1: --in, in some of the cost- in, in the cost- costumes [for 'The Wiz'].
Speaker 2: Okay.  How, how did that ended up, how did that ended up, how did it end, how did it get resolved with the costumes?
Speaker 1: Well, I cut the dress.  There was no--it had been cut.  So by the time that, you know, and one of the stage managers had said, "Oh you know you could have been, been fired, you know, for cutting that costume," but I had cut the costume just to be free, and to be the violence and the staccato of feeling, of the, and the, the legs of the girl that would lash out.  So, we later got boots and, and dressed it up in another way, but initially that's what she was in and I, I modeled it after that poster, you know, but nobody ever thought to do, you know, so I'd been playing with that idea and then changing the music to all of that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, n--
Story_ID: 486605
Speaker 1: This is what I'm curious about it says that--where, what role did Luther Vandross pl- play?
Speaker 2: He wrote another song you know.
Speaker 1: So, he just wrote one.
Speaker 2: He wrote "Brand New Day" ["Everybody Rejoice/A Brand New Day"].
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: And we wrote the Emerald City song ["Emerald City Ballet (Psst)"].  So, that's why we're collecting royalties today 'cause we are tied to that production and that piece for the rest of our lives.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that is good, I mean that's, you know but we got kind of cheated out of our other song that we didn't do because they tried to convince that we were employees, work for hire, and we weren't.
Speaker 1: So, how many, how many songs totally are there in 'The Wiz'?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, but you just happen, how did you, it come that you did the one song that's on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because Charlie [Charlie Smalls] didn't come up with something that, that was kind of exuberant and celebratory and grand and what we needed.  He came up with another dirge for the people of Emerald City when all they had to be is haughty and, and suspicious and jealous and envious and green.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how did it, it came, how was your process, the creative process?  Did Charlie come up with the song or did you or?
Speaker 2: We did.
Speaker 1: Together?
Speaker 2: (Unclear). No, no.  Timothy Graphenreed and myself (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, Tim I'm sorry and Timothy.
Speaker 2: So that's, we are splitting royalties.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 486606
Speaker 1: How was your relationship then with [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder then during this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I knew Geoffrey as a choreographer.  He had choreographed for Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], and I had done one of his ballets called, 'Prodigal Prince' ['The Prodigal Prince,' Geoffrey Holder] when in the Ailey company prop- probably around '66 [1966] or six--'67 [1967], '68 [1968] and that was, that's how I knew him.  Then, of course, he was famous for being one of the pioneers--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --along with Josephine Baker and his wife, [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade, who performed at the Olympic, Olympia theater [L'Olympia Bruno Coquatrix] in Paris [France], and Carmen has always been--and Carmen is from California as Alvin Ailey, and she was always associated with the Alvin Ailey company.  And she was, you know, a quintessential beauty of her time and dancer and so forth, goddess.
Speaker 1: But how did you, I'm saying it seemed like there was conflict between you and Geoffrey Holder.  There's not--
Speaker 2: Well, the conflict was resolved when the audience cheered.  You know, when you're getting bravos and so forth I don't think they can rightfully fire you, or if you get the musical jump started before, I think that your job is intact.  No, I had to work.  And I changed all of those dances until they worked, and that was six weeks of changing.  I know they hated me for it, but I got what I wanted, and I got that Tony [Tony Award for Best Choreography] too okay?  (Laughter) And the Drama Desk [Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Choreography] and money (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison] let me, what?
Speaker 2: I'm just laughing that I got money, I got paid.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, but, but George let me, but what I'm trying to understand though because a lot of times when we spoke before you were talking about the fluidity, you know that you sort of are instinctive choreographer, you talked about that, you know, and I was just wondering--
Speaker 2: I'm listening.
Speaker 1: Okay so I'm just wondering with the, with 'The Wiz' what was your, how did you work through?
Speaker 2: It was discovering, I, oh I pretended I was Dorothy, and I took a journey with her and made it up.  What is scary, what is funny, what is elegant, what's sophisticated?  What, you know, when the Wiz did the "Y'all Got It!" you know when the Wiz was leaving.  You know I turned that, he was then called James Brown.  I had, it's all in my culture. It was, it, you know I had, you know I had it all there.  Glinda was beautiful goddess, you know, and I made some wonderful lifts for them, and things like that.  She was Lena Horne.  We, I grew up with all of that.  So, you just borrow from the past, and that's all Dorothy had to do was learning, and then of course Charlie [Charlie Smalls] wrote the pivotal songs that we needed and came up with the final, "Home" ["Home (Finale)"].
Story_ID: 486607
Speaker 1: So I was--what I was wanting to know was you know the conflict, internal conflict because you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was so--
Speaker 1: --relatively, I mean--
Speaker 2: I was young--
Speaker 1: You were--
Speaker 2: --I didn't know and I didn't know the business like that, especially Broadway business and then, and then being totally oblivious of what ultimately was going to happen.  I was totally oblivious, and I guess I reacted like anybody would react, you know.  The music wasn't right [in 'The Wiz'].  You know like in those old days you didn't have computers and so forth, so any changes you made took longer, because people they had to have copies come in and copy every part by hand for the orchestra, an expensive proposition.  And it would take--no first they would come in, you would do a sketch.  They would come in, then it had to be orchestrated, then it had to be given to the copiers to copy down, then it had to be rehearsed, then it's five days later.  So any idea, so you had to suffer through looking at your mess if you had created that kind of mess or, or some horrible number that no longer worked and that you knew was, was out of the way.  You had to rehearse that during the day and do the old show at night.  And one, and you know you become very insecure after you've done a number over, like five or six times and, or you--you know, or the, you know the dancers become disgruntled because they have to rehearse and on edge.  And you keep going over that same point because you're trying to make it organic and you're trying to make it exciting all at the same time, and it's like.  You do become insecure and you start, and then you start complaining.  You know, you could either fall into that or you could just try something else.  And one, and, and in my moment of what to do, a stage manager turned to me, 'cause he had been, he had been assigned to me and the, the dance, and he knew what I was doing and he had, you know, and, and we had become kind of friends, you know, but he was st- still remained business and so forth, turned to me and said, "Don't worry about what everybody else is doing.  Just do your job."  And that's the best advice you could ever get, and I'm so glad he said that to me because I, I remained restless and not satisfied by you know even the best of the work that I'd done, always keep that critical eye, keep looking, looking around.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Do you know who the stage manager was?
Speaker 1: Jose Vega--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --was the stage manager who, who just came in, wasn't excited about anything, just did his job, dry kind of humor.  When it was good, he, he liked it.  When you worked hard, he liked that, just not look at what everybody else is doing.  Do not fight with them, just go on and do your job, and that, I think that that got me through any kind of difficulty that, that I wanted, that I had.
Story_ID: 486608
Speaker 1: Now was Dor- okay Dorth- I mean Stephanie Mills she was a good si- singer, but did you have to work with her, with her movement and all that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she could, good little dancer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was a kid.  She was fifteen.
Speaker 1: Gotcha.
Speaker 2: So she, she was still agile, she could move.  She had, it was, Stephanie Mills is a theater kid from back in the day of 'Maggie Flynn' [Hugo Peretti and Luigi Creatore].  Stephanie Mills is a Broadway theater kid.
Speaker 1: And how do you describe a Broadway theater kid?
Speaker 2: Theater kid, she grew up in the theater, professional theater, Broadway.  'Maggie Flynn' was on Broadway, so she was one of the kids in that.  So she is used to seven shows a week, two matinees, and doing it, and that's why she has a career today.  She does two and three shows on this R and B circuit, in concert in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], around the world, parties and so forth and can do that.  I was talking to her the other night.  She was just thanking me for her Broadway training, 'cause she can do it.  Those other singers break down, lose their voices, and so forth, but she is a Broadway singer, you know with her and, and recording artist.  I mean, she has all of that, and she's very reliable, responsible, all of that and that's why you know--and she works on herself.  You know, she understands her shortcomings and worked on it and made herself into the vision that she is right now, and who she is, and she should have gotten a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] for that [role as Dorothy in 'The Wiz'].  That was an amazing feat, you know for, for that fifteen or seventeen-year-old, old girl.  But, you know there's too much backlash out there, you know, and she had a very mature, very warm voice, and she didn't sound like Annie, not that there's anything wrong with sounding like Annie, but she brought--we brought a whole new feeling to Broadway whether they wanna admit it or not, but that was a whole 'nother feeling, and it hasn't been back since.
Story_ID: 486609
Speaker 1: Well, there was a whole excitement to it ['The Wiz'] and it all was very fresh.
Speaker 2: Right well it was new, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was very fresh; it was fresh and new.
Speaker 2: --mean we were really defining--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --who we were, our Broadway at that particular time, or my Broadway or whatever.  It was--
Speaker 1: But, when you say that you're talking about the African American influenced Broadway?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.  Now, the, the--who, who in the cast though there were people like [HistoryMaker] Dee Dee Bridgewater she had not done, she had--
Speaker 2: She had not done it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was a jazz singer and had a marvelous quality and was compared with Lena Horne.  We had Mabel King who this, who sang the Wicked Witch [Wicked Witch of the West], R and B and how had this big, big enormous voice and personality.  We had Tiger Woods [sic. Tiger Haynes] who was a tap dancer and, and performer from back in the day who was and, and who was still performing who was wonderful as the Tin Man.  And then we had Ted Ross who I had done, whose first job was, was my first Broadway job was in 'Purlie'--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and we were in a trio together backing up Sherman Hemsley in 'Purlie' in 1970, and who else was that?  Butterfly McQueen who was the Queen of the Field Mou- Mice [Queen of the Field Mice].  But she, that part didn't last, you know, and became a chorus, just a chorus part, and Tasha Thomas a recording artist.  Of course, [HistoryMaker] Andre De Shields who had done a lot of Tom O'Horgan shows and had been raised a little bit by Allan Stewart down on the Lower East Side [New York, New York] and come up through that off-Broadway and so forth, very exotic, very daring performer, self-assured performer, worldly character.  And it was fun, 'cause they could flow with you and that's all you needed, so when it come, came time the Wiz the wiz on himself he did it as James Brown so to speak and so you know he was released and he went.  Who else?  Clarice Taylor, veteran of the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] was Addaperle and was a wonderful comedic talent.  And who, and then all of those wonderful dancers, tall and beautiful, and women and beautiful chorus of, of women and the Tornado, Evelyn Thomas who was like 5'11" who got crawled up and you know I had to put a ladder on the back of the house, so actually she crawled up the ladder to the back of the house and straddled the theat- the, the house, the little house from Kansas and all those wonderful dancers, I had, I could just go, you know.  So when they said it's time to roll out, here we go into Broadway, then all stops could come out.
Story_ID: 486610
Speaker 1: Now what did you learn also from the experience in terms of Broadway productions?  What--
Speaker 2: In Broadway or in anything?
Speaker 1: Well, Broadway?
Speaker 2: Life.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Life is Broadway too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, you're trying to get through this.  You have to believe in something, and if it's just believing in yourself, you've got to do that.  No, you laugh and people say, "Oh what is that?"  It is everything.  You know, your own confidence, your own self-esteem.  You gotta carry that, that with you or else you're not gonna last.  You're not gonna last in life, either, because people will be there to beat you down, tell you you can't do it.  What about all the inventions that have happened in the world.  All those people who stopped looking at people and stopped listening to people and went on with their single mindedness and create something, you know, that we all benefit from, that we all enjoy.  You can't listen to anybody.  It's a lonely, lonely road.  You know and you--you fail.  You know mistakes are there.
Speaker 1: But I was asking about the business.
Speaker 2: That is the business; your life is the business.  It's like--
Speaker 1: No, but I meant the business, the business of mounting a Broa- Broadway production.
Speaker 2: It's like pushing--Sisyphus and the rock up the hill.  What gets any--when you have never done anything so hard in your life, what's the hardest thing you've ever done in your life?  That's a Broadway show.  The hardest thing.  The sleepless night, the anxiety, you can't eat, you pace, you, you, you wait on, on an idea to come.  And then all the while, your critics are standing there around badgering you, giving you those negative looks, and so, and then you have to take it on by yourself 'cause you're alone.  And no matter, you know, and then all of the little encouragement that you get while, while useful and everything, it is up to you.  It is your ass on the line.  It's the most difficult and, that you can do in your life, and that, so what does that mean to you.  Is that your thesis?  And you got--you have to write a thesis every day.
Speaker 1: Okay so d- what about opening night on Broadway?  Can you describe that or was that the seminal moment?  'Cause it, it wasn't, it took some--do you remember the important moment in the production [of 'The Wiz']?  And when I say that, where you knew you had a hit and everything fell in place.
Speaker 2: Well I believed that from the beginning.  It's getting that there, so yes opening night was going to come or even that night when in Philade- did we go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with--
Speaker 1: You, you didn't.
Speaker 2: Yeah we did.
Speaker 1: You went to Philadel- so you went from Detroit [Michigan] to Philadelphia to New York [New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah I think so, and I think I remember Ernie Jacobs [ph.] saying we were going to Broadway, and that was great, but I kind of always believed that we were because of--because they hadn't seen anything like this before, and I had never created anything like this.  And then there, then people start their backstabbing and you know, but it didn't work.  Why?  You do your work.  You do your work.  Then people get into personalities and things like that.  They can always hate you for your personality or whatever, but that, does that really matter?  No.  But it's getting through all of that.  I don't know if I would have been as lucky as I were now because, you know, hate is so subversive and so undercover these days.  You don't know, know when--I see, I think you can talk people into being as happy as you can be.  I think it was easier then, or they--I don't think that they realize how dangerous you were to the thinking or how influential you could be, have on the thinking of young people, and there you have it.  You can influence, you know, the youth.  You know, even today we, we missed the boat, because we don't tell our children who we are or recant the tales of their struggle.  So it's like, you know, you gotta tell the kids who you are.  You gotta get them on your side.  And you gotta stay a kid and optimistic all at the same time.
Story_ID: 486611
Speaker 1: So now after--so the Tony Award [Tony Award for Best Choreography] you got in what was it in 1976 'cause the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Five [1975].
Speaker 1: Nineteen seven- no the production [of 'The Wiz'] was in '75 [1975], the do--
Speaker 2: We were coming up to April.  We only opened in January.  The, the Tonys [Tony Awards] are in Jan- in, in April, May, June.
Speaker 1: Oh, I--wait, but you, I thought you opened in, in the fall of '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: In '4 [1974].
Speaker 1: In '74 [1974], that's right.  Okay I'm sorry '74 [1974] you're right '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it ran to '78 [1978] okay, so '75 [1975].  Do you remember, can you talk about that evening?  They're in the evening right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.  Can you talk about that evening?
Speaker 2: I--you know, it's a blur.  You know, it's the most happy day, you're getting, you know clothes, and you're dressing up, and you're wanting them to love you so bad, you know, and all of that.  You don't know that your--the work then begins.  You know you think your job is so over, and our job wasn't over because some of the things that they said we had to overcome, but we knew that if people saw us, it would be over.  They, they're gonna buy that ticket.
Speaker 1: So talk about the things they said about the, the production, the things that were--you're talking about the critics (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They said hideous things about--
Speaker 1: --you're talking about the critics.
Speaker 2: The critics, hideous things about--
Speaker 1: And specifically what critics?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: John Simon hated it.
Speaker 1: So, what did he say?
Speaker 2: Because he was, he was.
Speaker 1: A Dorothy.
Speaker 2: Judy Garland.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And most of the audience.  You know I guess they were hearing "Somewhere over the Rainbow" and we were playing "When I Think of Home" [sic. "Soon As I Get Home"].  Hell, it was a new day.  And like the country, everything, things were changing, you know, and yes they said that and then what are we going to do?  They were gonna run.  Are we gonna get a commercial?  All of these other things depending on would, are the only things that could counter what they said.
Speaker 1: No, now, I didn't understand a thing you just said there.
Speaker 2: A commercial, TV commercial, getting it out beyond The New York Times.  Getting, you know, who we were into the hands of people that read the Daily News [New York Daily News], the Post [New York Post], you know the people's papers and so forth.  And, and Clive Barnes was, well I don't know, that's what we were, we were black, and there we were.
Speaker 1: So what about Clive Barnes?
Speaker 2: I don't know, it was, it was kind of good and kind of you know, I guess he would be even handed.  And you don't rem- you don't really remember.
Story_ID: 486612
Speaker 1: But what I do remember is, oh they came to us in a grave way, "We'd like for you to give up.  If the show ['The Wiz'] was to run, you're gonna have to give up your royalties."  Bom, bom, bom, then, "And we're gonna have to make a commercial and we're gonna have to run."  "And how, how long do we have to give up our royalties?"  That means I'm not getting any money.  Well, they were gonna try and if the box office bills, we get the money, so we saw the box office bills over week by week by leaps and bounds.
Speaker 2: Grow.
Speaker 1: Grow.  But one smart thing that we did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, wait a minute, so when you--
Speaker 1: --so one smart thing that we did from our camp was--, "Okay you're gonna close it, but you're going to--well, well what do we get if we give up our royalties?"  Some people just wholesale gave up their royalties.  All of them did except me.  I thought I had done the best work.  I thought my shit, shit was right up there with Jerry Robbins [Jerome Robbins], and, and all of the other people who ever trod Broadway.  I thought I had been, you know, just as good, you know and so forth.  So my, my negotiator T, T negotiated, Tishno [ph.] negotiated a deal.  Yes I would give up my royalties if you gave me half a point more on the Broadway company and every subsequent company that went out.  They said yes, because they didn't believe.  They didn't believe what we had been singing all, (singing) "If you believe then in your heart you'll know" ["If You Believe"].  I believe that.  That's what I was saying.  Jose Vega said, "Shut up and mind your business and keep your mind on the work."  Charlie Smalls wrote the most inspirational song that has ever been written, you know, for me.  He wrote it for me.  So, if you believe in yourself son, and they weren't believers.  So, I was in a room full of nonbelievers.  So, when they said that they said yes.  So I said okay I'll give up my royalties.
Speaker 2: How did T know how to do that though?
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know how we knew to deal--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but you don't get something for nothing, and since they had been talking about me already, let them really talk about me, but I don't think that Manny Azenberg [Emanuel Azenberg] or any of the general manager people would ever like that story to get out, because it only showed that they didn't believe in the project to start with.  They gave me the royalties--Stephanie [Stephanie Mills] and Geoffrey [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Holder] never really liked each other, so I got to direct all of the road shows.  So that pushed my royalty up to a point and a half on everything that went out for the next five years.  So now I had my future.  So, since she didn't get along with him I directed all the other shows, all of the other productions, the one in California, the bus and truck, any show that went out.  And I was making what the writer was making.
Speaker 2: And that was, we're talking after Sidney [Sidney Lumet] or this was between--
Speaker 1: This was, Stephanie was still in the show.
Speaker 2: Oh, so, oh.
Speaker 1: This is all the way through to '78 [1978], '79 [1979] and then we went out in '81 [1981], '82 [1982].  That was just on Broadway.  So, when we went on into the '80s [1980s] with, with the bus and truck, and that meant that too.  So, you know how much money I made on that, so and then I could do all of my other work.
Speaker 2: So le- so let me-
Speaker 1: And then I got industrials.  I worked in regional theaters.  I worked with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, w--
Story_ID: 486613
Speaker 1: I wanna talk bu- just a few things to tie up 'Wiz' ['The Wiz'] when you, the night of the Tonys [Tony Awards], how many--
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: Seven, so who got--
Speaker 2: We won seven Tony Awards [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre].
Speaker 1: So, so tell me what got the--
Speaker 2: Geoffrey [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Holder] won for directing and costumes.  Ted Ross ran, won for the best supporting, the Lion.  [HistoryMaker] Dee Dee Bridgewater won for best supporting.  I won for choreography.  Charlie Smalls won for music and lyrics.  Who else--isn't there seven?  Who was the other one?
Speaker 1: Not Hinton Battle no.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: The book?
Speaker 2: Dee Dee.
Speaker 1: Dee, no you already mentioned Dee Dee.
Speaker 2: Who was that?
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Andre De Shields, no.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What else did they give?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was seven wasn't it?
Speaker 1: Now why, tell me, then how did Stephanie Mills feel?
Speaker 2: I'm sure heartbroken, 'cause she should have.
Speaker 1: And why do you say that because you think it was, because of her looks or her--?
Speaker 2: Let's just call racism, racism and leave it at that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, come on they weren't, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: It wasn't just.
Speaker 1: You think it was the looks, her race, I mean?
Speaker 2: All of the above.
Speaker 1: Oh okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her looks, her race, you know defying vi- you know the character, you know of Judy Garland and so forth.  We had never seen a girl like her before.
Speaker 1: That's right. That's right.
Speaker 2: I mean whether you, and it didn't matter how she looked, but how she sounded.  That was just, you know.
Story_ID: 486614
Speaker 1: Now tell, tell me now that, that Tony [Tony Award for Best Choreography] put you in the league.  Let's talk about who the other white choreographers were at the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had already, wait a minute, hold it.  I was already a choreographer.
Speaker 1: I know you were chore--
Speaker 2: No, wait a minute--
Speaker 1: I just--
Speaker 2: A choreographer no, a choreographer listed with Martha Graham, Merce Cunningham, Alwin Nikolais.
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: Oh no I have reviews from this, wait a minute.  Alvin Ailey, Talley Beatty.
Speaker 1: That's, you, you--
Speaker 2: No hold it a minute.
Speaker 1: --misunderstood my question.
Speaker 2: Hold it a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute.  I had--
Speaker 1: You misunder--
Speaker 2: --already been put with those choreographers.
Speaker 1: But I'm talking--
Speaker 2: I had already done Broadway with 'Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope' [Micki Grant].
Speaker 1: But, no, but I was talking about the white choreographers.  That's what I'm talking about.
Speaker 2: But I had, you know but--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], George, George--
Speaker 2: --I'm saying choreo- no I, no those are my, some of them are my idols.  You know, you know and so forth.  Yes, then in addition to--
Speaker 1: That's all--
Speaker 2: No wait a minute.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Who is Martha Graham?
Speaker 1: No, but all--
Speaker 2: But Martha Graham is white.
Speaker 1: No, I know she is white.
Speaker 2: Merce Cunningham who is he?
Speaker 1: No, I know that.
Speaker 2: White.  Alwin Nikolais.
Speaker 1: I--
Speaker 2: Only because I'm saying but--
Speaker 1: I meant--
Speaker 2: --it didn't matter.  I was in concert.
Speaker 1: I meant--
Speaker 2: You don't understand.
Speaker 1: No, I--
Speaker 2: I was an artist.  No you get it twisted.
Speaker 1: I'm not--
Speaker 2: I was an artist and I was satisfied already.
Speaker 1: No, I'm not saying that.  I'm saying that this is a Broadway production ['The Wiz'].
Speaker 2: Right, but then that put me with right--
Speaker 1: We were talk--
Speaker 2: I understand that, but I was already over the moon, with moon.
Speaker 1: I know you were over the moon and you would not even have been chosen in the first place, you were bo-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That, so you misunderstood my question.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't answer your question.
Speaker 1: No you didn't and why didn't you answer my question?
Speaker 2: But I--because I wanted to give credit where credit was do.  I had worked with Jack Cole, Matt Mattox, Claude Thompson, Jaime Rogers.  I had, no I had been through all, all the choreographers.  You know like the only way I was gonna work with Jerry Robbins [Jerome Robbins] was be in New York City Ballet or, or if I hadn't been a student at the Harkness House [Edward S. Harkness House, New York, New York] I wouldn't never come in contact with Donald Saddler or, or Jack Cole or Matt Mattox, you know, who are, you know who are great in what, in their, and monumental in their contribution to the theater.  So, I grew up in, in the theater.  Talley Beatty.  You know I had already, you know, met greatness.  [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson, [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham.  I had already danced with all of these people first hand, Pearl Primus.  You know, so I didn't want, you know for, for anything.  Then to be elevated to that status was just another, another level.  But then not always being considered a Broadway choreographer has its, its upside, because, you know, the people from the concert world hate them and I think, you know, the people, sometimes the people from the, from show business and, and theater dancing are not so fond of the others.  And I had the unique place of straddling both of those at one time, so I felt really felt great about--I felt blessed.  I felt honored.  I felt, you know, special because I had grown up in those two, in, in, in those two worlds.
Story_ID: 486615
Speaker 1: I understand that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, that's all I meant was--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that I was trying to have you comment on, on, on its role of that.  That's all I said.
Speaker 1: But, they had been Fosse [Bob Fosse] and, and Jerome Robinson--Robbins [Jerome Robbins] who I had been put into the esteem company of by, you know ascending to that lofty, you know, Broadway choreographer thing.  It did change everything.
Speaker 2: Tell--talk about that George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison].
Speaker 1: Well, you know you have to grow accustomed who, who you then are and what you can really do, and you know and what, and, and what you still ultimately have to control in order to be in that kind of, the, the kind of control you have to have and be in that condition, because you're gonna always be introducing ideas that some people are not ready for.  You know, well how you gonna do that?  And you run into that stupidity more than you do anything, because they're not ready for new ideas.
Speaker 2: Now did, did Bob Fosse and--
Speaker 1: Jerry Robbins.
Speaker 2: Yeah, did they, are you, are you kind compatriots?  Did they welcome you into the family?  Did they--
Speaker 1: Guess what?  When I first started choreographing Jerome Robbins came to one of my concerts.  I received a grant from Jerry Robbins in my early, you know while I was still doing, doing, you know, concerts.  Bob Fosse had come to my concerts, too.  Alvin Ailey came to my concerts.  You know, most of the choreographers did come to my concerts, 'cause they wanted to know who, you know, what was all these raving about?  Because I could get an audience, you know, you, you happened by sometimes who you're dancing with and so forth and so on, but that's doesn't matter.  And ours was a celebration of life and our condition and you know, and, and informing people about who we were, who we are, what we stand for.  That ultimately my civil rights roots were still there, because people didn't know, know me.  You don't know what we are even about.  That's why I did not take on in 'Slaves' [George Faison], I didn't do ethnic dance.  I did what I was trained in, modern dance and ballet and jazz.  So that's why it has that look and whatever I have is African, that is who I am.  We had been to Africa.  We had, you know, communed with that country.  We know what that is.  We know, you know, that that's our roots, that's, but that's only part of who we are and my experiences here.
Story_ID: 486616
Speaker 1: Now let's go to the concert staging though.  How did you get involved with that?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?
Speaker 1: Co-
Speaker 2: Oh, concert staging.
Speaker 1: Right, concert staging.
Speaker 2: How did I get into that?
Speaker 1: Did you start--
Speaker 2: Well, I started with Stephanie [Stephanie Mills].
Speaker 1: 'Cause I'm wondering--
Speaker 2: I started with Stephanie.  I did all of her nightclub acts.
Speaker 1: But thought wait a minute, but I wanna understand what happens immediately after the success of 'The Wiz'?  This is what I need--
Speaker 2: We will call you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Your phone starts ringing.  You're doing industrials.  You're working for Ford [Ford Motor Company], Lincoln, Mercury.  You're, you're, you're doing movies.  You are doing commercials.  You're doing a lot, you're doing a lot of commercial stuff and, and then you're doing some theater, and then you're, you know always trying to reinvent that hit, you know what I mean?  Or try to have that same kind of a success.  But, you can only have it, I think--Ken Harper [Kenneth Harper] was really special.  He was able to get the money.  He did it the legit way, and not, you know, we have another way of doing theater right now, which is not the right way.  And you get caught up in that, and then so, then you know if you don't really have the money to do it, the wherewithal, the influence, and all of those things that go with making a show and making a show successful, then you're up the creek.  But, then how many black producers do we have that are interested in telling our story?
Speaker 1: Now, Ken Harper's role ended with the, the Broadway production [of 'The Wiz'].  Now what happened with the, the movie, that's what I'm--
Speaker 2: Well you sell the rights and he I--
Speaker 1: He sold the rights, okay.
Speaker 2: Whatever rights that he had, ancillary rights that he has for the movie--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then Motown [Motown Productions; de Passe Entertainment] produced it for Diana Ross and then that and Michael Jackson and then Nipsey Russell and so forth and that failed.  I think failed because you had, you know, what's his name directing, what's his name--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --Sidney Lumet--
Speaker 1: Yeah Sidney Lumet.
Speaker 2: --who was a courtroom drama person and not really a musical person or any of that and I don't think--
Speaker 1: It would, it also would be hard, it's hard to bring the bigness, you know, of theater especially that production to the smallness of the screen.  I, I really think that that would have, I don't know, anyway that's my opinion, okay--that's okay.
Speaker 2: You, you were talking about having more imagination than they exerted on that.
Speaker 1: I know, but I'm just saying even with that it's still hard to do those things on the screen.  Sometimes, the screen sometimes--
Speaker 2: So that's why (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) can be, you know--
Speaker 2: Right, but that's how you have to have the imagination to real, to be able to do that.
Speaker 1: Now--
Story_ID: 486617
Speaker 1: You had--and when I talk about conce- so you're saying Nata- I mean Stephanie Mills you start working with her did you, 'cause you were working with [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then--
Speaker 1: --and Stevie Wonder--
Speaker 2: Wonder and--
Speaker 1: --and I mean--
Speaker 2: Natalie Cole.
Speaker 1: Natalie Cole.
Speaker 2: And all of them, Gladys Knight--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --followed all of that, Dionne Warwick, Stevie Wonder.
Speaker 1: But who started it?  Do you remember who started it?
Speaker 2: Probably Nick and Val.
Speaker 1: Okay, Nick, Nick, yeah no, Nick, Nick Ashford--
Speaker 2: I was driving up, I was coming from--Nick Ashford--
Speaker 1: --and [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson, okay.
Speaker 2: --Ashford and Valerie Simpson stopped me while I was driving up Amsterdam Avenue at 72nd Street [New York, New York] and, and yelled out of their Rolls-Royce, "We need to talk to you."  I'm like, "That's Nick and Val--" and so forth.  And, and I met with them and they wanted me to stage their first performance as a duet, and so I staged them, and, and it was easy.  They had love songs.  It was a man and a woman and so forth, and so I came up with the concept from putting them together and they are doing, their nightclub act, and a lot of those steps they do today, thirty years later.  I'm just waiting for a royalty check (laughter), but we, we became dear friends and right now I'm working on a new musical for them, with them called 'Invisible Life' ['Invisible Life: The Musical'] and that's based on the [HistoryMaker] E. Lynn Harris plays, stories.
Speaker 1: They're doing a musical?
Speaker 2: We're doing a musical.
Speaker 1: That's--okay.
Speaker 2: Well, we are well on our way.  Can't wait to hit you with that.  And so that's why I bought this building and why I'm rehearsing--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --and why I'm--
Speaker 1: Okay, but can I, let me just talk to you about though the concert staging just a little bit.  Was that a way to pay the bills or did you actually end up enjoying it?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) I was make- I was making a lot of money in royalties 'cause--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'The Wiz' was on the road and sending me checks every week (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you didn't have--
Speaker 2: --for years.  And then I'd pick up these gigs.
Story_ID: 486618
Speaker 1: The biggest one I think that I loved the most was probably Earth, Wind and Fire.
Speaker 2: Can we talk about--but they're the most theatrical really, right?
Speaker 1: They weren't.  They had two left feet as well, flat footed, you know klutzes.  These were musicians, hardcore jazz musicians and all of that and then I, I could swirl it around and make them do, and present them in a way that it made them look even more theatrical.  They had a, they had a theatrical way, but it was still rough and raw around the edges, and I just took them and made them everything, because that is probably the most magnificent music in the world if you're gonna do concert stage.  And so what are you gonna do with all those fanfares and all of that?  So, I had to give them something that would, that would support you know and use the pe- the, the members, you know, who, you know were the most agile and could dance a little bit and so forth and then build their thing bigger than they could, they could, they could imagine and then they had the magic.  But in between made them comfortable about talking, about being in front of the audience and all of that and taking solos and doing the songs that they weren't even going to include, you know 'Getaway,' 'Fantasy.'  They weren't gonna do these on the stage, on the stage, so I influenced, you know, and, and kicked them up a notch and.
Speaker 2: So are you saying that the work that you did with Earth, Wind, and Fire was what made them Earth, Wind and Fire 'cause all I know is that--
Speaker 1: It took them, those, those arena shows--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --became bigger and better so.
Speaker 2: Okay because that's all--
Speaker 1: I saw their first one and I, I just looked at them, I loved it, I thought it was the music and everything and then somebody, I got a call from California one day and I went out there and I just whipped them into shape.
Speaker 2: Now the other--which artist though did you not like working with the most, or did you have any?  Were there any (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Everybody has something, and then just making them aware of that something that they can exploit for the next twenty-five, thirty years that you are going, and everybody had something like that.
Speaker 2: Now were you looking, and that the reason--
Speaker 1: And why would I tell you who I hated the most?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay moving on.  Please forgive the interviewer.
Speaker 2: I was just wondering if you caught that question or not, okay.  So--
Speaker 1: Whether I'm awake, right.
Story_ID: 486619
Speaker 1: But let me--you know when we've done, I think we've done one or two.  We've done one person who has won an Academy Award [Oscar] I think, Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.].  He ta- he talked--
Speaker 2: Lou Gossett.  I worked with Lou Gossett on 'The Josephine Baker Story.'
Speaker 1: Oh good that's where I'm headed, then.  But, I was saying before I got there I wanted to talk about, before I got there I wanted to talk about, he talked about you know how you, it sounds like your experience was not like his experience.  He said the phones went dead, you know, when he, you know that it was sort of the beginning of the end.  You didn't find your Tony [Tony Award for Best Choreography] serving in that role at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.  Now let's talk about 'The Josephine Baker Story.'  How did you end up, you know, who did that end up coming, you know coming to you?
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: 'Cause we're talking about 19--this is 19--
Speaker 2: --I did Josephine Baker at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] when she made her comeback in 1975.  This is just--
Speaker 1: Wait, so you're saying 1975 was a hot year.
Speaker 2: All of this--'75 [1975] hot year for me.
Speaker 1: So when she came back and this is her last performance I was actually, I remember doing interviews here as a young college student.
Speaker 2: And the souvenir book, I'm all in the souvenir book with my dance company [George Faison Universal Dance Experience].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, can you talk about working with her on that Carnegie Mellon, I mean Car- not Carnegie Mellon.
Speaker 2: You know she was, you know she had standard things, and we were like an act on her show, so it's not like, that's really what that is.  You know we weren't like an integral part like, you know, Carmen [HistoryMaker Carmen De Lavallade] and Geoffrey [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Holder] and the fact that they were--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the same kind of, and which she was, and Josephine, you know, progressed with the times.  She did not play with you.  She'd come back more fabulous than she was before, so she just kept changing with the times until she just made that last quick change in the sky, and, and she actually made that one and then went on to sleep and woke up in another place.
Speaker 1: Now so did Jo, how, so you had worked with her then, but how did this--how did this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Movie come about?
Speaker 1: How did it come? I mean, I know, because--
Speaker 2: I, how did the movie come about.
Speaker 1: I thought two people wanted to do it and one person won out.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: I went and met with the director--
Speaker 1: Whose project was that?  Whose project was the HBO's?  I know it was HBO who produced it.  I know Lynn Whitfield was Josephine--
Speaker 2: Well, she met her husband on--who was the director [Brian Gibson]--on the set, and she auditioned a couple of times.  How did that happen?
Speaker 1: I think, don't you think that was an HBO's originated project?  I think it may have been.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: But I think someone was trying to do the same thing at the same time.  I may be wrong though.
Speaker 2: And Diana Ross asked me why didn't I, came up to me and asked me why didn't I cast her in it like I was the director, but they did want somebody younger and they felt Lynn was younger.
Speaker 1: So how was that doing that because you hadn't, I mean you had done concert things, but--
Speaker 2: What? No, I was already in it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was a movie--
Speaker 1: Okay I see.
Speaker 2: --and she did songs and you did, you staged the numbers and that's all I was able to, you know come up with that and then I had dancers.
Speaker 1: Okay, but that was your first Emmy [Emmy Award] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was your first Emmy. I'm just trying to touch the salient points, okay.
Story_ID: 486620
Speaker 1: Let me ask you though in the period from 1975 to that 1991 period of time, which is you know fifteen years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you think was important in that time period, George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison]?
Speaker 2: What was important in--?  You know, you're growing, you're moving on to other things.  I think I started writing.  Eighty-five [1985] was the first time I think that I really took on writing in 'Sing, Mahalia, Sing' [George Faison].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which starred Jennifer Holliday.
Speaker 1: I didn't know you wrote.  I had you as a chor- chor- choreographer.
Speaker 2: I directed it too.
Speaker 1: And you wrote?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  'Sing, Mahalia, Sing,' the life of Mahalia Jackson starring Jennifer Holliday who was the most belligerent and not so happy a person at that particular time.  Was that after 'Dreamgirls'?
Speaker 1: Yes, I think it was after 'Dreamgirls.'  Yes, yes it would have been after 'Dreamgirls.'
Speaker 2: Right.  She was big, unhappy, and I don't know, she thought the world was against her.  It was a good project for her, because people loved her as Mahalia.  And all she had to do was just do that, be done with that, but her head, I think (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now how did that--how did the project come into being?  Why don't we talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, Aretha Franklin was initially supposed to do that, but you know Aretha--
Speaker 1: Whose project was it?
Speaker 2: Well it--we wrote it with Aretha in mind, you know, and we could just speculate, then we'd throw it out whether she wants to do it and so forth and she said she was, would do it, but Aretha was beyond that kind of Broad- any kind of Broadway schedule.  Aretha is beyond any schedule.  But anyway we, she sent her, her com- her background singers to, to New York [New York].  She never showed up and then that petered out, but anyway, again producers, not enough money, on and on.  Anything that could plague you, anything that has to do with us, it's just hard doing a black show.
Speaker 1: But, can, can I ask you--
Speaker 2: Shows.
Speaker 1: --how much, how much research had you done for that show?
Speaker 2: Oh please, give me a break.  You have to scour everything because nobody--her involvement in the Civil Rights Movement, which is how I came to know her.  So, I had her going to a church and, and being invited up on the stage and telling her life, which, which took in civil rights and the whole thing and how we all connected to that and then all those great songs and so forth that she had, she had done.
Speaker 1: So were you producing it as well as--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no no.
Speaker 1: You weren't?
Speaker 2: We had little producers that were trying to produce it and so forth, and they, you know, they were trying very, very hard.  But not everybody is, is ready to come to Broadway or you know in that vein, and I don't know if, if we were that serious or concentrated.  See I've always been, you know, unless you really know what Broadway is.  I'd been working on Broadway all that time on what it could really bring to you.
Story_ID: 486621
Speaker 1: But also, don't you think in that period from '75 [1975] to '85 [1985], definitely in the '9- [1990s] that Broadway changed, that the economics of Broadway, what was working on Broadway, didn't that change some (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we started to come up with the imports, the English invasion again, you know helicopters, staircases and all of those other shows.  England had not been known for its dancing, but their, you know, 'Starlight Express'.  All of those big mechanical musicals.  McKevin [sic.], you know Mackintosh [Cameron Mackintosh].
Speaker 1: And what year would you say those started?
Speaker 2: About--the rumblings '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you could also remember what we were going through, recession.  Wasn't that Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon]?
Speaker 1: It was, no it was Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].
Speaker 2: And Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] was the--
Speaker 1: It was Reagan and, and Bush.
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: But Bush won.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: It was Reagan and Bush won.
Speaker 2: And then, no but they started, the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] started disappearing and then Cheney [Lynne Cheney] came along and they, she killed it dead, and then you know, then the, that meant the dance explosion was over.  Everything was really over.  We were, those were hard, hard times and we were into those trickle-down--
Speaker 1: Economics.
Speaker 2: Economics and those voodoo economics, and you know.  And the country was in a very strange, strange place.  And so we weren't looking to--and Americans weren't really creating.  What musicals came out of that outside of the English imports?  And with the death of Mi- Mike, Michael Bennett, our Broadway died, all of those guys.  It was a very difficult, '85 [1985], '90 [1990].  They were dying.
Speaker 1: So what--
Speaker 2: A dozen a week.  It's--
Speaker 1: So what do you think of the Broadway of today then--
Speaker 2: You mean--
Speaker 1: --because it's affected by the, the--
Speaker 2: Let's talk about the Disney [Disney Theatrical Productions, Ltd.] of today--
Speaker 1: Okay, I see.
Speaker 2: --because that's, their, it's their show and their shows.  And their, you know, way of thinking, and they're theme park musicals.  I don't know if I'm getting any points with them for even saying that, but that's what that is and then Taymor [Julie Taymor] being able to lift all of that from the African culture and still make it homogenous for a white audience.
Speaker 1: So, are you saying that Disney is actually involved in, are you just talking about Disney as--?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) influence. Disney has done with Disney has done.
Speaker 1: But no, no you're not saying Disney controls Broadway.  You're saying it's like Disney, they go after Disney-type productions.
Speaker 2: Well, Disney is it's the large, probably one of the largest single producers on Broadway.
Speaker 1: I don't (unclear). And that started when?
Speaker 2: And when, what, what started it, 'Beauty and the Beast' didn't it?  And that was mid-'90s [1990s] or '90 [1990s].  No, what started that?  'Les Mis' ['Les Miserables,' Claude-Michel Schonberg and Alain Boublil].
Speaker 1: 'Les Miserables.'
Speaker 2: 'Phantom of the Opera' ['The Phantom of the Opera'].
Speaker 1: 'Phantom,' oh okay.  Those were all Disney then?
Speaker 2: No, but those, that big spectacular kind of musical, operetta.
Speaker 1: Right, operetta that's what I, right operetta.
Speaker 2: And you know so much death over here of the creative talents.
Speaker 1: Want some water?
Speaker 2: That's, and I don't know, you know I think you--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: You know and our lack of any black producers period.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Who's gonna tell my story, you know?
Speaker 1: That's right. The last big production on Broadway--why, okay I shouldn't say--but what was before this that we have, what was, there has, let me see I'm trying to think what, what has been besides, not the (unclear), whatever is--
Speaker 2: 'Once on This Island' [Lynn Ahrens].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One, 'Ain't Misbehavin' [Murray Horwitz and Richard Maltby, Jr.], 'One Mo' Time' [Vernel Bagneris], 'Moe,' 'Five Guys Named Moe' [Clarke Peters].
Speaker 1: Well, that's a revue.  Yeah, those are like revues, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that's what, you know, that's what it was.
Story_ID: 486622
Speaker 1: So let me ask, now there are other things that you did, 'American Jam Session.'
Speaker 2: I did those in Europe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Golden Gate' in Europe (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Europe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now why, Mad, 'Mad Pain' [George Faison] wasn't done in Europe.
Speaker 2: But, that's a ballet I do--
Speaker 1: That's a ballet okay.
Speaker 2: --on, on Dallas Black [Dallas Black Dance Theatre].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But actually I did it first on Omega, Alpha Omega [Alpha Omega Theatrical Dance Company], the dance company.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the European, how did those projects come?
Speaker 2: Oh, I did, see I did, I had done a lot for Perjeaux [ph.] big, extravaganza with twenty and thirty people, film, cost, over one hundred costumes, and I did those shows--
Speaker 1: Okay, what--
Speaker 2: --that celebrated American, the American music, jazz and, and so forth.  They weren't revues.
Speaker 1: Which you were, which you were well suited for.  Let's go to the American A-PAC, American Performing Arts Collaborative [APAC, Inc.] and where you are right now, you know that started, that's almost been--
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000], seven years ago.
Speaker 1: I have 1996.
Speaker 2: Well, we were doing shows, but we didn't have--
Speaker 1: Okay this space.
Speaker 2: We didn't have a space, we didn't you know, we weren't embarking on outreach and doing all of the other things that, you know, you do.
Speaker 1: So do--
Speaker 2: And then so as I got more interested in writing and doing all, and, and doing the theater and less of dance company and less of the musical and more of, you know, shaping, trying to shape something that had a message or had something to say.
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about that, you know what, what, your vision is, what you wanna do, you know what you're doing, you know the things, the projects that attract you.  That's what I'd like to, you know what your vision is for here [Faison Firehouse Theater, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: What I am trying to do is stretch some of the bounds of musical theater and I know we're not doing anything phantasmagorical as you know 'Tarzan' [David Henry Hwang] or what is that 'Wicked' ['Wicked: The Untold Story of the Witches of Oz,' Winnie Holzman] or you know with their hydraulic lifts and things like that.  I feel that there has been a lot of literature and circumstances and history that has not been not explained, but illuminated that give us an idea of our connection and, and how we come to be Americans and growing and going and doing the kind, and, and doing the things that I, as I see us, us doing.  But telling stories and, and doing dances that have to do with who we are have been, have become more important and the conditions under which we live and grow and love and die have become more interesting.  And how we become, how did we come to the notion of coming together, the history of enslavement, emancipation, freedom growing through the early 20th century?  How did we, particularly, and how do we forge those?  Then how do we intersect with society at large, and then ultimately how do we grow?  And how, and then the conflicts, the disconnects that happen between us, our peers, the children that we try to raise, the parents that we try to take care of and how do we, we grow?  How do we renew (pause) ourselves?
Speaker 1: Is--
Speaker 2: 'Cause you, you know because you have, because as, as you, as you probably know, we don't have one lifetime, we have two.  And that, the first one is the one that we can run along with and explore and be influenced by and challenged by change with and so forth and the other is doing all--
Story_ID: 486623
Speaker 1: When I hear you making those statements, I can't help but thinking about your--it's almost a return to your childhood and I have to s- because--
Speaker 2: Oh really?
Speaker 1: That's what I think, because you know I remembered the stories of you going to look at the trains, I remember you know the theater, the exposure to history (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My, my father and them, you know I guess I had a real childhood.  I was really raised by parents, George [George Faison] and Agnes [Agnes Crockett Faison].
Speaker 1: And it sounds whole, it was the wholesomeness of your childhood that I hear coming back in terms of the work that you're doing.  Now--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that's, that's--
Speaker 2: You know what my brother did say that the other day that, you know, he had seen me in this BET [Black Entertainment Television], you know, reality show ['One Night Only'] that I did--
Speaker 1: Oh that's right.
Speaker 2: --with the kids from Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  (Pause) Yeah, I guess so.  I guess, you know, your childhood you know--you look at your childhood and you think about other kids and their childhoods and then you, and then no matter how poor you were, you realize you had one.  You had a real one.  You know your parents were there.  You know, I had a real one.  I had my parents a long time, and I knew both of them.  You know, we did not go to sleep without my father being there, my mother being there.  I don't know anything, thing else and you know like and whatever else happened to you they, you know they could explain what the world, what in the world was happening.
Speaker 1: But what I--the reason I'm asking that is that we're trying to get you to think of it in those context, which is how it comes across.
Speaker 2: You know like you say maybe I'm having a second childhood.  Right, maybe I am.
Speaker 1: But, no I'm trying to get you to contextualize what you're try, wanting to do with your work.  That's what--and it just reminded me, you know, of some of the early stories you tol- told in the first part of this interview.
Speaker 2: Well, maybe I'm--
Speaker 1: It's wanting--
Speaker 2: --what I'm trying to do in my work is try to remind people not to just, not to let that part of your life or your existence go.  Continue to keep alive the child in you.  Keep alive that, that, the humor, the imagination, the, the discovery, the fun.  You know, and because you're gonna do that--as an adult what kind of fun are you gonna have.  You're gonna have that adult fun, but that, but that child, you know, like when op- you open a book, a good book how the, or, or the author prepares you to take a journey.  But, you gotta look for those keys in the early pages, because they are there.  And how you read that book is how you've been told to read that book, and an author really tells you.  And if you two are on the same page, it, it tells you how you're gonna live that book.  It could be tragic.  It could be happy and, excuse me, and how funny the pro- or how you listen to stories or how a person can tell you a story and how--and what you get from a person's opening lines and how they lay out what they may think your relationship may be.  It will probably change, but how you initially, you know, talked, you know, to people or if they have anything on the ball worth talking to, talking about.  It's that.
Story_ID: 486624
Speaker 1: So George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], is that how you approach your writing now that you're doing it?  And I'm wanting to understand now, the context of the work that you're doing and the types of projects you're taking on.  Like we're here today, you're, you know, you're auditioning for Storyville.  I've seen 'Hats' ['If This Hat Could Talk,' George Faison] you know, 'Hats' was, but what other things, what is, what is attracting you to, to projects?
Speaker 2: The resolution of difficulties, of how we come to resolve, you know, what life throws at us.
Speaker 1: Okay, so let's talk about that in the c- let's talk about that in the context of 'Hats.'  Talk about, and I'm using 'Hats'--
Speaker 2: I, okay (unclear).
Speaker 1: Tell, tell the story of why you--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height wrote a book, 'Open Wide the Gates of Freedom' [sic. 'Open Wide the Freedom Gates: A Memoir'] and so forth, and this is basically a book of, "And then I met."  But, then on a couple of pages she spills the beans about her conflicts, but only lightly, 'cause she's a diplomat and a lady.  And so no matter how much you prod Dorothy, she will maintain that, that upbringing, that training, that generosity, that compromising quality, that diplomatic quality that statesman, its diplomacy that she has.  But, then she'll slip because she understands and knows the difficulty of unraveling those situations and may- and bringing people together and trying to create some sort of understanding and part of that she got from Bethune [Mary McLeod Bethune] who, from slavery, found a way of living that would be good, that would allow her to progress, but not work so hard that that's all she was doing, that she could enjoy life.  That she could explore other worlds through the people that she came in contact with, the young people like Dorothy Height, but her peers like Eleanor Roosevelt.  And how through education and the people that were drawn into that circle allowed her to become who she was, you know because you, you, the generosity--your life depends on the generosity of other people, so when, when Tennessee Williams said, "The kindness of strangers" ['A Streetcar Named Desire'].  You don't know who--you don't know how kind some people can be, or you don't know what the kind, the kind of kindness that they're gonna impart to you.  You know sometimes you may think it's harsh.  They may be letting you, giving you insight into something that could be very damaging.  They may want to protect you from things that you don't quite know about, but--or they may let you in.  And when you get in, like I got in with Dorothy Height, I could see through some of the things, some of the painful things, that she may have encountered in dealing with these men.  And there, there I found the base, the most, the biggest thing that she did, because she did something that was so natural, she was their mother, she was their lover, she was their friend.  And what else does, you know, and those things a woman does in rav- unraveling.  Some of the most politically charged atmospheres and volatile moments that we would have when all of these men who were powerful in their own little region, but could become more powerful if they united.  She helped that by just being a woman.
Story_ID: 486625
Speaker 1: So in, in meeting all of these other people the generosity that Alvin Ailey had in telling me--no in, in negotiating with me whether I would come back to the dance company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] or not by saying to me at one point, "Why should I help you?"  Right.  Why should he help me?  And it's off-putting to hear that, but it then has something, it grows something else in you that if you really listen to it and if you really took it in, you would grow from it.  Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] probably said this, has probably said the thing.  Maya [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou] probably says, has to say the same thing.  "Why should I help you?  Why should I give you anything?"  And that's, you know, what relates as a platform here.  What am I giving?  I'm not giving you anything, but you're gonna get everything you need.  But you know that still, that's you.  That's the person.  What are you gonna get?  Am I gonna get my play out of [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height?  Am I gonna rest this musical on one--I could rest that show on one thing 'cause I could explore, exploit it.  I, but I have to know everything.  Not just about Dorothy Height, but all of the men in the room that she was talking to.
Speaker 2: And who were those men?
Speaker 1: Roy Wilkins, Whitney Young, A. Philip Randolph--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --Bayard Rustin, John, James Farmer, George Forman [sic. HistoryMaker James Forman]--
Speaker 2: Jim Lew- [HistoryMaker] John Lewis.
Speaker 1: John Lewis was my hero.  John Lewis and Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  At the most pivotal point in our survival in America.  And so Alvin said that, I was hurt.  He said, "Why should [HistoryMaker] Louis Johnson do anything for you?  Okay so after he gives you that job, what are you going to do?" So, all, all of the dreams that I had were my dreams.  I had to make those come true.  That wasn't his dream.  Alvin had his dream.  He was living his dream.  Oprah's living her dream.  Maya is living her dream.  I could only join hands with them and, and be thankful that they're just breathing the breath of life over me.  That God is breathing a breath that God gave them.  So, I'm, I'm sucking up the same air that they are.  I'm going to exhale that and out of that is going to come what I wanted to do, but if these kids don't hear that, if you never know that, if you never know that: why should I help you?  You will never make up you're, the reason for your living.  You're not going to get down to the purpose that you're even here and be confident in that.  What are you gonna do.  You're just gonna rely on me and ride whatever you gonna ride.  Owen Dodson, after I left Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and all those environs, told me, although I never had a class with him, "Wherever you go you tell them that you studied with me."  I became one of them.  I became him.  You understand what I mean.  So, I became one of his dreams.  You, you know what I mean, so what do you do you become, you know, and, and, and then Alvin and I could have a real, we could have a real talk.  We could, we could really be honest.  He could talk to me, you know, beyond my being a student, beyond my being, you know, a colleague, choreographing, but, but as a person.  Maya could do, we could do the same.  You could do that when you grow up, and then I could give it to these kids, but then the kids could come back to me as kids.  They don't have to be anything else.  That's what they, they could be.  And then one day they grow up and become a little bit more mature for you and then so hey I got somebody I can lean on.  That's all there is, and then you could talk about old stories and things like that, or you can create something new right then and there.
Story_ID: 486626
Speaker 1: So are you creating new or are you creating old (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Creating new.
Speaker 1: You're creating new with the old.  Are you creating, no?
Speaker 2: No, that's all-
Speaker 1: What is Storyville?  What is that?
Speaker 2: That's New Orleans [Louisiana] and all of the, and all of that culture and, and all of those circumstances, the survival of those women in those houses.  It's how that culture got transferred and went on up the river and how it influenced other people.  And how they continued to survive 'til today.  They're still down there, so I'm trying to put--you know the levee has been breaking for years.  So, the levee is gonna break in Storyville and maybe put out the fires that were ignited by, you know, that's me.  I'll, I'll take that, that license, but the people of New Orleans will go on and that's what life is.  They're going on and these kids will go, go on and become something else.
Story_ID: 486627
Speaker 1: Now let me, let me go back to just some things about like you sit here sort of on the precipice of wanting to do something new, and I'm wanting you to have a view of the past of your life and I'm asking you what, what, if you look back like the people whose lives you have touched and have touched you, you know, and I think like you know [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell, Alvin Ailey, I mean, what, you talked about what you learned from Alvin Ailey just now, but really it was yours to take and make, well you that's the same, what did you learn from Arthur Mitchell?
Speaker 2: I, Arthur was more of an icon, pretty much like [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade.  You looked at them, you admired them from that distance.  They were there.  He was black, he was there dancing with the New York City Ballet.  Carmen was beautiful, beautiful beyond, that's how beautiful we can be.  Geoffrey [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Holder] offered another kind of culture, you know being West Indian, you know, and whatever he made up in his life.  But, I used Alvin 'cause he was intelligent.  He was a very, very smart man.  Oh, but knew a lot about food and wine and living and life, but at the same time at the bottom, at the root of that in, you know, a father figure, a father, a nurturer kind of if you listened, you know.  And he sacrificed a lot, a lot because he was consumed by his art and the need to create each year, the ability to renew himself each year and go on and on, and on.  But that, I think, when you divorce yourself completely of a private life, of a life outside of dance and so forth, consumed by culture and art.  And Miles Davis who mentored me as well.  You know, underneath all the brashness and the harshness and the cursing and the madness was an artist.  And what was he gonna give me?  What was he going to give me?  Bill Cosby, the same way and his way of living, his way of life, you know.  You know, I'm sure he helps people, and they've been generous to me too, he and Camille [Camille Cosby] so I can't--you can't say anything.  You go on and live life.  You go on out there and you make it.  You know I, I can't, when Bill Cosby is already made.  I can only, I laugh at his humor, his humanness, that's what I can have.  That's what I can have from all these people.  You know you say, you know who helped me.  I got all of those people.  They all gave me something, and you know like who was some people, the most, you know difficult, I can't think of one because you know if you thought of one there was something in that relationship that they helped you with, something that they made, they said or told you or did to you, made you grow up a little bit more and allowed you to understand what the world was gonna do, and if it was gonna kick your ass, you were already prepared for the ass kicking.
Story_ID: 486628
Speaker 1: And I go back to the Belo- I go back to the book, 'Beloved' [Toni Morrison].  Everybody says how difficult a book that was to read or that is to read, but again I say because I had a great time, I had a great teacher in English lit and so forth and we went back to the very beginnings to the English and all of that, you know, the forms and all of that and where they came from and how frivolous you know, cavalier poetry was and the subjects and so forth, but then how serious Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], how serious Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] and how related they are, how closely related they are in, in, in certain things.  And then you come to Toni Morrison and how deep sometimes some of the things that she says are, and it can be just, and they are just as harsh as if Alvin [Alvin Ailey] were talking to me.  She, in, in 'Beloved,' Toni says about this woman, on about page six or nine, I don't remember that, "She tries hard to remember nothing, as it is safe."  She told the most horrific stories about coming through slavery, children birthing, men, everything, and we were supposed to forget it and forgive all, all of it and move on and that's what they didn't do with the movie.  (Pause) You can't still be in the bed crying about what didn't happen.  They used one of those speeches and, and they didn't even listen to the speeches that Glover [HistoryMaker Danny Glover] said, "Sethe, come on, get up."  It would have been better that he took her out into the sunshine than she sending her daughter out in the sunshine; the daughter would have followed.  But what was gonna happen to her?  What was gonna happen to what she was trying to preserve or she was trying to keep in that house?  She said it in 'Paradise' [Toni Morrison].  In, in a couple of, Toni says it, but she, that's why she's classic.  She tells you how to read that book.  You didn't understand that, go on to the next page, next.  Oh, I had to read that ten times.  You're the fool (laughter).  What is your ear, how you been trained, and what you get, you know what I mean, and, but she told you how to read it.  "It is hard to remember nothing, as it is safe."  So if you were that kind of person growing up in that time don't remember nothing, just keep moving or you'd be dead (laughter).
Speaker 2: So George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison]--
Speaker 1: What, what (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So I had the philosophy on Toni Morrison.
Story_ID: 486629
Speaker 1: Let me go, let me go--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Just a few like what do you think of the future of black dance and the creative process for that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If they could just compete.  They just gotta keep doing it.
Speaker 1: If they.
Speaker 2: All of them, everybody.  What's gonna happen to black dance, you practice dance.  You keep doing it.  It's a ritual.  Dance started as a ritual.
Speaker 1: But do you think there is something called black dance?
Speaker 2: There is black dance.  It's, everybody black person that was doing it.  What the Greeks took, took away and took to Europe.  Where did it come from?  Africa.  And you know like all of that.  You know, Nigeria is probably the richest, and they don't support their people worth a damn.  You know the people are in the streets.  You know, all they care about is the oil and the natural resources.  They have abandoned the countrysides.  They don't grow anything anymore.  They're not connected.  But the only people I find that are connected are the dancers and the singing, singers, and the storytellers of Nigeria.  Those are the people worth saving, and they are living in the ruins of the National Theatre [National Arts Theatre, Lagos, Nigeria], which is shambles.  And these politicians here they said you know Obasanjo [Olusegun Obasanjo] should just hire some, you know, should give his people the money or build a decent road.  Build and maintain a road, one, or give the money to those artists that are living in the ruins of the National Theatre with no running water.  And they're like urchins living in a, in, in, in the ruins of what, of what, of their civ- civilization.
Story_ID: 486630
Speaker 1: Okay, George [HistoryMaker George W. Faison], let me go back to what are, what, let me ask you your hopes and concerns for the black community.
Speaker 2: My hopes.  I, I hope they wake up to the fact that no one can change your si- your situation but you.  That if there's anything that's going to happen you are going to do it.  What do I wish they would do?  Open a book, read a book, get connected with, you know, maybe who else they can be.  Something other than, even other than what they are growing up with.  I'm talking about the most influent--affluent are gonna grow up with what their parents did.  I'm saying get out and do something.  Get out and do something and don't and know your people.  But, see that's still gonna be part of my job.  We've gotta tell them.  They don't know, so who tells it.
Speaker 1: Okay one last question.
Speaker 2: We have to tell them.
Story_ID: 486631
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: (Pause) What do I want my legacy to be?  (Pause) That, that I was a student of life, that in order--that education is the key to your freedom.  To have fun, that I have had fun and will continue to have fun as I go through this troubled and complex and phony-ass world, and that I'm a bad motherfucker.
