Story_ID: 75743
Speaker 1: [--Larry Crowe.] I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Oh, my name is Barbara Farmer, first name Barbara, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, middle initial W., last name Farmer, F-A-R-M-E-R.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 16th, 1946, in Newport News, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm currently principal in the State College Area School District of Houserville and Lemont Elementary Schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: December 17th, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Houserville Elementary School, 217 Scholl Street, Houserville Road, State College Pennsylvania.
Story_ID: 75744
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now before we get into depth, there are five "People Magazine-ish" type questions that I'm compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is--and they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sweet potato.  Do I just get one?
Speaker 1: Well if you have two favorites.
Speaker 2: Okay, chicken and sweet potatoes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall and spring, those are my two.  When the leaves are changing color, it's, it--the brilliance of the leaves just inspire me and I'm happy to see things come alive in the spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Wow.  Australia's good in the right time of year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You can't make chicken salad if you don't have any chicken.
Story_ID: 75745
Speaker 1: All right.  Let's talk about your family history.  How far can you trace your family back and what, what do you know about your family history I mean going way back?
Speaker 2: Wow.  I know that on my father's [John Wilson] side my grandparents were Blackfoot Indian.  And we found that out, I think I was a teenager maybe because it wasn't anything that they really talked about because it didn't make any difference in our lives.  I don't remember my grandparents as being active people in my life on either side because I'm the youngest of six children.  So by the time I became of age to I guess enjoy them they were either very, very old.  And I remember visiting them and seeing them sitting on the porch talking to my parents.  But also at that time children kind of knew their place so if the grandparents weren't actively involved in things that we were doing, you respected their space and sort of let the older people spend time together.  So I vaguely remember that about them.  I remember the stories that my parents used to tell about them because they were always exciting for us to hear about life in the south because my family is from South Carolina.  And how my grandfather had to work so hard farming and they were tenant farmers.  And they would work a year and maybe make $47.00.  I think one time my dad said 47 cents they profited from the--from one particular year.  So remembering about the depression because that was a big part of their lives and hearing those stories.
Story_ID: 75746
Speaker 1: As for my parents, they were very colorful, colorful people I think, particularly my dad.  My siblings--
Speaker 2: What (unclear) your father--excuse me.  What was your father's name and can you spell his name for us?
Speaker 1: My father's name was John McKinley Wilson.  J-O-H-N, John, M-C, capital K-I-N-L-E-Y, McKinley Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 2: And what was his date of birth and where was he born?
Speaker 1: April, I'm sorry, April 16th, I believe 1911.  And he was born in South Carolina.
Speaker 2: You know where?
Speaker 1: I believe Bishopville [South Carolina].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But my father was a very colorful character and a very hard working man whose goal was to provide for his family and with that, us having six children, my mother [Rebecca Young Wilson] when I came to know her, did not work outside the home.  She had--they had both been tenant farmers in South Carolina.  Let me tell you something about my mom and dad that I find interesting.  We talk about slavery.  I can't trace my family back to slavery but as I would hear the stories that my parents would tell, their lives had some aspects of that controlling, that slavery had.  And my father was a tenant farmer and four of my brothers and my sister were born in South Carolina and they all picked cotton and farmed the land.  In addition to the six of us that survived, five did not so they were actually parents of eleven children but for whatever reason and I think some of the hardness of life had something to do because my mother did a lot of work in the fields.  And my dad would talk about being beholden to the man for whom he worked.  But at the same time because he was such a hard worker he had some privileges that some of his friends didn't have.  For example, he had accounts at some of the stores downtown and would often talk about how my mother was free to go in and shop and buy pretty things.  And that was important to him for her and for us.  And he talked about one of their favorite conversations was about the back lot and I was almost an adult before I realized what that entailed.  But every time he would take us to South Carolina to visit, we would go downtown to the shopping area.  We would park in the parking lot behind the main stores and we would see all of their friends and their friends' children. And they would have the shoebox chicken lunch and all that packed and they would spend part of the day and we enjoyed that.  We thought that was fun.  And as I got older, I realized they could not park in the front, they had to park in the back and the back lot was the meeting place for Saturday morning when you would go downtown to do your shopping.  So you took your family with you and it became a party day or a fun day.  And the children played in the back and the older ones kept the little ones and those who could go into the stores were allowed to go into the store.  And, but my dad was really proud because he had worked so hard and had established a reputation with the merchants that my mother could do the kind of shopping that she wanted to do.  He became very unhappy and disenfranchised with that lifestyle because one day he said that as he was working in the field with the--with my siblings that the landowner said oh John, you got a nice little farm family you're raising up there.  And my daddy said he was determined from, from that moment on that no, that would not be the case.  So he had his father take care of my mother and my siblings and he actually sneaked out of South Carolina one night, caught a bus to Newport News and started working for I think, Longshoreman.  And he lived in a boarding house I think for about a year and would send money home and my mother was a real good saver.
Story_ID: 75747
Speaker 1: And after about a year of that, he [her father, John Wilson] brought the entire family to Newport News [Virginia].  And my mother [Rebecca Young Wilson] would tell the story about all of them living in that one room and I think sharing a bathroom in the boarding house and that was difficult because my mother was a very proud woman and was at least accustomed to having her space even though it was crude in South Carolina but it was still their space.  And then he discovered that they were building new apartment type homes. Today they call them the projects but they were made like attached homes, one story homes.  And he went out to that work site and there he discovered that they needed workers and if you worked there you had a better chance of getting one of the homes.  So he figured that out and he became employed sort of like in a supervisory role there cause he was a hard, hard worker.  And after the homes were built, we were able to get one of those homes to live in and that was just the joy of his life for being able to provide for us in that way.  And after a while, after he'd done that, then he left that job and he started working for the Newport News shipyard.  And about this time--I was born in Newport News.  I'm the only one in my family born there, used to get teased about that a lot.  And he started working in the shipyard.  And I remember as a little girl one of the things that my mom and dad used to talk about that they were proud of was they had two children in college, two in high school and two in the elementary.  And my brothers were going to Norfolk State College, it used to be called Little State, in Norfolk, Virginia, and they would have to catch the ferry over.  And it was always such a hustle bustle in our home where my mother would, always fixed a hot breakfast every morning getting everybody ready for school, drive my brother down to the shore so he could get on the ferry to go--the boys could go to college.  And to sustain us through those times my dad took on another fulltime job.  So for at least fifteen years of my life that I can recall or more, my dad worked two fulltime jobs.  He worked in the shipyard at night on the night shift on the third shift and he worked for a housing project during the day so that my mother would not have to work outside the home and he could take care of the educational pieces for everybody.
Speaker 2: Was that hard on (unclear) the family?
Speaker 1: Oh it was very hard on him and it showed itself in some interesting ways for him because I think at that time men did not have ways of dealing with the tough times and the emotions attached to that so some interesting behaviors and some interesting reactions to that.  But it was always important to him that we had a home, plenty of food to eat and a nice car and the clothes that we needed to be equal to other people.  The other interesting part about that time of life too was it was in the 50s [1950s].  Everyone lived together in the projects, the teachers, the lawyers, the doctors, the shipyard workers.  So there was a sense of pride being in the same community with people who were educated.  In my family I'm first generation college, but edu--though my parents were not educated, college was so important to them.  And we would ask our dad sometimes just to kid with him did--if he went to school and he would say yeah, baby I went two days, one for me and one for my brother.  He was not school educated but he was an educated man about money, work and how to get ahead.  In addition to working two fulltime jobs, he also had--and at the time because he wasn't legally called a contractor and had not established it according to law but he had a part-time business and he was a jack of all trades.  And he would do plumbing, painting, you name it, he could do it.  Only thing I, I don't remember him doing was fixing cars.
Speaker 2: So he would do this on the weekends?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah and any free time he had.  And he had, a pretty much sort of an oral contract with a lady who had properties in Newport News.  So whenever anything happened on those properties she would call and he would--my--and my mother would drive him because he--I don't remember my dad driving I think for about thirty years.  So we took him wherever he needed to go.  But whenever he got a call, one of us or my mom would take him wherever the job was.  And even on days when it was the coldest and snow was on the ground, if somebody's sewer was backed up, my dad would get on his knees and open up that line and, and fix it for those people because that was helping them but even more importantly it was providing additional income for us to do the things that we had to, to do and had to have.
Story_ID: 75748
Speaker 1: He [her father, John Wilson] was also very conscious about us having transportation.  He had real pride about him about what it took for your family to be considered doing well.  I remember one time in my life as a young person, we had five cars.  Nobody on the block that had six children--and we had five cars and they were all running good shape, nice cars.
Speaker 2: But he didn't drive then?
Speaker 1: He didn't drive.
Speaker 2: Do you have any idea why he didn't drive?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He got caught with spirits and with a DUI [Driving Under the Influence violation] and during that time because he was not a learned person, studying for the exam to go back and get it, he never did.  And he said--well I guess he figured he had enough drivers in the house so he, he did it that way.  And it was, it was always an interesting piece when we would get a new car he knew my mother would resist because she thought we didn't need a new one and that was kind of wasting money.  He would go to a dealership and he would pick out a car, a new car and he would send the salesman to the house to my mother to say, your husband told me to bring this car to see if you would like it.  And she'd say son we don't need a car.  And he said, well Ms. Wilson, he's already kind of paid for this so this is your new car.  So that was kind of how we would get cars every couple of years.  And he, he didn't drive them but he made sure they were filled with gas and clean all the time because he wanted us to look like we were doing well.  And I've, I've often told people, I didn't know I was poor till I was grown.  But then we weren't so much separated in terms of socioeconomic level in the black community because we all lived together.  As--then another important thing that happened in our lives, home ownership, because I think by living in the community where everyone lived together, the most prosperous versus those not, the professional people started building and buying homes and moving out of the projects.  Well I guess my dad thought well he could do that too for his family.  So he moved us into our first home and then I think after that there, there were three homes that he bought because as the family changed or the physical condition of my mother changed, then we would move from one style house to the other.
Story_ID: 75749
Speaker 1: So, but in terms of going back beyond my parents, my mother's [Rebecca Young Wilson] side of the family was also very instrumental in shaping her who in turn shaped some pieces, major pieces in me.  Her brothers were--worked for the railroad.
Speaker 2: Oh just--to go back, what, what's your mother's name?
Speaker 1: My mother's name was Rebecca Young.
Speaker 2: What's her date and place of birth?
Speaker 1: My mother's name was Rebecca Young spelled R-E-B-E-C-C-A Y-O-U-N-G.  I think mama was born, she was born August 16th, maybe 1910.  I'm sorry, I had that--right now I can't give you the exact date but I think that's what it was, yeah.  And she too was born in Bishopville, South Carolina.  And her brothers all worked for the railroad and they were so proud of that because those were major jobs to have.  And in their travels they would bring her nice gifts and because her mother sewed a lot they would bring beautiful fabrics from other states and wherever they traveled.  And she had a lot of pride because it was important for her to, for her, for her family for her to look nice.  So they did all kinds of things to work together to do that.  So whenever we would go to South Carolina it was a very prideful time to go and hear the stories of the railroad from my, from my uncles.  And until about six years ago, my mother had one sibling.  There are no siblings left on her side and my dad has two brothers and a sister living and both of my parents are deceased.  My dad died in 1996, the summer we moved to State College.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did your mother go to school (unclear)?
Speaker 1: My mother went to school up through 8th grade and the reason she stopped then was because at that point your parents had to send you away from your community to like a boarding school to finish and her family was not able to do that.  And she was a very smart lady and she taught us how to read very young.  I, when I went to elementary school, I actually skipped first grade because my mother had used the calendar to teach me numbers and how to figure out the calendar and dates and she taught me how to read and she did the same with all, all of our siblings.  And she took educating us in a very serious way because the desire was for us to do better than they had done and she--they believed that education was the way for that to happen so she started out very early, very early on.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did your parents have a story about how they met?
Speaker 1: Oh my goodness (laughter) yes.  I think it was at a church service and my daddy saw my mom and decided she was the one for him.  And in her telling the stories and you need to hear my husband tell how my mother used to tell these stories because he would always listen to them repeatedly.  And she said, he came courting in a buckboard and she tried to resist him because you know there were lots of fellows who liked her and I think he decided that she was the one for him and he was determined and sort of made a way to get the other fellows out of the picture.  And she was--
Speaker 2: A buckboard is a wagon.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because there might be some people (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Oh okay, yeah a horse--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: A wagon, a horse, yeah horse and a wagon.  And she said how she would just be, sort of playing real coy and many times they saw each other at church or social events because going dating and as they used to say taking company, going--the guy going to visit the girl at her home, you didn't get to do a lot of that until you were older.  So he--but she would tell how he would come courting in the buckboard and, and he was persistent and convinced her that he was the one and, and they married.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then daddy talks about how he used to take her around in a Model T.  He's always loved cars.  So from the very beginning he's had transportation and my mother was impressed with that because he was a fellow who was determined as they used to say to have things and to do well and she liked that.  So--
Story_ID: 75750
Speaker 1: Can you sort of reflect back on growing up in Newport News and tell us some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: When we lived in--and I almost hate to call it the projects because then it wasn't.  We didn't know that word until I became I think like a high school senior.  But when we lived in the projects, one of the things I think that I remember most is the games we used to play.  We lived in a cul-de-sac and several of the young people who were older than me that my, were my brothers and sisters' ages, I remember Barbara Jean Jones was a majorette for the high school and some of the fellows were in the band and we would have parades in the cul-de-sac.  And Barbara Jean Jones would get her baton and somebody would get a garbage can top and play the drum and we would have parades through the cul-de-sac and that was just great fun.  Another thing that I remember is one of my favorite games was jumping board.  The concept is like a seesaw but it's lower to the ground and you take a long, wide board and put it over a rock and you would jump--some one person would be on one end and the person getting ready to start would say, give a signal that they were about to jump on their end and then that person on the other end would go high up into the air, and when you came down so you were jumping, pushing each other up in the air that way, projecting each other and it, that was the most fun.  And you always had to tell the person when you were ending because it would jolt your body if the person jumped off and you hit the ground on the end of your board.  So you would give them a clue as to when it was ending so that both people would jump off at the same time.  I also remember then, when you talk about smells, I remember our home and the warmth in that because at that time we did not have central heat.  We had a wood stove in the living room that heated a house that had three bedrooms, a living room, a kitchen and a bathroom.  And you took your Saturday night baths in the kitchen and little people took it in the sink and the bigger kids they brought in a big metal tub that they would fill with water and you would, you would bathe in there because in the winter time it was so cold we had to do everything centered around where the heat was.  I especially--when you talk about smells, I remember my mother [Rebecca Young Wilson] made the best homemade biscuits and fried chicken, macaroni and cheese.  And because they had been farmers they always had a garden wherever we lived so we always had access to fresh vegetables and things like that.  So I remember those.  And my mother used to make what she used to call sweet potato bread which is probably why sweet potatoes is one of my favorite things.  But she would somehow mix those sweet potatoes and put them in the oven and it would come to sort of like not a bread pudding either, it was stiffer.  It wasn't like cake but had a softer consistency and oh, it was delightful so that may be a part of--and then one of the other things we used to do was bake sweet potatoes in the oven and just sort of one, once they're done, crack them open, put some butter in them and that was a meal and something to drink.  So that might have something to do with my fondness for sweet potatoes.  I also remember how important it was for my mom to have us looking right.  She washed everyday it seemed all day long.  And I do remember the hum of the washing machine and it was a wringer washing machine.  And as I got older and, and I--my sisters and brothers and I bought her an automatic washer and dryer, she didn't want to give that up because she said they didn't clean clothes as well as the wringer.  Because in the wringer machine you could let that, that tub wash as long as you liked for any particular cycle.  And she would have a, a pot on the stove if there was something white like white cotton underwear or whatever, she would boil that in bleach and water on the stove to make sure they were white and then put them into the tub to, to finish washing to get the bleach out.  So I remember the hum of, of the washing machine and of course as I got older it used to be annoying because it would wake me up on Saturday mornings and you had to hit the floor when you heard the washing machine going to start your Saturday chores.  So that was a very special time. I also remember the noise of all of us being there together and we weren't allowed to fight one another.  You were taught--you had to respect-- your older brothers and sisters were really looked upon as your parents, second layer of parents.  And you had to have a level of respect and obedience because if you did not you got into trouble when your parents came home.
Story_ID: 75751
Speaker 1: So I remember my oldest brother, he was John Wilson, Jr., he was very special to us.  He died 27 years ago at the age of 41 and he was real special in all of our lives.  And umm--
Speaker 2: What happened (unclear)?
Speaker 1: He had been in a car accident about oh two to three weeks before he died and he had a blood clot in his lungs but the doctor diagnosed him as having the flu because of the, the coughing and the, some of the other characteristics that seemed flu like at that time.  And at that time we as--in the black community, we, we had, we did everything within our community.  And because black doctors were not allowed to practice at the white hospitals and sometimes not do the--have the potential for referral to other doctors, all of our medical treatment took place within our own community.  And most of the time we had general practitioners.  The doctor did a fine job, he just misdiagnosed him and by the time he was taken to the emergency room he was pronounced dead shortly thereafter.  So--but I remember he was a--he's, he's still with me in a very special way because he--him being the oldest and my being the baby, we had a real special relationship.  But I--but that's a part of the sounds that I remember because he, he knew how to make us behave without being unkind or unnecessarily harsh and we wanted to please him because he was that kind of person.  And then my second oldest brother was also special.  I think they were like almost two years apart and so we knew we had to obey John and Richard.  Richard was my second oldest brother and he's named after one of my mother's brothers.  So as we dealt with that--but I sort of got away with things and I didn't really do a lot of bad things cause see, I saw how the others got disciplined and I knew I didn't want to be spanked and I didn't want to be punished or privileges taken.  So I kind of learned a lot of how to maneuver should we say--
Speaker 2: By watching the mistakes of (unclear).
Speaker 1: --by watching the mistakes of--yeah, absolutely.  I learned a lot, yeah.
Story_ID: 75752
Speaker 1: So Newsome Park was a really interesting place and another--
Speaker 2: What was it called?
Speaker 1: Newsome Park.
Speaker 2: Can you spell it for us?
Speaker 1: N-E-W-S-O-M [N-E-W-S-O-M-E] Park, P-A-R-K.  Newport News got its name, if I'm not mistaken, my husband tells the story, there was a Captain Newport who would take the news across the bay and bring it back.  So Newport News and then Newsome Park out of all of that so that's where we--that's where all this happened.  And they were very protective of me.  One of the other things I remember when we lived in Newsome Park, we don't, we didn't--parents didn't think about it then as much I think as we do now but it really was an awesome responsibility when you had other children being in charge during those times.  And one day my mother [Rebecca Young Wilson] was just visiting in the community and she had left me under the care of my older siblings and we had a gasoline can we found someplace behind somebody's house.  And you know children exploring and one of the boys found a match and he threw it in the can.  Well nothing happened right away so I decided to look in there to see what was going on and it blew up in my face.  So my face was burned, the entire face.  It didn't harm my eyes though, that was a blessing.  And they ran me to where my mother was visiting with all this skin hanging off my face and, and being scared to death because they just said oh my god, she's going to die now we're going to get killed.  But I, I was really blessed.  The doctor pulled off all the skin that he could and taped me up and left my eyes nose and mouth so that I could function and they took me back home.  And because we didn't have dermatologists then that we could access, my mother used cocoa butter on my face and when I was a teenager I used to have a spot on my cheek that you could kind of tell was just a little bit lighter in, in tone.  But I've been really blessed.  I--it didn't cause permanent damage.
Speaker 2: That's remarkable.  You can't really tell.
Speaker 1: It didn't cause permanent damage.  So that was a, that was, that was cool.  But another part I remember about Newsome Park is that neighbors looked out for one another's children.
Story_ID: 75753
Speaker 1: You were talking before we paused about the closeness of the community, how people would look out for one another.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  Oh, there was a lady across the street directly from our home named Ms. Pete and we knew if Ms. Pete was sitting on the porch or looking out her window, we best behave.
Speaker 1: Pete, P-E-T-E?
Speaker 2: Pete, P-E-T-E, because if we didn't and Ms. Pete reported to my mom or dad that we misbehaved we got a spanking on what Ms. Pete said or we were disciplined on what Ms. Pete said we did.  And, and we had a lot of respect though for the other adults in the community because their word carried a lot of weight and you didn't have a lot of in-fighting in the community among people because they trusted one another to look after their children and each other.  And one of the things that enforces that even more for me is my family--and I didn't realize it I guess because I was such a little girl when we lived in Newsome Park [Virginia], when other families would come up from South Carolina trying to get out of the farming business they stayed with my family.  And I don't remember our house being that crowded but I guess because since it already was, it just seemed natural.  And those are friends of ours still today and we kind of see each other as family because families who had made it out of South Carolina sort of, I guess sort of an above-ground railroad instead of the underground railroad, because they provided safe places for people to--for the husbands to get the jobs, get on their feet and then get housing.  And as, through the years as I hear my siblings and I heard my parents talk about that, I thought wow because sometimes you wonder how you became friends with some of the people in your life that your parents took you to visit cause every Sunday after church just about we went to visit somebody or somebody came to visit us from--who was from South Carolina.  And there was that network so if something happened there, if someone had illness or someone died, we knew we were making the trip to South Carolina because we had to be supportive. I guess that was another form of, of the railroad in terms of people helping one another.  And I think that's probably common among any group who relocates and makes such a drastic change in their lifestyle and the geographic location.  And it's a matter of looking after one another.
Speaker 1: Was there any social service agency like a settlement house or anything like that in Newport News where people coming (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No.  No, when--
Speaker 1: So it was very important that people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --took care of one another?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  People were very much connected.  As a matter of fact when my face was burned, the healing process my mother [Rebecca Young Wison] used to tease me about, one of the friends from South Carolina was named Sam Dixon and he was very good friends with my mom and dad and his family was.  And he would come by and bring me fruit and tease me and just bring me things and encourage me.  And I remember him as being a very important person during that healing process.  I could take his joking and kidding about it and then when we were growing up too in Newsome Park, a grocery truck used to come through the neighborhood because remember we couldn't go to a lot of the stores.  If your parents went to the grocery store, many times they would leave the children home because had--family sizes ranged from six and up.  I come from a family of six.  My husband's family had ten children.  So when they went out to shop, you couldn't take everybody with you so a grocery truck would come through.  And Sam would always buy me goodies from the grocery truck, ice cream, candy, whatever.
Story_ID: 75754
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about school now?  You know what school did you attend, what was the name of the school and--or schools and--?
Speaker 2: My preschool, the preschool teacher was a Mrs. Suber (ph.) and--
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Suber is S-U-B-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was so exciting because she kept us outside a lot.  I guess when you, during that time--she too, lived in the projects but then she had bought a home outside of the projects and my mother [Rebecca Young Wilson] wanted me to have the preschool experience.  So I remember taking walks, nature walks by the rail, railroad track and she would point out different things in nature to us.  And the big thrill though was when we stopped to rest and she had hot cocoa.  I don't know how we managed that outside with a bunch of children and she gave us lunch and the hot cocoa but that was a really exciting time.  And after that I went to Newsome Park Elementary School and in the first grade--I think I stayed in there a couple of weeks and I guess after one of the assessment period, cause I could read and do numbers and all I, I skipped a grade.  And I went to Newsome Park Elementary until the fourth grade.  Then my dad bought a house in what was called East End, E-A-S-T E-N-D, and that was a black community in the east part of Newport News that had its own business community.  There was a, a black pharmacist and a drug store.  There were some small markets.  There was a movie theater and there was a YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] because I was a Y-teen growing up and Booker T. Washington Elementary School I went to in the fourth grade and the fifth grade.  And elementary school at that time went through the seventh grade so I spent those years at Booker T.  One of my most influential teachers during that time was Ms. Payton.  She was serious but she saw something in me and made me work hard and she had high expectations but at the same time you knew she cared about you.  But she didn't take any stuff, I mean no fooling around unless it was that time for recess or something.  And she was also a music person so we did a lot of music in, in her class and I think then I probably learned how to read music and appreciate music even more.  Because when I went on to high school I learned how to play the clarinet and was in the high school band.  But at Booker T., that was--what--that was a, a really wonderful growing place because the professionals there had such a sense of deep pride in their work as well as their high expectations for us to do well so that we could break the cycle in our families and so the educate--we would become educated and be able to do bigger and better things.  And even more importantly, replace them because at that time it was all segregated.  So we had to rely upon the community for people to come out of that to come back into those schools so that was a real--and it was a nice school.  It was a two-story school.  I remember that because Newsome Park was one story.  You know children remember things like that.  And I remember the only time the steps became a problem, I was--I started having physical problems with my knees.  I don't know if this makes sense to you but the doctor said that I had tonsillitis and because of the, I guess they were poisoning my system so I had my tonsils removed when I was in Booker T. as well.  So those--that's something I remember from being there as a part of my life.
Speaker 1: How old were you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Nine, ten years old, about nine or ten years old.  And our family lived on 34th Street in the 1100 block, 1133 34th Street.  And the school was between 36th and 37th Street.  So it was safe to walk up to the corner and make a left turn on Chestnut Avenue, walk down a couple of blocks and I was at school.
Story_ID: 75755
Speaker 1: I also remember a fun time doing that--my sister who is almost ten years older than I am married and she and her husband lived across the street from us.  And one of the big thrills in my life was to get up in the morning, get bathed and dressed for school and I would go to her house and she would do my hair because she knew how to comb it and curl it so that I had what we call throw hair.  (Laughter).  As a little girl you would wear the braids--
Speaker 2: Throw hair.
Speaker 1: Yeah throw hair.  You would have the braids on, maybe two plats on either side and the braids would hang down and then she would put these big, white ribbons on it and I would have hair you could throw.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You would flip your braid around.
Speaker 1: You could flip it.  But as you got older we started teasing because that was a cultural thing we had throw hair.  But that was a real important part of my life there.  Booker T. [Washington Elementary, Newport News, Virginia]  was a real, good nurturing place for me and I became best friends with two other girls, Jeanette Ingle (ph.) and Violet Williams, and we are still good friends today.  As a matter of fact when we were in high school they used to call us The Three Musketeers.  And we were in classes throughout from Booker T. to--through--and then I went from there to the eighth grade at [Collis P.]Huntington High School [Newport News, Virginia].  And when I hit Huntington it was interesting because I think I was twelve when I entered and all of a sudden I was in high school and it was like, whoa, bigger people, children who could even--had more privileges than I had because I, I had a very sheltered life.  My mother [Rebecca Young Wilson] was real strict about what I could do and not do and if I was invited to be a part of something--if it was school and academic, no problem.  If I were invited for something social or even, and sometimes within school, her question was, do nice girls do it?  And if the question to that--if the answer to that question was yes, then I could do it.  I was also blessed because my teachers saw something in me.  They kind of thought I was smart and bright in ways that I didn't necessarily feel that I was.  Because you know sometimes you compare yourself to other people and you know of course you see other people are smarter.  And, but when I got to high school the eighth grade was interesting, trying to make the transition to changing classes.  Oh that was, that boggles your mind, and, and taking on higher level classes.  And one of the things that I remember most from eighth grade though is that there were five girls named Barbara Wilson and when they would call one to the office, all five of us would go.  And fortunately, maybe one out of those times, they never wanted me and I was always glad because if they called your name over the PA system and I thought, oh my god my mama will die.  And that was another thing that was I think very strong in us, you didn't do anything to embarrass your family name and your family.  So when they would call Barbara Wilson to the office, my friends would snicker and say uh-oh, you must be in trouble.  And it was nice to come back with a smile on my face that I was not.  Going to the ninth grade you had to make a decision about either instrumental music or vocal music.  Well Violet, Jeanette and I decided we're not really good at singing so let's play an instrument.  So Jeanette and I started clarinet lessons and Violet played the flute and we all ended up in the marching and the symphonic band.  That was the thrill of my life because that's how I got to go out on Friday nights to the football games and play with the band.  And when you put your uniform on to leave home and go to the high school football field, all the neighbors would come to the door and kind of wave at you because you had on a nice uniform and they just--everybody was real proud of you.
Story_ID: 75756
Speaker 1: In high school I had wonderful teachers.  I ended up majoring in business education and one of the reasons for that--two of the reasons were my two business teachers.  Mr. Royster taught me typing and Ms. Winder taught me shorthand and they pushed and pushed and pushed us hard because again of the high expectations.  Another reason I became a business teacher too though is my sister could type really fast when she went to high school.  She had been the only girl now for ten years so she was kind of spoiled.  And when she took typing my dad bought her a full size business Royal typewriter.  I thought, wow, I'm impressed with that.  And I, and, and as I came, became older, I realized there's a little bit of competition there on my part.  So I decided well, o--and then she went to business school.  She went to Peninsula Business School started by Jessie Rattley [Jessie Menifield Rattley] who ended up being the mayor of Newport News [Virginia], Mrs. Rattley.  And she did a two year business school.
Speaker 2: How do you spell Ms. Rattley's name?
Speaker 1: Rattley, R-A-T-L-E-Y [R-A-T-T-L-E-Y].  And her daughter I believe today is an attorney and owns a restaurant housed in the old train station in Newport News.  But Ms. Rattley was quite a business woman and as I said later became mayor and she's now deceased.  But my sister went to business school so I said okay, she can type fast.  Let me see what I can do with that.  So I just took typing and, and business classes and so did Jeanette and Violet and I out-typed my sister.  So I decided okay, I'll go to--I'll be a business teacher because Mr. Royster and--I loved Mr. Royster.  He made us think we were so smart and the fastest typists in the world.  And he used to have us compete with even the music and typing of Cortez Peters who at that time was the fastest typing person in the world.  And we tried to out-type Cortez Peters.  So--
Speaker 2: Cortez Peters?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: He was the fastest typist in the world?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, when I was in high school.  And so it was important to Mr. Royster that we outdo the best.  And as a result of that and his enthusiasm and always nominating us for awards and giving us little certificates for our speed and, and other activities.  I then had Ms. Winder for shorthand and she was real serious about us getting that and learning it well.  And throughout that time in high school the band and the friends and the band family was very important to me.  Then I had an English teacher come into my life as a senior.  I have to tell you too at my high school, this is another family story.  My oldest brother John was the last to marry next to me.  I was last and he was the oldest but he'd gone into the--he'd gone to college and dropped out and went into the military.  Well when he came back from the military he came home for a while.  He even taught me how to spit shine shoes so I always had real good looking shoes because one of the sayings was if your shoes weren't shined and your hair wasn't combed, you weren't really dressed.  So it was real important to have nice hair and shiny shoes.  So John came back home to stay with the family until he decided what--how he was going to branch out and he was single.  So I had a homeroom teacher who was also single so I said oh, I can work this out.  So I tried to get him to meet my homeroom teacher and but at the same time I can't remember how but he met the assistant librarian at my high school who was also single.  And somehow they met and I didn't realize it until of course later he told me.  And he started dating her and he ended up--and they married and oh, she's one of my best friends in life.  And she was instrumental in my high school career and directing my educational path at times when I didn't even know it, and her good buddy Dee Ricks (phonetic) who is a math teacher.  So they were plotting my schedule and I didn't always know it because they had high hopes and great expectations for me.  So I was put into some of the advanced classes and I had a teacher who taught 12th grade English named Marian Payne (ph.).  She was young, fresh out of college.  She taught us the first semester, she got married.  When she came back she said I married, before I left you I was always a pain, now I'm Marian Wright and I will always be right.  And whenever we go home from here to Newport News, I usually get to see her and it's such a joy because we have sort of a friendship still and she's real proud of me and she had a big part in that.
Story_ID: 75757
Speaker 1: Another important teacher in my life was Ray Herring, H-E-R-R-I-N-G.  He was the band director.  Mr. Herring was a professional's professional and a perfectionist.  We had band practice in the morning at 7 o'clock some mornings, some days 7:30.  If you weren't there the door was locked and you just didn't get to play at the next event.  But he was doing the precision drills from the University of Minnesota and all those big schools in our band in the early 60s [1960s], late 50s [1950s] and early 60s [1960s].   So he was very serious about the diagrams and all of the placement that we had to come to process and memorize to make a good showing.  And our band always won first place in either marching events or symphonic events.  And we would, you know whenever we would go for the competitions or concerts, we, we won.  My husband and I went to rival high schools and colleges and he knows that I had the best band and that's one of our little things that we debate about a lot.  But band was very important in my life because it, I don't know, it opened up opportunities for me to go places and do things.  I also got involved in, with this, all of this, hate the word tracking but I know my sister in law was helping to track me through.
Story_ID: 75758
Speaker 1: I took an advanced English course in the 12th grade and a part--that was attached to Hampton Institute at the time.  And we would get to go to social events and cultural events at Hampton.  Well, my mom and dad were just thrilled with that and after being down on campus so much and, and it feeling right, my mom thought, oh maybe that's where I should go to college.  Well I had already planned to go to Virginia State College in Petersburg in my mind.  So when the conversation came up to apply for college, my mom said, no I really want you to go to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia].  And I thought, I don't really want to go there cause it's fifteen minutes from home.  I wanted to go farther because that was my chance to get away from home.  And my mom said, no if you get sick in the night I can't get to Petersburg.  That's an hour and a half.  I can get to Hampton though in fifteen minutes.  So okay we talked about that and of course she won out.  And then after we--I was admitted she decided, well since it's so close why don't you just commute?  And I thought, oh no, I'm not getting away from home yet still.  Well I had--my--I had four older brothers and they all married wonderful women who became my cheerleaders and my supporters and we called one another sisters by the law as opposed to sisters in law.  Well they went to my mother [Rebecca Young Wilson] as they often did on my behalf and one had graduated from North Carolina Central [University, Durham, North Carolina] and lived on campus.  And she said Mother Wilson, she really won't have the college experience if you don't let her live on campus and you should really let her do that.  So they went all--they were my cheerleaders and they kept talking to my mom and by the time the college sent your list of things to bring and your list of clothing and a, and books and all those things that you had to have and bedding and linen supply, by that time that came my mother was sold and we took the list and went shopping.  And because it was important to her that I was like the other girls, we got everything on the list and I lived on campus and it was wonderful.  Since that time however, Hampton has become a university so we're real proud of that.
Story_ID: 75759
Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school did you have an idea of what you wanted to--what career you wanted to pursue you know--?
Speaker 2: I did and I'll tell you how the bug hit me.  I knew that college was an expectation because my--that was important to my parents and it became important to me of course.  But we were playing for graduation, the band, and during that time they would be outside on the football field and the teachers would dress in academic regalia.  So as we're sitting there playing Pomp and Circumstance and the teachers walked out in their caps and gowns, it was almost like I was in awe.  And I thought oh my goodness I want to be one of those.  And connecting that to the relationship I had with my teachers who pretty much all took pretty--really good care of me.  But I--that was common though in our community.  Again, a sense of family and a sense of high expectations because you have to replace us and you have to--in order to do better than your family did, you have to be educated.  So I decided okay, I want to be a teacher and because my typing and shorthand teachers and my business teachers were so influential in my life and my sister remember was a business person, I decided to be a business education teacher.  So I went to Hampton University.  I went there in 1963 and graduated in 1967, wonderful experience.  Nothing like HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] and we, we shall not allow them to die.
Story_ID: 75760
Speaker 1: In my freshman year, [President] John F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King [Jr.].  So--and the somberness--
Speaker 2: They spoke (unclear)?
Speaker 1: No, they, they were assassinated 1963, '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: Well they weren't assassinated the same year (unclear).
Speaker 1: When I was in college between that first two years.
Speaker 2: Well you know King was assassinated in '68 [1968] and--?
Speaker 1: Was it '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well maybe it was John F. Kennedy.
Speaker 2: Kennedy was '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: It was, it was Kennedy then.
Speaker 2: He made the speech, the March on Washington Speech in '63 [1963] that same year.
Speaker 1: I did that too.  I went to that--I was a part of that march.  Okay, you're right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Kennedy was assassinated and the sadness over our campus--I'm trying to think, Martin Luther King must have come to our--somehow he's connected in my life at that point too though.  I'm trying to remember why.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) that speech in '63 [1963].  The March on Washington was (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, but there was something else connecting him to us at Hampton at that time too, it was.  There was something else.  I'm sorry I can't remember what it was but I know those were two major happenings in my life at that time.  Speaking of the March on Washington, I was able to be a part of that because at that time churches were taking a part in those types of activities.  And I was a part of my church choir and Sunday school and Youth BYP.
Speaker 2: Now what was the name of your church?
Speaker 1: I was a member of Six Mount Zion Baptist Church in Newport News [Virginia] and at the time our pastor was Reverend Brown.  My mother sang in the senior choir, I sang in the junior choir.  Our Sunday school, I did Sunday school and as I became an adult I was the assistant church clerk.  So I spent a lot of years and my family spent a lot of years in that church.  That's where I came to know who God was in that church and what an important time in my life.
Speaker 2: So church was a progressive Baptist church in (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  We were involved in community events and because that was such a monumental occasion they sent a bus--many churches, most of the churches.  Most of the churches in our community sent a bus of young people of course escorted by some of the older ones and that was quite an occasion to be there in [Washington] D.C. on that day.
Story_ID: 75761
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to meet in person any of your heroes I guess from the civil rights movement or--?
Speaker 2: No.  We were too far removed from where the actual stage was.  But we met the small town heroes because as the buses parked and we would--afterwards and we would sit to eat and hear the speeches, people--a sense of community was created that day in that surrounding.  So you made--you know you touched the hearts and hands with people that day and formed something.  And went back home with a great sense of accomplishment and making a statement that we're more than deserving of all that this country had to offer so it was very important.  And while I was in college, interestingly enough I'm not a person into politics.  I'm a voter of course and I take opportunities to share issues.  But I was working, I used to work the polls.  I've dealt with Stokely Carmichael's [also known as Kwame Ture] group. I did--
Speaker 1: For SNCC?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure did.  And there was a community in Virginia--
Speaker 1: Did you work in Virginia or did (unclear)?
Speaker 2: In Virginia.  That was in Virginia.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Remember my mom was not going to let me go far from home.  There was a rural area in Virginia that they were trying to get people registered to vote and I remember working with I guess some of these people might have been considered Freedom Riders at that time but very much involved in the movement and blacks and whites were working together in a small home or build--office building in a community and did not realize at that moment, felt a sense of risk and danger.  But because I was there with older people who were, had promised my mom that they would take care of me, we worked there trying to figure out ways to get people registered and encourage them to vote.  And when I look back on that after I had lived through it I thought wow, I didn't realize I was being political, brave or any of those kinds of things.  It just felt like you were doing what you needed to do to make a difference for your community and for your people.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a sense when you were coming up of the, I mean what was your sense of the civil rights movement?  I mean how did it impact your family when Dr. King was involved in Montgomery and Birmingham? And all of that was on television in homes and so forth (unclear).
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  That's an interesting lane that you're taking me down.  Speaking of television as aside, as an aside, when I was living in the projects in Newport News, my family was one of the first ones to get a TV because remember my dad wanted us to have the nice things in life.  And on Saturday mornings we could have other kids come in and watch TV.  During that time because I lived in such a segregated society, it was almost like a cocoon and protected from many of the things that people suffered in other places.  Many blacks were suffering in a discriminatory way in other places.
Story_ID: 75762
Speaker 1: It's interesting because remember I was the youngest in my family which means that there was a sense, there was a protective hedge around me for that, one of two girls and I lived in close knit communities where people looked after one another.  I often tell people when I'm presenting today, when I was a child we knew our place and the safest place for us was in our community.  But knowing our place, young people today have grown up with everyplace being theirs which is as it should be.  But in knowing our place we were also taught how to maneuver and manipulate society to get what we needed to have and to move around freely in it.  When I was still, oh until through college I would say but pretty much through high school, we had two areas that we would go outside of our very close community and one was called Uptown, and the other one was called Over Town.  Uptown was the merchant area were most of the stores were owned by Jewish people and that's where blacks could have accounts and we did most of our shopping.  If you went Over Town that meant you literally went over the bridge to the section of town where whites shopped and you had many more of the large stores, Montgomery Wards, Sears, Lerners, Parisians, the large grocery stores and drug stores.  And the shipyard was also on that side of town down toward the end of the block that still was surrounded by some of these areas.  Well I had become accustomed to going to Overtown with mom because she would take my dad to work and pick him up and sometimes as a teenager I would do that.  But when we were going Uptown, we went looking nice always because you wanted the merchants to not want you in the store. You knew how to dress, talk and act to go in and get what you needed.  And then of course we would go home and make fun of how we had to behave to get what we needed.  If we were going to Overtown we dressed up a little bit more because we were going in stores where people were looking at us and we wanted to make sure that they knew that we thought we were somebody and we were special and we deserved to be there just like they did.  So when we had those trips, my mom and I very often would do those together because being the youngest to everybody else by this time was pretty much married and gone.  So it was very important to her that we present ourselves in the right way.
Story_ID: 76047
Speaker 1: One of--it's--as I was sharing about the shopping, that was also training because my mother [Rebecca Young Wilson] in teaching me in knowing how to treat people and talk to people because I, as I said she said there was a way to do and say anything, we began to be favored in some of the stores we shopped in.  Hudson Belk was our favorite.  It's a nice department store.  And growing up we used to wear hats to church.  You didn't go to church any Sunday, any time of the day without a hat. In the morning the rule was it was a big hat and in the afternoon service, it was a small hat the same color as the morning hat.  And my mom and I had a different hat size so we shopped so much at this particular store and got to know a couple of clerks.  When the new hats came in for each season, they would save ones, certain hats that they thought my mom and I would like in the drawer and we would go over.  And they'd say, oh Ms. Wilson we saved a couple of hats for you and your daughter to try on cause we know you like hats and you have a you know, particular head size.  And so by her knowing how to maneuver through and deal with people we often were blessed in terms of--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) special treatment.
Speaker 1: Many times we did and because my mom knew after being in South Carolina and learning the routine there and, and also just dealing with people because many times you know as I tell people today, I'm going to charge that to your head and not your heart and fear has caused people to do some outrageous, extreme, unkind things.  And people have suffered because of other people's fear and, and their lack, L-A-C-K mentality, not wanting to share the goods.  So because of that training I think and even the sense of knowing who I was, that was also an important part for my mother for me and for us.
Story_ID: 76048
Speaker 1: And as I mentioned earlier, my four sister-in-laws, I, I'm just a real loved person and each of my, I'm--I also say that I'm an eclectic person because I have a part of each one of my sister-in-laws and my sister, my sister took care of me like I was her little girl forever, providing for me.  Her husband was in the military.  Everywhere they were stationed, she sent for me.  So that also gave me opportunities to interact in integrated situations because I would go into military towns and that sort of thing.  So I gained experience and strength to deal in those situations.  Well back home because we lived in such a close seg--we had one white person that I recall and my mother [Rebecca Young Wilson] used to iron for her and baby sit for her because that was her way of earning change without leaving home, and Ms. Murphy.  And we used to baby sit Bobby Murphy for his mom and Ms. Murphy would come and sit at our table and eat whatever we were eating and visit with us just like we were family.  So--and I also believe that another trait for, for us as African Americans and again I can't speak for any other culture, we are a very accepting people because we have been so rejected and mistreated and discriminated against.  That--people don't realize that hits your head and your heart as well as your physical being when you are subjected to physical abuse.  So I think there's a tenderness in there with the toughness to survive, there's a tenderness in being accepting when--because Ms. Murphy wasn't real popular in her own community so we became her family, her group, so a sense of us knowing and me knowing who I was.  And then when I went to these different places because, I'll jump back again, the church training as well as the home training and the community training.  And then I was a Y-teen in high school and got leadership skills in that and a sense of knowing who I was and the expectations for me and my faith through my church and the activities I was engaged in there, I had sort of a picture, a wholeness so that when integration began to occur it, in my community it did not occur in ways that it did in many others.
Speaker 2: Well explain (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, we went down Over Town shopping for example.  W.T. Grant used to be a major five and dime type store.  They sold the best hot dogs in the world with a flat bun that they would toast and everything.  We all stood up at the counter to eat the hot dogs.  I guess they decided since you know we're having these difficulties no one would sit down so we all stood and ate the hot dogs at the counter and had the soda.  And I always--my mom would be with me and as I got older, girlfriends or family members.  And we had just decided we deserved to eat the hot dogs standing up just like the rest of them did.  And we weren't challenged in those ways that other--in other--that were happening in other communities.  In Greensboro [North Carolina] where everything just sort of took place and sort of boiled over and boiled out and, and ran into all of the communities, but even in high school they integrated high, a high school in Newport News [Virginia] when I was a junior or a senior.  And they selected oh, maybe half dozen to a dozen black families to enroll their children in what was then Newport News High School, it was Over Town.  I went to Huntington High School which was in my community and we saw those children go and I remember one boy, Isaac Jones I think his name was went to Newport News High School and because I was about to, in the next year or two graduate--and they picked prominent families in the community too who could sort of I guess have the clout and withstand some of the pressure because the parents in many of those families were professional people who were already operating many times in integrated situations.  So their children had some experiences maybe that those of us who had not done a lot of that because our parent--my parents weren't professional, so my world was really black.  So when they selected those families to go and in several cases the kids were athletic as well as being academically strong, so they had a different sense of mission and it was our job pretty much to stay prayed up for them and to offer whatever assistance or support we could offer to them in the community because they were our pioneers going into those situations.
Story_ID: 76049
Speaker 1: And then after graduating from Huntington High School in 1963, I went straight to Hampton U-Institute [now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  So again I was living in a very protected society and community.  Now it spilled over there in terms of our, like you said dealing with SNCC and being involved in some of the movement activities.  But I lived in a very protected world for a very long time.
Speaker 2: Now what was college life and what was Hampton Institute like 1963 that it's probably not like now?  (Unclear) there were probably rules that you all had to follow or probably--and procedures that are a little bit different from--
Speaker 1: Oh very much different.  One of their--they had many goals for us particularly at that time and they knew that they had to put a certain tight structure they felt around us for protection as well as educating us and teaching us, not just academics but social things as well.  The social component was very strong and the cultural piece was very strong.  We had Leontyne Price, from her to [HM The Honorable Jerome Butler] Jerry Butler, to what was the opera, I can't think of the name of it but operas.  All of those types of cultural events were brought to that campus.  There was a, and expect--and we had to do Vespers.  Every week you had an assigned seat and you were supposed to go to chapel on Sundays because they looked around and we thought we had assigned seats even in church but I don't think we did.  But you know they had a--they had us believing any--all those kinds of things the structure that they had and it was a good thing.  For girls we had to be in the dorm by 6 o'clock.  If you wanted to go to the library you had to sign out and be back in by 9.  We couldn't wear pants except on Saturdays.  Of course during the week if we wanted to wear pants we would wear a long trench coat and wear your pants and rolled them up so that they couldn't see them below your coat length.  And there was a dress code, there was a behavior code, social and cultural code.  As a freshman of course we had to meet on the steps of Ogden Hall every evening before dinner to sing the alma mater.  And they were just very protective.  They were very friendly.  It was a sense of community.  Dean Hawkins if you passed him on campus, hey young lady, how you doing?  How are things going for you?  And there was a sense of them taking care of every aspect of our wellbeing.  And the friendliness and the family and the boys lived on one side of the campus and the girls lived on the other.  The only time a boy could come into the dorm was when you were moving in or moving out and he was helping you to bring heavy boxes.  And if he were coming with you, you had to announce loudly "man on the hall!"  Well when you did that, all the girls ran to the door to see who the man was because we didn't get them in our building.  We could have guys come to visit us in the lobby of the dorm a couple of hours on Sunday evening and Saturday night.  There was by the time I graduated there was one white female student and she became--everybody knew Sally.  She became a cheerleader and everybody knew Sally cause she was our only white person on our campus.  We had a few white instructors and a few from other countries and other cultures.  Today Hampton is integrated from top to bottom, faculty and student body.  The integrated part of Hampton as I recall most vividly was in the masters program for administration.  Many people in the school district teachers who wanted to go into the next level of administration got their masters from there, my husband did too as a matter of fact, and encountered integration more in those graduate level courses.  But in the undergraduate day, they just weren't there, so again in sort of a very protective environment.  And it did serve well because we weren't challenged by the issues of who's better than who, who's smarter than who?  You were competing with people like you.  And you felt like you were on a more even playing field so it worked out really well for my life.  And the size of Hampton at that time was wonderful for me.   It was private school and it was a small family and that worked really well for me.  By the time I went to University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, I thought oh my goodness, the only reason I can survive here is because I got my undergraduate from Hampton and my masters from North Carolina A&T in Greensboro [North Carolina].
Story_ID: 76050
Speaker 1: Who was the president of Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University in Hampton, Virginia] and who were some of the teachers that kind of stood out that you--?
Speaker 2: Oh his first name was Jerome--oh it will come to me.
Speaker 1: Well you don't have to (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.  They used to call, his name, his nickname to his friends was Bud, but of course we never called him that.  Dr. Hicks was one of my professors.  Oh, Sopholia Parker, Dr. Parker.
Speaker 1: Can you spell her name for us?
Speaker 2: S--first name Sopholia, S-O-P-H-O-L-I-A Parker, P-A-R-K-E-R.  She was our methods teacher.  Dr. Parker was a tall, African American woman with gray hair whose posture you would think she would line herself up with a board because she was, she stood tall and straight.  And she always came to class dressed professionally and expected that from us.  When she would come to observe us in our student teaching situations she had on a suit and white gloves because she had high expectations for how professionals acted.  And at the time since we couldn't wear pants at all except on Saturday it, you didn't even own a pantsuit to wear to teach in because that just, that just wasn't so.  And on campus we had to, you had to get yourself dressed and get to transportation and the car or the van from transportation would take you to your student teaching site and you best be well dressed and well prepared with your lesson plans well done.  And when she came to see you, you were shaking in your shoes because you knew that she was expecting nothing but the best in perfection.  But at the very same time she loved us and she took care of that emotional part of us as well.  So she was a very instrumental piece.  Dr. Jerome Holland was the president at the time.  Okay, I had to--I couldn't lose that one.  But there were a lot of people--and you know who else were also important to us?  We had a dorm director that--who lived in the dorm with us and her daughter was a student there too as a matter of fact.  And she kept a real close eye on us.  And even down to the ladies who served the food in the cafeteria because they would always give you--if they knew you liked something special they'd give you a little extra of something.  And so it was really a wonderful place.  Some wonderful things happened to me at Hampton.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you majored in--?
Speaker 2: Business education.
Speaker 1: Okay, business education.
Story_ID: 76051
Speaker 1: And did you meet your husband at Hampton or you--?
Speaker 2: Actually no. I met my husband as a senior in high school.  I was presented as a debutante that year and when we met to have our first rehearsal he came as an escort for a young lady from his high school because we were representing the three black high schools in Newport News [Virginia], the one black high school in Hampton [Virginia] and the one black high school in Williamsburg [Virginia].  So young ladies were chosen, seniors were chosen from all of those schools.  So when I walked up to practice there he stood and I thought, oh my goodness, where has he been all my life?  And we met because all, all the girls and guys got to meet one another and--but at the time he had a girlfriend and my escort was a friend of mine.  So we just, we became friends and the girl that he was escorting apparently talked to him about me being a nice person for him to get to know.  And I don't know all that she said and did everything but we ended up--they took us to a lot of cultural events and one evening they took us to Norfolk [Virginia] for I don't remember the exact event, but--and out to dinner.  And they allowed us to walk through the hotel and visit the gift shop and buy things and just sort of have a leisurely good time.  And he escorted me on that tour that evening and bought me a little stuffed animal.  I thought, oh that's a good sign.  And then he sort of--we became friends that year as a senior in high school.  And then we kind of kept touching base back and forth.  He would show up in my life from time to time and the year I was a junior at Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University] we had come back from spring break and he was at Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia] and they were now on spring break.  And my buzzard rang and my roommate came, Sack--cause we called each other Sack--somebody's in the lobby to see you.  And I thought okay, and I went down and there he stood.  And he's been standing in my life ever since.  So I met him as a debutante escort.  We became engaged May of our--my senior year and we married a year later in, on June 16th, 1968.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were married when you went on to graduate school?
Speaker 2: Oh listen, I had been married a very long time.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Before I went on to grad school.  After I graduated from Hampton I worked a year in Campbell County High School in Lynchburg, Virginia.  And Edgar would commute to see me and I would come home on the bus to visit family and, and him.  And then I moved back to, we moved to Hampton.  We married that June, moved to Hampton and I taught at Kecoughtan High School, taught in the business department there.
Speaker 1: What is the name of that again?
Speaker 2: Kecoughtan, K-E-C-O-U-G-H-T-A-N, we were the Warriors.  And I was a Business Ed teacher there and Edgar was in the military because during that time it was the draft in Vietnam and we married that June and he went into the military February and was--had received an early release from [President Richard] Nixon. I think he, he wasn't in quite two years and came home just before Christmas that year.  And then we moved to Hampton and then he became a teacher at Pembroke High School, P-E-M-B-R-O-K-E High School in Hampton as a construction teacher.  He taught bricklaying and things of that nature.  So he's a bricklayer by trade but he says he's too old, much too old for that now and has been for a long time.  So he's in the Work Force Ed Department, Adult Ed Community College Department over at Penn State University now.  But--and it's been a really wonderful part of my life.  He's a fantastic husband and a great dad.
Story_ID: 76052
Speaker 1: But I had been married, all three of our children were--we--college, high school and middle school so I went back to school in 1993.  I got my doctorate in '98 [1998].  So I went to [North Carolina] A&T [University, Greensboro, North Carolina], did that for a little, a year and two summers, was getting ready to go back to work and a friend suggested I should go to Chapel Hill to the doctoral program and I said oh no, I'm ready to go back to work because I was going, I was in a--going back as an assistant principal.  So I ended up having an interview with the Department Chair of Educational Leadership and they invited me to join that program, so I did that and I graduated from there in '98 [1998].
Speaker 2: Okay.  That seems so--you kind of pushed us through it pretty--kind of fast (unclear).  But there, did, there any challenges involved in doing that?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, quite a few.  But because I have such a loving and supportive husband and loving and supportive children we sort of got through some of those hard places.  Actually after 1971 our first son was born and I was teaching at Kecoughtan High School and Edgar was still at Pembroke [High School] and the year--he was born September 12th so I stayed out that year to stay home with him.  And during that time Edgar started I believe graduate school at Hampton to get his masters in administration.  So once he completed that and I stayed out that year and then I went back to Kecoughtan to teach.  In 1974, Edgar decided he wanted to go to school to get his doctorate and I thought, oh my goodness you know we had bought a house, we had a child, we were both working hard and teaching school, high school.  And I thought, okay, thought okay, where did this come from?  And--but he's a person with a lot of vision, he's a visionary and he had some--his eyes and his heart set on doing some things and accomplishing some things.  So he announced that he wanted to go back to graduate school and when he told me the two choices I thought oh my goodness, they're not in Virginia.  Keeping in mind I'd never really--I'd taken trips outside of Virginia of course but to live away from there and my family was foreign to me.  So that was sort of difficult.  And the day we put the sign, the for sale sign in the house and the yard, my sister in law were taking a drapery making course cause I'm a seamstress and a crafts person.  So I was going to, I was making drapes for the house so we were taking this course and as I backed out of the yard and looked at the sign, I just lost it because I couldn't imagine selling our home and moving away from the rest of my family.  But he convinced me that he would take care of me and get me back there one day.  So in 1974, we came to visit Penn State [University, State College, Pennsylvania] and Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] and he selected Penn State.  So in the fall of '74 [1974], we came up here to live actually and it was a very different kind of place then.  Coming through the mountains getting here was just traumatic for me but as a wife you're trying to be supportive and you're trying to hold everything together.  And I'm thinking, oh my god, who's going to ever come up here to see us and how will I ever get out of here to go home?  But because he knew he married my mama's baby and because he loved me a lot, they were on a quarter system.  At the end of every quarter he took me to Newport News [Virginia] to visit, sometimes even in between.  And while we were--so for ten years during that stretch of him going back to school, finishing a program here, we had a son here, Eric, E-R-I-C Ian Farmer was born here in 1976 and I worked in the human development department as a secretary in the mornings while the older son was in the daycare program and I would pick him up and we would come home.  But for base--we lived here for three years on campus and they just tore down those apartments this past year.  We--and we lived there for three years. And then when Edgar graduated he took a position at Temple University so we moved to Willingboro, New Jersey.  But for about ten years I didn't really work outside the home because when we were--we had children in three different states and just getting acclimated and getting all the services that you need and sort of maintaining a household in new places for about ten years I didn't work outside the home.
Story_ID: 76053
Speaker 1: So during that time he [her husband, Edgar Farmer] taught at Temple [University].  We lived in New Jersey for two years. He was offered a job at North Carolina A&T [University].  We moved there and we stayed there for five years and that's where our youngest child, Becky, was born in Greensboro [North Carolina].  And while there I think I worked on campus a minute while I was pregnant with Becky and then after Becky was born I was the administrative assistant to Bob Childs, at the time, President of Greensboro National Bank and that was a black bank in Greensboro.  That was an interesting experience for me and for our family too because we had been at Penn State for three years and then living in New Jersey.  And that was the most integrated my world had ever been.  And when we lived here [State College, Pennsylvania] that first stint, any time we left home and we were riding or walking, if I saw someone black I said Bay, stop, I might know them.  He would say, Bay, you know you don't.  I said, but I just might, just that hungry for someone who looks like me.  And first time really being away from home and my immediate family and trying to get a sense of self and who I was in this place.  And in the meantime of course Edgar's taking classes and going about his business just working hard and doing those kinds of things and taking very good care of us but it's like okay, what am I going to be and who am I going to be while we go through this?  So we started attending church on campus.  There was a black Christian Fellowship and we started attending that and we became friends with some of the people in that.  And when we came back to live this time our minister was one of the people, he and his wife, that we became friends with like twenty-eight years ago and he's now our pastor.  So it was a very different place then and even as we lived on campus I think there were two black families in Eastview Terrace where we lived and one black family in the other graduate housing across the highway.  And it was interesting trying to become a part of that graduate student community because there weren't any--many people who looked like me.
Story_ID: 76054
Speaker 1: But when I worked at Kecoughtan High School, I want to jump back a minute to give you some support for my getting acclimated when we moved to Penn State.  I started teaching in 1969 at Kecoughtan High School and that was the year they integrated that high school's staff and they brought in about fifteen of us to integrate us into the staff of over a hundred people.  And that was a, that was a real interesting time because remember up until that time my life had been pretty sheltered.  So okay, what do we do with this?  Well because I was I think pretty confident in my abilities and my competence that helped of course.  And one of the good things I've discovered in any of the situations we've been in that have been integrated, there's always been someone who rises with a heart to embrace people no matter what.  And we've really been blessed that those people have risen out of the dust of all the people there to come and, and let you know that you can connect with me even though we don't look alike and maybe our cultures are different, we can still connect because we're people and we're human beings and we care about the same kinds of things and we can care about one another.  So I found a core group of people like that at Kecoughtan, not the principal however.  One day I was, at the beginning of the school year I went into the office to get some papers and he looked at me and said, young lady go to the auditorium.  We'll be, we'll be there soon to fix your schedules--because all of the new kids were in the auditorium working with the counselors to get their schedules taken care of.
Speaker 2: He thought you were--
Speaker 1: He thought I was a student.  And the dean of girls came running out of her office, no, no Mr. Ballard.  She's not a student.  She's one of your new teachers.  And I just sort of stood there and he said oh.  He said what's your name?  So I told him.  And it was interesting cause that--it still didn't quite stop there.  I was walking down the hall one day and here comes Mr. Ballard, he stopped me, he says, do you teach French?  I said, no.  Do you teach Spanish?  I said no.  And then he asked me one other question. I said, no I don't teach that either.  So he said what do you teach?  And I said I teach Business Ed.  He said, oh well I need a foreign language teacher.  I said well then I'm not your person.  Because he, he never made the connection.  He--it was forced on him and he implemented the process that was put in place on him.  But I became sponsor of the Pep Club and I worked with the senior class and got involved so that--but never had any trouble connecting with the children, never.  Had high expectations of them but they knew I loved them and would do anything for them to be successful so never had any trouble connecting with children.  And the adults, those that didn't make the connection then I left them out of my circle.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I made that very clear.
Story_ID: 76055
Speaker 1: Observing this interview have been Edgar I. Farmer, Sr., Becky E. Farmer, Bob Allen and a reporter from the Centre Daily Times here in State--
Speaker 2: College.
Speaker 1: --College, Pennsylvania.  So let's return.  Now after you left the first, that first school you were moving I saw to another--
Speaker 2: Okay, after I left Kecoughtan [High School] and after we left here after graduate school, after living in New Jersey for two years we moved to Greensboro [North Carolina].  That was a really interesting time in our lives and a turning point I think too for many things.  Becky was born there.  I started working at Greensboro National Bank.  That was a wonderful experience because it was black owned and operated and I was administrative assistant and I learned a lot about finances and people. But in that area of Greensboro, they used to call it Black Wall Street because that strip where the bank was had--was all black businesses.  There was a pharmacist, pediatrician, an M.D., savings and loan, restaurants, beauty salons and then the university, North Carolina A&T State University was couched right in the midst of all of that.  During our stay there we became active in the community there but again in the black community, I did.  My husband branched out even farther.  He worked at the university and he was also Chairman of the Board of the Hayes Taylor YMCA.  So we became a big Y-family.  And as far--again into a very secluded sort of cocoon, protective environment because we offer--and I worked on campus as secretary for the biology department.  So we did university things and we did Y-things.  The Y activities when Edgar would do Metro Board Y-type activities, then we were more involved in integrated activities.  But again, and our church was in Danville, Virginia which was an hour ride from Greensboro.  So we made that ride every Sunday and sometimes during the week for church services and again that was in a small black community, a rural community in Danville.  The children went to integrated schools.  Now the younger son--
Speaker 1: When--about what year?
Speaker 2: This is 1979 to 1984.  Our younger son went to a magnet elementary school so he was in an integrated situation but he had a black teacher.  Our older son was in a middle school that was in the black community so that was a black middle school that was integrated with busing white children in.  And Bess--Becky was at the babysitter's because she was a little girl at that time.  But--and we lived in a black, professional community there, Benbow Park.  So we sort of--
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Benbow, B-E-N-B-O-W.  So we stayed on the southeast end of town in the African American area.  We had friends of course who lived everywhere but our world still--and my husband coached base--softball, base, little league baseball so that was in the black community park where we lived.  And of course our shopping was integrated because the malls and all those kinds of things but our world was still basically a segregated world.
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet Mr. McCain [Franklin Eugene McCain] or any of the, the people involved in that original sit in, in Greensboro then, you know in--?
Speaker 2: I only met--no, um-um.  No.  Met Jesse Jackson at one of the events and it might have been graduation or something at A&T one time but--cause he's an Aggie. And his wife and I graduated from the same high school.  As a matter of fact her sister and I graduated together Connie Brown.  And Jackie I think was a year or two ahead of us.  But no, never did meet any of those particular people.  But rich heritage in that Greensboro area and you didn't live there without knowing the history and, and knew people involved in the movement who are now businessmen, professional businessmen in that community who had their stories to tell.  But again, they have paved the way in Greensboro for so many wonderful things to happen.  But maybe by choice, I still kept, my world was still pretty much a black world, an African American situation.  So--but it was fine for us.  And we would go out for activities either for my husband or my children.  And because I wasn't really working outside the home, I was working at the bank, the customers were primarily black, the Board of Trustees, so my world was really, pretty much about the same color, one color there.  After we left Greensboro then Edgar was offered a job at North Carolina A&T State University and we moved to Raleigh [North Carolina].  My movement is around my husband's job so this is how my life has been changing and evolving into what it is today.
Story_ID: 76056
Speaker 1: And in 1984, we moved to Raleigh, North Carolina and I started teaching at Athens Drive High School, A-T-H-E-N-S, and the principal there was Johnny Farmer.  And after interviewing at a couple of schools I was offered a job there as a computer teacher.  So that was great.  I had a good time but I grew a lot there in terms of becoming more actively involved in an integrated world because Athens Drive was a, was an integrated school.  The principal was black.  The assistant principals were both white, a white male, white female and the faculty and staff was integrated.  But even in the midst of that we were still in the minority in terms of number.  But I grew by leaps and bounds professionally and became an--more active community person.  My principal saw something in me and would encourage me to be involved in certain kinds of trainings and represent the school in certain activities.  So I ended up being the teacher recruiter for my high school for the state.  The State of North Carolina created a scholarship, North Carolina Teaching Fellows, where they are growing their own teachers.  And the North Carolina Teaching Fellow Scholarship had teacher representatives at the high schools throughout the state.  So I was the rep for my school and I ended up doing in-services and trainings throughout the state.  And of course my world became very much integrated at that point.  But I believed that all of the segregated part of my life strengthened me, gave me the confidence and the wherewithal of knowing who I was so that I could forge out into those areas and do the things I was called to do.  And I discovered that all of those things, I was kind of not outspoken but speak out, and I--and that was interesting for me because as the youngest child in my family I sort of had a place there and I was not that kind of person.  But as you begin to see your world and how it changes and how people are not interacting in positive ways and not being kind to one another and mankind and that we're all a part of the human race, I found myself thrust into situations where I was either called for or sent to speak on behalf of somebody.  And I thought okay, we can do this.  And I found for example we at that time received five professional leave days a year as an educator.  One year I used twenty-five because I was either called to do trainings because I taught computer literacy but I also taught a class called Peer Discovery and it was sort of like teaching counseling kids to students and then training them.  And then the second semester they would go out to the, our feeder elementary and middle schools and do the training.  Well I became a trainer for that and I became a trainer of trainers for different kinds of educational initiatives.  And the more that I--and I was on a committee, my principal put me on a committee where the governor was--can't think of the name of it.  It's been so long.  But people throughout the state met with the governor and his task force.  It was a task force.  So I found myself in situations and in groups emerging as a leader and people said, well Barbara you tell them.  Well you, you share what we believe or what we think.  I thought, we can--any of us can do that.  No Barbara, you do it.  And that began to happen to me a lot so I thought, okay, we, we'll work this out.  And as a result of that I became involved in some leadership type programs that my school district supported and then I began speaking at churches and other community events and I've evolved into realizing that a part of my responsibility or a part of my mission is to make sure people understand that as a people we're just as deserving, just as qualified and just as needed and not just by other African Americans but by other races and other cultures.
Story_ID: 76057
Speaker 1: My, in my experience I've come to understand that white children need to see me as much as black children need to see me and know that I do the things that I do.  They need to see my husband in the role that he's in and doing the things that he does.  And one of the pieces that has come out of this is that I also have three children who came up in a very different way than I did.  So not only was I evolving as a person in the midst of integrated situations, but my children were living and trying to survive in the midst of them and evolving into people whose background is very different from mine.  And that was another part of my training and I don't want to say shock but another part of the training for me as a person in my, even in my home where my personal life takes place.  And one day, oh I don't know how many years ago I, I was with my children and we were having fun because they're wonderful adults to be around.  Well they've always been wonderful and I like them a lot.   And we were teasing and I said you know what the problem is?  I figured out something.  I've been trying to raise you with a 50s [1950s] head in the 90s [1990s] and it's just not working real well is it?  They all laughed and looked at each other and said, you know mom, we figured that out but we were waiting for you to catch up and catch on.  So when I realized that I thought, okay.  So a sense of release of them to be the best people that they can be where they are.  At one point I was sharing with a friend who is African American about some concerns about my, my--particularly my daughter being here because she graduated from State College High School and there are no African American teachers, no African American personnel at all in that building.  And she had come from a very integrated high school that we lived in Raleigh [North Carolina] four blocks from the school and her brothers graduated from there and she was known there and she, even when she wasn't in high school she was at the activities because her brothers played sports.  So she was having a very good time in her high school with people who looked like her and who didn't and all of these people from the boys and Becky were in and out of our homes.  We lived in an integrated neighborhood.  So I had to also shift some gears and realize that it was also a big part of my entire life.  My husband's job and my job, we met people that we connected heart to heart.  And many times when I speak I often tell people some of my best friends really are white.  And that sort of throws them because that's one of the trademark statements that sometimes people of other races will say to us, give us a comfort that they know about blackness.  So I sort of reverse that on them.  But in actuality its, it is so true.  When we were in Raleigh we met some wonderful neighbors and friends that we still visit and they visit us today and they're a part of our extended family.  So you progress to stages of identify and knowing and trying to bring other people through stages of identity and knowing who they are.  And recently my husband and I were engaged in some training about white identity theory and trying to get a particular audience to understand that there are phases to that for them as there are part--as there is a part for us and some stages that we too evolved through even as we try to navigate in a society that has long rejected us and now we're forging our own path at even a greater pace.  And then now we're faced with some political things that sort of get in the way of that.  But all of that has evolved out of the history of who I am in my life.  And because I have been so loved and so supported you feel an even greater commitment and need to do the things that you have to do.  So at Athens I began becoming involved in those types of things, even was the baccalaureate speaker for the high school seniors one year because a peer saw something in what she thought I embodied as someone to speak to some of the issues.  And again that makes you, that strengthens you even, when people see that you are willing and committed to making a difference, not just for your people but for other people as well.
Story_ID: 76058
Speaker 1: So after we left there, while teaching in Athens [Drive High School], that's when the graduate school situation surfaced in my life.  I had been teaching and loving it.  I love teenagers.  I--just they're most, some of the most wonderful people in the world.  And the administrators in my building though would frequently say you need to go to grad school and get your certification for administration cause you need to be an administrator.  And I thought that sounds real good but I have three children at home and at the time my father was also living with us.  He had come up from Newport News [Virginia], had been ill and he lived with us about three and a half years.  So he was even there with that time.   I was sort of taking care of him, us sort of taking care of him.  And my response was if you believe in prayer, you pray because I don't want to do graduate school and try to teach school and take care of my family at the same thing.  I just don't think I can handle all of that.  So they would chuckle and say okay, okay cause we want you in administration.  So I thought okay, but I was very happy being a classroom teacher because I was getting to do the things I enjoyed doing.  And one morning on the way to work, my car was in the shop and my husband was taking me to work and I was sharing with him some of the things that you know were happening at work and in my life and he said, why don't you quit work and go to grad school.  And I said, and what are we going to do with all--about all the things that we take care of and the things that we do, how are we going to manage those?  He said, I'll take care of that, you take care of school.  And I thought, okay.  Well in the interim, I had, I was working with a leadership committee for the North Carolina Teaching Fellows and at a retreat I met the Dean of the Graduate School at a College in Raleigh.  And she had said Barbara why don't you come over and get into a program we're going to start for teachers and professionals who want to do administration?  And she was Native American because my first response was, now you know at Meredith [College, Raleigh, North Carolina] ya'll are not known for treating black folks real well and I don't know if I want to take that risk.  And she said oh no, things are really good there and she had been doing--she had been quite successful there and they were trying to bring some changes there.  So I said okay.  Well, after my husband made the statement about quitting work, I wrote a letter of resignation, took it to the assistant principal and she's--and just in time for her to get it down to central office so that I could get the leave of absence.  So after I had taken care of all that, I went to Meredith College to meet with the Dean and when I started the conversation, she said I am so sorry but the program we thought we were going to be implementing is not going to happen this year.  I thanked her, lovely woman I thank--Mary Johnson, Dr. Mary Johnson is her name and a wonderful lady and I thought oh my goodness.  I'm sitting there composed and my mind is racing, what am I going to do?  So I went outside to get in the van to drive home and I will take a risk and share with this with you.  The voice of the Lord said to me, find your husband and do exactly what he says to do.  And I'm thinking okay, I certainly hope you gave him a good word for me because I need to know what I'm doing.  I've quit my job, there's no program, what am I supposed to do?  So I got home and I called him and I told him and he said just relax, it will be okay.  And he said you'll go to [North Carolina] A&T [State University].  I said which one, cause I lived in Raleigh.  He said the one in Greensboro.  There isn't but that one.  I said and how am I supposed to get here cause at the time we--it was an hour and a half away.  He said you will drive.  And I thought, I think you're confused.  You go back again and see what the lord is telling you.  Then you come back and tell me what I'm supposed to do.  So he chuckled and he said I'll come home.  So he came home and he said I will clear my schedule and we will go to A&T.  Well since we lived there for five years and he worked there he took me to see Dr. Henry Cameron who was the Department Chair at that time of Ed Admin.  And Edgar and Henry sat there and planned my schedule for A&T as I'm watching.  It was sort of like an out of body experience and I'm thinking they are planning a part of my life and I'm just watching it happen.  There's a, there's a problem with this picture.  So as we were, as they were finishing up, he turns to me, okay you'll be taking these two courses this summer and this is the plan, dah-dah, dah-dah, dah-dah, and I'm shaking Henry's hand and we're leaving.  And I said okay, all that's all well and good but you work at NC State, we live in Raleigh, how am I supposed to get to this school to go to class every day.  He says, it will be all right.  You can drive yourself.  And I thought, you're talking to a woman who's the youngest in her family, always somebody taking care of her and being real good to her and sort of looking out for her in many ways.  And I'm thinking drive to Greensboro every day.  I don't understand that yet.
Story_ID: 76059
Speaker 1: So, we go home and I'm trying to make all this, process all this.  Well, then he added another piece to the puzzle.  Why don't you take Becky with you because they have camps there?  We looked into a camp while we were there and there's a camp that Becky can start when you start summer school.  I thought it's enough taking me, you want me to take the child with me on a road that I'm not even good at--all these things going through my mind.  And he says you'll be all right.  Took Becky with me and we had one of those Chevy conversion vans at that time. We would get up 5:30, get dressed, go through Hardee's just when they open, get breakfast, hit the highway.  Becky would get me straight with my food and she'd take a nap.  Took her there the first day and I said okay Lord, if I'm supposed to be doing graduate school then when I pick Becky up this afternoon at 5 o'clock, her face will let me know if we're to continue this.  So I did my two classes and I thought this is so hard and I've driven all day to get here.  Well when I went to pick Becky up I was sitting in the van watching the kids come out of the, the gym and here comes Becky at that time I think she was in 6th, 6th or 7th grade, coming across the street locked arm and arm with two other girls.  I thought, oh my goodness, she's had a great day.  I guess we're staying.  And she actually connected with the daughter of one of my husband's former co-workers at [North Carolina] A&T [State University] and--but she didn't know that we knew them.  So she--it was a growing summer for her because that was her summer of being with her people because she had always been in integrated situations except for preschool.  So she had a blast.  She was on the newspaper staff, she--they had a wonderful experience for them, excuse me, that summer from like 8:30 in the morning till 5 o'clock.  Becky grew by leaps and bounds and so did her mother taking graduate courses.  And then after that because we had the children and all the other doctor care and all the medical care for kids, I went back to the school system, Wade County Public School System in Raleigh and was invited to take a job as a, an assistant to the Sims Tech in one of the middle schools and that was wonderful because that's also where I did my internship for my degree.  And the lady I worked for was outstanding.  I learned so much from her about being an administrator and I would leave that building a couple of days a week and hit [Interstate] 85 and go to Greensboro and take my classes and come back.
Story_ID: 76060
Speaker 1: As I was graduating I had a couple of principals call to interview me as an assistant principal.  And this is when one of my former peers at the high school who was coming out of [University of North Carolina] Chapel Hill said, oh no you need to go to Chapel Hill and get your doctorate.  I said I don't think you understand.  I've been out of work for so many years.  I need to go to work.  My family needs me to go to work.  So she said oh no you can do that.  And I said besides I can't do that.  I'm--I, I just can't do it.  I didn't have confidence then in my academic ability I don't think.  Doctorate, that just seemed bigger than life.  So she gave me the Department Chair's name, Dr. Hermanowicz (phonetic}.  She said call him and talk to him.  He's a nice guy.  So when I called I couldn't get him.  So I went home and I made the mistake of telling my husband.  I said I can't do it.  He said why?  You need to do it.  I said can't do it.  Dr. Hermanowicz, couldn't get him.  So that means I'm not supposed to do it.  He said okay, well let me have the number.  Well again he set up an appointment for me for us to go see Dr. Hermanowicz and after the conversation Dr. Hermanowicz, oh yeah you need to be in this program.  Well I thought somebody's losing their mind here because I need to go to work for my family's sake and all of those pieces as well as get back into the work force, but ended up going to Chapel Hill, got shingles the first year though cause it was so stressful trying to drive to Chapel Hill from Raleigh.  My dad as I said was with us and I had three children at different levels, college, high school, middle school and just trying to live life.
Speaker 2: How long a drive is Chapel Hill from Raleigh?
Speaker 1: Forty-five minutes to an hour, depending upon traffic.  But I, you know when you're in a hurry and stressed, you do it in forty-five, forty minutes.  So I did that.  The first year we had to be a part of the campus scene so we--I was in a cohort of ten and I was a Z. Smith Reynolds Fellow.  So I did that and met some wonderful people there and after a year there your internship was to go to back to work.  So I went to Fred A. Olds Elementary School in Wade County and became the assistant principal for the day school and the director of the extended day program that--it was a magnet school.  And while I was there before that year was up I was called to be an assistant principal at another school in the district and I worked there a year and while I was doing those two jobs, I was commuting to Chapel Hill finishing classes and then I took some classes at NC State which was right around the corner from one of the schools that--where I was working.  And my husband and my children rose to the challenge of cooking, all the things that you need to do, have done, they took charge and part in all of those things and--so that I could do this program.  And even my dad, I would come home some evenings and he would be sitting in a chair with his hat and coat on.  I'd say, what's up dad?  We are taking you out to dinner.  You've worked hard today.  You don't need to cook.  So even he played a part and he would be there for my daughter to come home from school so someone would be in the house with her.  So they all just sort of embraced what I was doing and got me through it.
Speaker 2: That's wonderful.
Speaker 1: So it's been--I've been loved a lot and my life, I've been blessed a whole lot in my life.  I have a wonderful husband who saw the value in the things that I was doing and supported those things and whatever it took he did.  So I'm real pleased with who he is in my life as well.
Story_ID: 76061
Speaker 1: And then after the [UNC] Chapel Hill experience I had done all of my coursework.  Edgar [her husband, Edgar Farmer] was offered a job here and I didn't realize it until the second time that it had occurred because the first time when he was talking with whomever about coming here I was at a critical point in my program at Chapel Hill and Becky and the boys were at critical points in their educational process so he knew that was not a good time.  And after the boys were settled, one had graduated from Chapel Hill so he stayed an extra year so his brother would have a roommate.  They had an apartment together.  He asked Becky and me what would it take for the two of us to come to State College [Pennsylvania] and have that be successful for us?  And he offered to commute because he knew it was a difficult time in our lives trying to pack up and move and I think my daughter said something very wonderful.  She said well dad, we've never lived apart before so why should we start now?  And I said to her, the Lord is going to honor your sacrifice for giving your dad that kind of support.  So we moved here in the summer of '96 [1996].  The day that--Edgar was already here that summer and on July 9th, I believe it was, my dad died that morning, I went to Central Office and resigned my job.  No, Edgar was still in Raleigh, I take that back.  And the next day, put Edgar on a plane to go to Europe with some graduate students and my two children who were home and I went to Newport News [Virginia] to bury my dad.  That was a tough transition for us.  And we moved up here in August of '96 [1996], got Becky enrolled in school and that was not the easiest time because she was a junior.  But she didn't give us grief.  She did well and some of the things that she thought were important for her life occurred in her life here.  She was a cheerleader, she was in the homecoming court, she got to go to Nationals for cheering and she met some neat people.  And a part of what helped us to come back too, again remember I mentioned the church we were in twenty-eight years ago?  Well now it was a bona fide church situated on a corner of its own and our dear friend was now the pastor, he and his wife.  And there was a youth group of teenagers her age at church.  I think the year she graduated from State [College] High there was at least six to eight of them who graduated together that year.  So she had a sense of community in terms of blackness but she also at the high school the receptivity to her presence was also positive in an integrated environment because she had grown up that way.  I was talking to a friend about reflecting on my life and had we done our children a disservice by not giving them an opportunity to grow up in a segregated situation as we had?  We could have done more of that had we stayed in Newport News [Virginia] if no more than being around our family because we have, we come from a very large family and our church.  So we could have kind of kept them close but we've moved and been involved in so many other people's families and situations.  And she said to me--and this--she's an African American.  She said to me, oh no, we need people like your children who can move in and out of any part of society and help people to come to understand what living life is all about and what relationships among people are all about.  And that was very affirming for me because I know throughout our moving there were times I would question the situations that we were putting them into and where they had to learn how to live in and how to survive.  And they have come home many a day with hurts that they would not have experienced if they had grown up in the type of world that we had.  But we used those hurts to help them learn more about life and people and how to survive and how to make a difference.  So it's been working so far.
Story_ID: 75778
Speaker 1: Tell me about how you became the first black principal in Centre County.
Speaker 2: Well the first year we were here, I did not work outside the home because I was doing the research for my dissertation and trying to help be there to be supportive of our daughter getting acclimated being here.  So since my days were open I started volunteering at the high school and there I met a school counselor, Karen Stoehr.  Karen's last name is S-T-O-E-H-R.  And Karen and I connected almost immediately.  And in interacting she discovered some of the things that I used to do and the trainings that I've had and she asked me if I would make a presentation to the district's diversity committee.  Thought, okay I can do that.  And a member of that committee at the time was the former superintendent, Bill [William] Opdenhoff, O-P-D-E-N-H-O-F-F, I believe.  And Dr. Opdenhoff was a part of that committee so I did my preparation and I went to their meeting and I made my presentation on diversity.  After that I got a call, I received a call from his secretary Elaine Skidel, S-K-I-D-E-L, to be a part of that committee, the diversity, the district's diversity committee and I thought okay, I'd like that.  And I became involved in that and we were preparing for the Martin Luther King in service day and we were having a well rounded diversity program.  I mean we covered the spectrum from one end to the other.  And the meetings and preparation for that became interesting.  I was the only black professional person.  There was a black student, Gary Abdullah, A-B-D-U-L-L-A-H.  Just an aside, Gary's parents were students here the first time I lived here and they've been here ever since.  So Gary is now a senior at Penn State [University] but at the time he was a high school sophomore maybe and he was a part of the committee.  And as I sat there listening to the issues we were discussing and how many times people weren't reality based about how people lived life outside of the Happy Valley and I found myself speaking to that and every now and then Gary or someone else.  And then I made, I forged friendships on the committee and Gary said, "Okay, Mrs. Farmer you need to help.  You need to help them."  He'd lean over and say, "Help them understand."  And then I'd have somebody else say, "Barbara please help them understand that."  And I began to be a broker for people understanding and hearing each other's voices many times.  And then when they wouldn't, I stepped outside of character every now and then to have my voice heard and that was necessary.  And Bill and I formed a friendship and a relationship during that time so as--and that in-service year in preparation for it was very volatile in many, many ways, and our meetings ended up like that many times.  But you know I kept going back because I was determined.  Oh another couple, Claudia Hutchinson was a part of it, black female, and her husband Dave Hutchinson is a white guy and wonderful people.  I've known them for almost, from when I lived here the first time too.  So we found ourselves in the midst of people who had good intentions, I must say that, the right heart and good intentions and good direction for what they wanted to do and provide for district personnel and students.  But if not having lived a certain kind of life or even been exposed to people who have lived that life, sometimes I found myself being a clarifier of whatever, whatever was needed at the time.  Toward the end of that year I said to Bill, "You know I'm going to be coming to see you for a job so--because I need to go to work."  He said, "Haven't you been able to tell that I've been courting you and hoping that you would do that?"  And I said, "Okay, I like that."  So he said, "Call my secretary and make an appointment."  Make a long story short, he offered me a job as an administrator in the district and the interviewing process was interesting.  I interviewed with him, interviewed with the parent committee and my PTA president at the time was on that committee, and some other district personnel.  And then I interviewed with the district's A team, walked into a room and I think there were about thirteen people.  I thought whoa, we can do this.  So the training that I had had made the difference for me in that.  And was my being African American a part of that?   I've been asked that question in presentations that I make at the university or anywhere around town or in the State of Pennsylvania and I say that they saw a qualified person who happened to be black and that's why they chose me.  Am I wise enough to understand that that had a big part of it?  Of course.
Story_ID: 75779
Speaker 1: And Bill [Opdenhoff] and I had conversations so it wasn't--that wasn't-- but what I saw was an opportunity to make a difference for children and for people with whom I worked.  And what was really I think heart moving for me, I was walking campus one day with my husband.  We had gone--I was over there visiting him.  We'd gone to get ice cream and some of the people from my church walked up to me.  Dr. Audrey Kareem was one of them.  Her last name is K-A-R-E-E-M, and someone else.  And they said to me, do you know how proud we are?  They said we have been praying for years for the--some black Administrators and black teachers to be in this school district and you are an answer to our prayer.  I thought whoa, and I felt the weight of that.  And then people even on my job--I had another co-worker who said to me, and this is a white female, you are an answer to my prayer.  I thought okay, I'm glad to be here.  And I must say that I have been very well received and supported in this school district.  I have been called on to do certain kinds of tasks and jobs and presentations and to represent the district in different places and for whatever reason, but always with a level of integrity and support.  And my supervisors are Cameron Bausch, B-A-U-S-C-H, and the superintendent is [sneezing] excuse me, Patricia Best.  And I have grown so much in knowing them.  They are outstanding human beings.  They happen to be white but they are outstanding human beings.  And I have grown tremendously in this district and I think I've made a difference for the people here.  One of the things that really warms my heart is my babies don't care what color I am.  And it is always amazing to me when they do art or--in their classes or whatever and they draw pictures of me.  Now they get my jewelry and my hair right but sometimes I'm, I don't have any color at all.  Sometimes I'm a pretty brown.  Sometimes I'm other colors but they embrace me every morning I'm at that door.  They come hugging and loving and we do that and the people with whom I work have embraced my presence.  Do they know that I'm black?  Without a doubt because I also made, make it known, have made it known and will continue to make it known I'm not going to lose who I am.  I think about what W.E.B. Dubois [William Edward Burghardt Dubois] said about fitting in without fading out and that's my--that's who I am.  I'm fitting in here because I'm a professional person.  I'm the Administrator.  I've been assigned the task of taking care of people's children.  I believe no matter where I've ever worked people send us the very best children that they have.  It doesn't matter where they come from, whether socio economic background, color, culture or any of those things.  Even before I came to this place I was dealing with children and because I believe so adamantly about us giving children the very best that we have and providing for them, the variables of race and all of those pieces don't get in my way, but nor do I let the fact that I'm African American get in their way.  And I'm going to--and I tell them I've been that all my life and I will always be that and I'm very proud and pleased about that, and I walk with my head high in that way.  And whenever I'm out either representing the district or myself or my family, I carry the same mantle of trying to make a difference and getting people to hear with their hearts as well as their heads that we can all make a difference and make it a better place.
Story_ID: 75780
Speaker 1: What do you see as your legacy here at this point?  You're still young so (unclear) point, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Leaving them with a sense of knowing that relationships are the most important thing and those relationships will occur among people who look different, sound different, come from different places.  But if we're all for the same purpose of taking care of children and making a difference in the world that they will inherit, then we have to do a better job of looking after and taking care of one another and embracing each other.
Story_ID: 75781
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered after all of this journey is over?
Speaker 2: As a person who loved the babies that were in her charge, embraced the people who helped her to take care of them and was a hugging, loving person.
Speaker 1: Well, Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 75782
Speaker 1: I'm doing the morning message.
Speaker 2: Where?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay so this is you, when and where, what's the time?  If you remember or just give a general time frame if you know remember.  The decade or you know 70s [1970s], 80s [1980s], 90s [1990s], last year?
Speaker 2: Nineties.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineties, doing the morning message.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, and where was this?
Speaker 2: I'm trying--at my church and I can't think of the name of it.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) golly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  It'll probably come back.
Speaker 1: Yeah it'll come back.
Speaker 2: Oh that's awful.
Speaker 1: Okay, how about this one?
Speaker 2: That's my graduation picture from Hampton University, my senior class picture.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Can we be so invasive as to ask the year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Sixty-Seven.
Speaker 1: Okay great, next.
Speaker 2: That's my mom and my dad, John and Rebecca Wilson.
Speaker 1: About what year was is taken?
Speaker 2: Goodness, twenty years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1982.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next please.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's my husband and I after I did a morning message (laughter).  It's another Sunday morning message.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, how long ago do you suppose?
Speaker 1: Nineties, early Nineties.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  All righty, next.
Speaker 1: Hooding ceremony, University of Chapel--North Carolina Chapel Hill.
VIDEOGRAPHER: 	Okay, who, who's in that photo and what year?
Speaker 1: Nineteen Ninety-Eight, is it Byrd, Dr. Byrd?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Like taking a test isn't it?
Speaker 1: It is!  It's not Byrd though.  It's the Dean of the Graduate School-
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: --of Educational Leadership, Dean of the Graduate School, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay. VIDEOGRAPHER:  That'll work.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That's Becky and me. (BRIEF INTERRUPTION)
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, go ahead please.
Speaker 2: That's Becky and me in a happy moment in our home in Raleigh.  It was on a calendar in North Carolina.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And what year?  Guess if you don't know exactly.
Speaker 2: I'm going to tell you in a minute.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  It doesn't have a date does it Larry?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Ninety-Six.  Ninety?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, we're saying 19--
Speaker 1: In the early 90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Early 90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Early 90s [1990s].  Oh, I didn't know I should--I didn't know I needed to have that for you.  I would have, I'm sorry.  First Congregational was the church.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, the church that we've been going through where she was giving (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  First Congregational.
VIDEOGRAPHER:   Okay, and now this is what town?
Speaker 1: Raleigh, North Carolina.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, great.
Speaker 1: UCC.  Oh my goodness.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  Good work, good work.  Congratulations.
Speaker 1: I'm older that ya'll.  I have to dig deeper.  That's Becky and me, just a Christmas photo from two years ago.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, so 2000?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Next.
Speaker 1: That's my baby.  Family portrait same year.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Those are my wonderful children.
Speaker 2: Their names?
Speaker 1: Red, Becky B-E-C-K-Y, the tall with the glasses is Edgar Jr. and the shorter son is Eric.
Speaker 2: And your husband is Edgar.
Speaker 1: Edgar.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Edgar, Sr.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Great.  Next.
Speaker 1: That's just to capture us both in our academic regalia.  That's Dr. and Dr. Farmer, how's that?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  What year?
Speaker 2: Nine--uh, 2001--2, 2002.  We just did that, 2002.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  (Unclear) okay, great next.
Speaker 2: It's me at First Congregational again, morning speaker.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, time frame?
Speaker 2: Late Nineties.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: I went back for that one.  I got invited back.  Oh, that's one of my favorites.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right go ahead.
Speaker 2: Debutante, Becky's debutante ball, 1998.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, and who's the other person there with you?
Speaker 2: Jeanette Hardin, J-E, I mean last--Jeanette, J-E-A-N-E-T-T-E  H-A-R-D-I-N.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  That was one of your friends, your three musketeers, right?
Speaker 2: No.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  No, different?
Speaker 2: No.  Uh-
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Wasn't one of those Jeanette?
Speaker 2: One of my best--good.  Jeanette was, is one of my best friends.
Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 2: But this is--she graduated with Becky.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: And her dad is the only black on the School Board here.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Okay?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Great.  All right we got that one.  Next.
Speaker 2: That's me doing a-
VIDEOGRAPHER:  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I know.  That's Park Forest Baptist Church and I'm presenting to a women's group.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  I thought maybe you were talking to kids.
Speaker 2: No, I was talking to women.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Classic, okay kids--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  I have a women's ministry.  We have couples ministry.  So I was doing women.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And that's pretty recent, right?  Is that--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's 2000.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: Does it--I don't--this won't matter to you but these are all done at white churches in the community.  That's another part of-
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: --what I've been called to do.  I do retreats.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a family reunion, 2000.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my family.  That's my sister, but that's the family reunion in Williamsburg, Virginia.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: Two-Thousand [2000].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay great, next.
Speaker 2: That's an article and a cover they did for the State College Magazine on diversity.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Two Thousand Two [2002].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: I (unclear).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Should we talk about who appears with you or should we just let it be?
Speaker 2: Uh, those are the (unclear)--those two ladies on the right are twins.  They are in their late eighties.  The guy, the Asian fellow is a local minister, Christian church and the Indian fellow owns a restaurant.  It's inside but I can't tell you much more.  I can't tell you their names.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: Every now and then I get to be the colored girl in town.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Yeah (laughter), the poster girl.
Speaker 2: There ya go. But they're kind to me.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  (Unclear).  You like it there right?  You like State College?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: I do.  I know I'm supposed to be here so it's all right.  That's my honey.  That's a personal moment with my honey.  (Laughter).  That's early 90s [1990s].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  All right, next.
Speaker 2: This is (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's my wedding day.
Speaker 2: Can you get them?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Um-hmm.  Yeah, it's working okay.
Speaker 2: Wedding day, June 16, 1968.  That's my mom and dad on the right and Edgar's mother on the left, behind him on the left.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  Hold on one minute please.  Okay.
Speaker 2: John and Rebecca Wilson and Rosetta Farmer.
