Story_ID: 28420
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Bertram, B-E-R-T-R-A-M, Oliver, O-L-I-V-E-R, Fraser, F-R-A-S-E-R, hyphen-R-E-I-D, Bertram Oliver Fraser-Reid.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a reason for the hyphenation of your last name?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was nine months old when my mother died of pneumonia.  My father was a teacher in elementary school.  Well, he was a head, the head teacher.  And that made it possible for him to be registrar of births and deaths, head of the bank, the small bank and so on.  And he decided to hyphenate my name because of his great love for his mother--for his wife, pardon me.  I was the last of his six children.  And I don't know why he did it because (laughter), I didn't know or didn't ask it and think to ask him because that was no problem in Jamaica.  Everybody would call me Mr. Reid.  They wouldn't say Mr. Fraser-Reid, but that was on my birth certificate.  And so when I went to Queens University in Canada, the registrar said, well, it's on your birth certificate.  So that's what we have to call you.  And so that all my certificates have that, and--
Speaker 1: Okay, so was Fraser the last name of your mother?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so, all right.  So now--oh, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 23rd, 1934.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born, a little village in the remote hills of Jamaica, Brice, which was close to Christiana, if you wish to know (laughter).  Christiana was the town where there was electricity, where there was the banks and so on, and it was a big deal to go to the town of which you had to walk about a mile and a half.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is in Jamaica--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --West Indies.  Okay.  So what was it, it was then like Jamaica, West Indies, right, where you were born or was it--
Speaker 2: British West Indies.
Speaker 1: British West Indies, okay.
Speaker 2: Jamaica, British West Indies.
Speaker 1: Oh, British West Indies, yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 28421
Speaker 1: Sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Now, I am a professor, and I am president and director of an independent lab which I have, which I serve after retiring from Duke [University] because the name of the town [company] is Natural Products, N-A-T, Natural Products, no problem with those.  And Glyco, G-L-Y-C-O, Technology Research Institute.  We set this up because of my experience and travels specifically to the third-world countries, and India, particularly, where the rapid, the depredations of malaria is really, really a problem because I had visited so many third-world countries, Brazil has a famous disease known as Chagas disease which is as bad as malaria.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: C-H-A-G-A-S, and it's not hyphenated.  It's not, you know, you don't have an apostrophe.  So it's just Chagas disease because the man's name was Dr. Chagas.  I've been to Kenya which is just devastated by malaria.  That's what got me to go there, and so I really wanted to work in it because it was possible at the time to develop a vaccine based on the carbohydrates, the complex sugars that are found in the pathogen of malaria.  And, I guess, I sort of hoped, quite frankly, that we would be able to get venture capital to do this work because it was so important at the time.  Interestingly, that didn't turn out (laughter) to be of much interest to venture capital at the time because they didn't figure out how they would possibly make their investment return from something like a vaccine.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something that would save lives, but it wouldn't make money.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  What you want is a drug that you have to take every day.  And there was no prospect of that.  Ethiopia is also another place which comes to mind because when I give lectures, I talk about the value of vaccine from that point of view, that although this place is very, very poor country, Ethiopia, up in the hills of Ethiopia, the country has no, zero, polio.  And why?  Why has been polio reduction so important in Ethiopia?  It is because the kids get it on a tablet or a piece of sugar or something when they go to school, when they go to church.  So the entire population is now free of polio.  If you could do the same thing with malaria, that would be fabulous, but--well, I'd better be careful.  I think the emphasis on developing the vaccine has shifted because why do you think it would be a vaccine in the case of malaria?  It's because, the long years of study of this can identify where the pathogen, the chemicals from the pathogen, how they penetrate the sugar on the surface.  So what you have to do is do something to prevent that from happening.  But that, as far as I know, is no longer the interests, except for what is happening in India at the present time.  Last year, I was invited to India again.  I was making my fourteenth visit to India on the basis of science.  And it was for India Health 2012.  They're having another conference next year, but it's not focused on health, specifically.  Well, they have now decided (laughter) that fighting things like Malaria and expecting to get the funding for this from countries like Germany and the United States where the big pharmaceutical houses are, it's not gonna happen any time soon.  So what they have been doing is to use the money which they have made over the last decade, to focus it entirely on Malaria.  And there are so many young scientists in training in India, they are going to be supported, handsomely, scientifically, of course, scientifically, to do, to continue the sort of work which we were doing.  And I have an article about an interview which I gave in 'The Hindu', the newspaper in India, which talks about this.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a, you formed your company--
Speaker 2: Company.
Speaker 1: --in what year?
Speaker 2: 1996.
Speaker 1: 1996.  Okay, now, we're gonna get there, and I just wanna--we'll talk about it again, in 1996, when we get there in the chronology.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But just wanna--that's interesting.  So right now, we're just trying to introduce you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, you were the professor of chemistry, and you were the Duke [University] chair of chemistry at--
Speaker 2: I held that when I retired, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what's the title?  It's the, what chair, the full title?
Speaker 2: Oh, James B. Duke--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Professor of Chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, James B. Duke Professor of Chemistry.  Okay, and they actually give you a chair that's actually upstairs there--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Ah, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Now, before we go into--oh, what is today's date?  I'm sorry, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 6th--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --of May.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the year?
Speaker 2: 2013.
Speaker 1: I'm just getting you to say it, just to authenticate what we're doing here.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Fearrington, Fearrington Village, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's good.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 28422
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up, even though I think we're already warmed up.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Do I have a favorite food?  That's a very--(laughter), even if it's bad for me (laughter)?  I want chocolate cake (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That is my favorite food, but I can't eat it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I'm a diabetic, that's why (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, blue, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Season, like a season?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, especially because of the, in North Carolina, which has such a heavy, complex, heavy concentration of trees.  You know, I don't know if you--if you flew over coming in, you wouldn't see any houses.  And there have been--you probably noticed if you drive on some of the highways, there have been very, very well preserved.  The trees are not allowed to be cut down.  If you go to say, the Research Triangle Park, which is on the way to the airport, you don't know that there are these huge Glaxo and all these big companies there because all you see is trees.  So, I like it when those colors, the fall colors come in too.  It's really beautiful.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I just came from one last week with my (laughter), with my two-year old grandson and my, and that was a place in Florida.  But I don't, I'm not much of a--well, I don't swim.  And everybody's amazed at that.  So I don't actually need to be by the sea or the water.  I like to visit new places and just enjoy them rather than a place that I would go to every year.  I couldn't do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I couldn't do that.
Speaker 1: And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  "One day at a time," probably.
Story_ID: 28423
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But we'll do 'em separately, then put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Laura, I should, can't remember her middle name, but it's Fraser.  I can look--Maria, no, Laura Maria?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's right.  Laura Maria (laughter).
Speaker 2: Laura Maria is her--
Speaker 1: I'm saying it's right because I had it written down on the paper here, but, Laura Maria Fraser.
Speaker 2: Fraser.
Speaker 1: Okay, F-R-S--
Speaker 2: F-R-A-S-E-R.
Speaker 1: F-R-A-S-E-R.
Speaker 2: No, "I".
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  Now, is there a difference--what's the difference between the spellings?  Do you know?  Do they just--does it make any difference?  I mean does it indicate where they're from?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Mine is spelled the Scottish way which is, for example, there is a Fraser-Tarton (laughter), which means that my ancestors were, my ancestors, my slave ancestors were probably, who were owned by a Scottish plantation.
Speaker 1: So if you spell it F-R-A-Z-I-E-R.
Speaker 2: That's definitely American, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So Fraser is the Scottish way.  And what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't have those in my head, but I have them written down upstairs.  I--
Speaker 1: Okay, was she born in the Twentieth Century or--
Speaker 2: No, no, she was born in the 1890s or thereabouts--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was the same as my father.  And during the break, I can get it for you so you can write that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but in the 1890s--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I have that for my father as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was in her thirties or, I guess, when she had you?
Speaker 2: She was forty-three [years old].
Speaker 1: Forty-three, okay.  All right.  Okay, now, where was your mother born?  Was she born in the same place?
Speaker 2: She was, I don't know where she was born because I think--people don't keep their histories very, very well.  And part of it, we were lucky that my father was the type of detailed person he was.  So he at least told us where people were born.  But I never thought to ask him where was our grandmother born because--I grew up in a house where my, my mother--my mother's mother and my father's mother were living there at the same time.  And then my siblings were spread over a period of twenty years.  And some of them were off when I started to take interest in anything.  By the time I was say ten, they were all, they were all scattered over various parts of Jamaica.  So I don't know where my grandmother was born, either one of them, either of my grandmothers was born, except they were born in Jamaica.  And how far apart--I don't, they would have known (unclear), of course.
Story_ID: 28424
Speaker 1: But do you think your mother [Laura Maria Fraser] was born close by where you were born or in that same region [Brice, Jamaica]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, she could have been born in Kingston [Jamaica] as far as I know, but I really have no idea.  I think my father met with her when they were both in teachers' college in Jamaica.  And that was in Kingston, which is sixty miles away from, from Brice, which in those days was a formidable (laughter) travel, to go sixty miles from Brice to Kingston.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you know, she could have been from anywhere in Jamaica, and--
Speaker 2: Right, as far as--
Speaker 1: Because that was "the" teachers' college, I guess, for--
Speaker 2: Sorry?
Speaker 1: That was the, was that--was there more than one teachers' college in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute.  I'd better be careful how I say that because there are some, but the one my mother went to was in Kingston.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, your mother passed when you young, right?
Speaker 2: Nine months old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what do people say about her?  What have you learned about your mother from your relatives?
Speaker 2: She was very, very loved by the community.  She was supposedly a very kind and warm person.  I didn't have to be concerned so much with that because my father married one of her classmates.  And we didn't call her "Mama" or anything like that.  We called her "Ms. May [ph.; Mary Keane]."  And so she was my, my stepmother until she passed when I was about seven [years old].  And so for, you know, she, she was a good stepmother, was a good stepmother.  And we had the advantage that somehow she had studied as a teacher in New York and was, she may have been married before, and I don't know.  But I know she had a son.  But he was living in New York still.  And it must have been a long-distance romance.  I don't know because the idea of her meeting up with my father, I--in those days was (laughter) was required a lot of, a lot of effort.  But I thought about it recently because she introduced us to an element of say, North America in our first-world living, that I wholly become conscious of in thinking about her.  You know, as I open this book and see "Ms. May" there, and then I'm conscious of the things that she brought to our attention, things like the first statute or, you know, these little things that you can get of the Empire State Building.  Otherwise, I don't think anybody would have said, look what I brought for you or something like that because you would have that.  So, she was very good to us.  My mother, I think she would also have been very generous with people.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had been classmates, Ms. May and your mother--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Jamaica?  Or, right?
Speaker 2: Ms., yes, and then she went to, she went to New York.  I don't know why she went to New York.  But she and some of her relatives, her sister, for example, were back and forth to New York in those days, which was--she may have been working.  I think she would have probably been working.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there are stories, I've read stories of people who wind up in New York when they meet Americans on vacation that need a good maid and they get 'em to New York.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that might have been.
Speaker 1: And that's one of the ways, and I think that's how Marcus Garvey's [Jamiacan political leader] sister got to New York, initially, was like that.  You know, but there are those kind of stories, and even with the South here, people come down, and they meet somebody, and then they take 'em back to the big city with 'em.  So I don't know if that's the case, but she had a chance to go to school in New York, which is--
Speaker 2: Yes, which I think she did.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because I was very fortunate that both my mother and my father and my stepmother were very much supportive of learning and educating yourselves.
Speaker 1: Well, so there're no--now, so your mother went to teachers' college in Jamaica, and she was a school teacher before she passed, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was a lot of that sort of pairing up.  I'm not sure if it was because it was (unclear) between young people at college, but it turned out that many times, the head teacher of the elementary school of the village was married to the assistant teacher.  And they may have met when they were at college in Kingston.  It's something that could take some research because always, all--as I think here now, back in there, the head teacher was always married, the head teacher, when he changed and came to school, he brought his wife as the assistant head teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 28425
Speaker 1: Well, let me go to your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: William Benjamin Reid.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I'll get those dates for you.  But he was at one of the rural--I guess I would call it, it was not a village, it was more like a district, very close to Brice [Jamaica].  And what's the, what would be the name of that place?  I don't think I heard that (unclear) either.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was he born--was he older than your mother [Laura Maria Fraser] or younger or about the same?
Speaker 2: I think he was older.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was older, yeah.  I'm sure he would have gone to school--and his school, to teachers' college [in Kingston, Jamaica] somewhat later because he had to hustle to find the money to do it.  I know his, you know, his parents couldn't support it.  And I remember we, while we were living at Brice, we were frequently visited by our relatives who were, they, you know, they could walk to us in maybe a couple of hours.  So I don't know what that means, that maybe they were only four or five miles away.  But to get there would be quite a formidable process.  The roads were not well, and, you know, you could ride a bicycle or ride a goat or ride a donkey or ride a horse or something like that.  But I don't, can't remember having visited them.
Story_ID: 28426
Speaker 1: So your dad [William Benjamin Reid], he finished teachers' college [in Kingston, Jamaica], and did he go on to--because he becomes a head teacher, right, when, in the town where you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --grew up.
Speaker 2: Yes, and did he go on to study elsewhere?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No, no.  In those days, that's all the training that was available on the island.
Speaker 1: Okay, so if you wanted to get a--did he have the equivalent of say, a bachelor's degree?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This would be like a normal degree?
Speaker 2: Yes, and the elementary schools were, had different levels.  I don't know exactly how it worked.  But there were some that were more, should I say, prestigious (laughter) than others.  And so they, most of the teachers, it seems to me some of the more successful teachers of (unclear) or prominent teachers would advance from Level One to Level Two to Level Three, etcetera.  Now, that's just how I saw it at the time, but, but he stayed at the one place all the years.  Now, you have to remember that I am seeing this at the end of his career because I was born in, in, I was born when he was fifty-five years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And you have to retire at sixty-five.  So really, all I can tell you from my own experience is that ten years.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, so he was older than your mother [Laura Maria Fraser] by about twelve years, I guess?
Speaker 1: I would think so.
Speaker 2: Or thereabouts.  He's fifty-five.  Okay--
Speaker 1: Twelve, yeah.
Speaker 2: At least, maybe (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But he was substantially older than her, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, did your father have stories about growing up that he shared with you of his life when he came along?
Speaker 1: A few.  It was a very musical house.  As a little boy, growing up.  I can remember us having in this, what I would now call a tiny house (laughter), but there was a piano in it with, you know, the piano roll so that you could play the rolls by lots of musicians of the time, you know, the names can't come to me.  But I think that came to Jamaica with my stepmother [Mary Keane].  But we had a piano.  We had an organ that you--a harmonium organ, the ones that you pump with your feet in those days, violin, for sure.  And I think that's, those are all the instruments we had.  But all of us were required (laughter) to undergo training in music.  And my eldest sister who passed away, she was excellent to my ears and what was told to me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he taught himself all of these things, by the way.  He taught himself all of the music.  He played the organ in the church (laughter) because that's something that was also required of the elementary school staff.  Somebody had to be able to play the organ in the church.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 28427
Speaker 1: Now, was the church the sponsor of the school [where Fraser-Reid's father, William Benjamin Reid taught]?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know how the connection went between the school, the school, the government and the Presbyterian Church.  Initially, of course, most of the schools were set up by some sort of religious, religious arm.  So, so Brice [Jamaica] relied on the Presbyterian Church and then changed to the (unclear) Church and so on and the United Church.  But eventually, they all were government, government supported and remain so today.
Story_ID: 28428
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the school your dad [William Benjamin Reid] was head of?
Speaker 2: Brice Presbyterian Elementary School [Brice, Jamaica].
Speaker 1: Brice Presbyterian Elementary School.  All right, and that was the--yeah, it took to, how far?  Did you go as far as eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Okay.  The educational system in Jamaica at the time was that you started off by going to elementary school for six years, or thereabouts, depending on whether or not you could get advanced, depending on how things were.  And what happens afterwards.  You can either continue in the elementary school after that and study for three, study for government exams, grade one, grade two and grade three.  These pupils in these grades could serve as teachers' assistants.  And so they would, you know, fill the role of junior teachers to some of the lower classes, the lower--not classes, that may not be a good word to use.  But I mean like the lower forms.  And some of these could be seen outside under a tree, for example, being studied by these people who were actually studying for, to take grade one, then grade two, then grade three.  And if you did well enough in grade three, you would be accepted, acceptable to either of the teachers' colleges that my father had gone to or my mother [Laura Maria Fraser]--father and my mother had gone to.  So those were called pupil teachers that would allow them to go there.  And their destination was to become teacher--school teachers themselves in elementary schools.  Now, I think that may have been free or available at a very small cost.  But if you were more from a fortunate family, you would then go to secondary school.  So,--
Speaker 1: So you had to be able to pay to go to secondary?
Speaker 2: You had to be able to pay one way or the other.  And the pathway to go to one of the, one of the colleges--one of the high schools, and in those days, there were very few scattered across the country.  Acceptance to say the premier one, Jamaica College (laughter), you had to be white or you had to think you were white (laughter) or you had to be, have a lot of money.  So, you know, if you're from a black family, but you were wealthy enough to pay the fees of the school, then you could be accepted.
Speaker 1: Or if you were white, now, did you still have to pay if you were white?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes, oh, yeah.  But most of the white people in those days were on a much higher economical scale.  I mean in my own case, for example, my father had to pay my education in these schools.  And that was expensive because they were boarding schools.  I, where I lived was probably no more than thirty miles from the high school I was going, but it took two hours to drive because they were going through the mountains and so on.  So, so you had to, it cost money to go to these schools.
Story_ID: 28429
Speaker 1: So your father [William Benjamin Reid], so he retired as a head teacher [from Brice Presbyterian Elementary School, Brice, Jamaica] and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And so, and you're sure they probably met, your mother [Laura Maria Fraser] and father probably met at teachers' college?
Speaker 2: Well, if I (unclear), I think that's where I thought they met.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, some of that information, my--I think I would have heard it, heard it.  I think the idea was that they met in teachers college.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us something about your father's personality.  You said he was more exacting than a lot of people.  So--
Speaker 2: He was, he was very exacting.  He was methodical, sometimes to a fault.  You know, he always prided himself, for example, in getting up in the middle of the night and going, walking across there, going to the bureau or the desk or something and lay his hand on the flashlight (laughter).  Of course, there was no electricity.  You had to light a light.  How are you gonna light a lamp if you don't have any light to do it by?  He could go and lay his hand right on where the flashlight was.  So if you use his flashlight, and don't put it back exactly in that spot (laughter), you know, you would hear from him.  And that's the sort of discipline--I guess you can put it (laughter) that way, that every detail was, was taken care of.  I, interestingly, as I told you, I recently had a book published, and I point out in the book that my first experiment in chemistry was by my father testing his urine because he was a diabetic, and watching the process.  Well, today if you wanna test, whether, test you're a diabetic, there're strips of paper you can use.  No, in those days, you had a little lamp.  You had to light the lamp and prime the lamp, and it was interesting to me to see all of this and see this, the solution go from blue to brown or light green.  And he had to know what all of that was about because it, he was not only working for him--teaching himself (laughter), everybody who suspected they had diabetes would come to him and he would test these peoples' (laughter) urine.  And that's the sort of person, and serve as the head teacher could get, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28430
Speaker 1: Sir, do you take after your father [William Benjamin Reid], you think?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The older I get, the more I think so, but I, I think so.  You know, the interest in music, detail.  I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't have his skills.  He was very skillful with his hands, you know, making things and so on.  I don't think I have that skill.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you name your brothers and sisters and tell us where you fall in the order?
Speaker 2: Okay, my siblings came two, separated by three and four, and about nine years separated by the, by five and six.  My eldest sister, Brynhild [Reid], she also became a teacher, then following maybe a couple of years later, was Gilbert [Reid], my first brother.  Then Joyce [Reid], my sister who died last year, followed by Dudley.  So it's girl, boy, girl, boy.  And then my last sister [Minette Reid], we called her Pixie (laughter), and then I came last.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28431
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: I think I must have been about two [years old].  My mother's [Laura Maria Fraser] mother used to go for afternoon strolls to visit another lady some time, going over her older friends.  And we lived, they, the teachers' cottage was supplied by the school.  And it was surrounded by a fence of some type, I'm not sure.  It may have been to keep children in.  But anyway she was going to visit the, visit her friend.  And I can remember, I was wearing a little white coat (laughter) or something to sleep in, whatever.  And I was running after her, and crying like I just didn't want her to leave and so on.  And it turns out that she was, she was so close to me.  This little, this little house that we lived in, nobody had a--you sleep wherever it's convenient.  And it was convenient most of the time for me to sleep with her.  And I don't know, she and I became very, very, very close.  And I think she, I missed so much when I had to leave the house to go away to boarding school because at this time, I was the only child at home.  My sister was in boarding school in Kingston [Jamaica].  And beyond that, all the other people were away.  So, so she became so close to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 28432
Speaker 1: Can you describe what it was like when you were growing up [in Brice, Jamaica], and tell us what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, the sights (laughter) which interested me was to see the events leading up to Saturday.  There was no market, no chief market, of course, far from it.  A few grocery shops, but that is when everything was done.  And you could see Mr. Evans walking down with the cow or bull or whatever, that in a few minutes time will be meat (laughter), and you could say, you could look at it and if necessary, you could say, can I get the tail or whatever, and, you know.  We, we, my sister and I would run as far as we were allowed to see things like that.  And then later in the day, you could go down to the city and, I guess, all right, the town, Christiana [Jamaica], and watch people do purchasing in--it's the original farmer's market (laughter) because it's people who brought their own stuff to sell.  So that I certainly, that's one of the sights I remembered.  Going to church was a must, and I can think of people wearing their Sunday best.  The sounds, the sounds, mostly the harmonic singing in the village because many of the people, you know, our village was kind of surrounded by smaller, little holdings, and there were people singing at night because that, in those days, there was no electricity.  So people would gather together and sing songs, maybe which had origins back in the days of slavery.  I don't know if you--but they're songs that if you like to plan certain things, you would sing, and you could form a rhythm to it, and it would help to make the, the days' work go quicker.
Speaker 1: So, what--can you give us an example?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) "Come let--" There was one where stones were broken.  You had these big stones, and these had to be broken up into little pieces which were spread on the road.  [singing] "Come we down the yard, gallant boy (unclear) rock and--oh, dear."  What they're saying is, let us get going, so that we can break rock stone, gallant boy, and, you know, that would set the rhythm to which you would do this.  And those are not sounds which I particularly, memorized or--and I'm so grateful to some people who have come along and, and kept them alive.
Speaker 1: Now, is the song that was popularized here in the fifties [1950s]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --by Harry Belafonte [also a HistoryMaker; singer, actor, songwriter, social activist]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: "The Banana Boat" song.  Is that an actual song that was sung in Jamaica?  I mean is that a work song, traditional--
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Dayo {unclear), yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, you could hear that.  And then the thing is these people sang it, and you had the harmonies.  Or it could be a hymn or something from the, from the--but you know, the thing that I remember about it is that these folks who, the sense of harmony that they had, you know, and you could hear the men's voices, you could hear the tenors.  You could hear the basses and everything was clear.  It was really a musical experience.
Speaker 1: Yes, I wondered if that song was one of the ones that, I mean an authentic song.  I never really knew, but--
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --it sounds like it is, you know.
Speaker 2: It was, it was.  But, of course, his was, his was delivered with a band behind it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: These people had no bands, although they had a lot of original instruments.  There was a sort of drum that they would sit on, a rumba box, rumba box.  That was used for Calypsos.  And you could, there was some metal prongs which stuck out of these, and you strike one of these, you strike these.  And these set up the rhythm.  And I don't, I have to think when I last saw one of those because, of course, that has all changed.  But the banjo, they made their own saxophones from bamboo, from a bamboo.  And you could hear all these being played across the landscape.
Story_ID: 28433
Speaker 1: Now, you didn't live near the ocean at all, right?
Speaker 2: No, we were forty miles from the ocean [in Brice, Jamaica] because we are about dead center of the island [Jamaica], and the island is forty miles across.  So we are twenty miles either direction.
Speaker 1: Was there--now, I've heard this, and you can correct me if I'm wrong or tell me the right of it, but I've heard that the center of the island is the highest part of the island, the most mountainous part, and the, on most of the islands, that's the case, and that the, back in slavery days, people would run towards the, run uphill, up to the hills and that way they could, you know--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: --it was harder to catch them if they did that, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, actually, the highest mountain, is unquestionably Blue Mountain which is to the eastern part of the island, just near, Kingston [Jamaica] is.  But it certainly is about the cockpit country where I'm living on the fringe of the--I grew up on the fringe of cockpit country.  And before there were roads and so on, you couldn't get out of there if you (laughter) if you wanted to lose yourself, this would be a good place to choose.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard of the cockpit, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it's a, it's a formidable sight, and even today, we only have to drive, what twenty miles or so to the beach, but going to the cockpit country, winding up and down and around the rounds and things like that, that would also be, be quite a time for you to travel through these days.
Story_ID: 28434
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about school now.  When you started school when you were--were you five or six [years old] or--
Speaker 2: About five, because, you see, we lived a stone's throw from the school.  It was right there.  And so maybe the best way for me to be baby-sat was to have me in class.  And so (laughter) I was sent away to Kingston [Jamaica] where I, to go to high school.  Why Kingston?  Never asked my father [William Benjamin Reid].  But there was a very visionary man who had been trained in the United States, and he came with an idea of developing a multipurpose school.  And today, that was called Excelsior School--
Speaker 1: And that was in Jamaica, I mean Kingston?
Speaker 2: Kingston, yeah.
Speaker 1: So an American developed the Excelsior School.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was a Jamaican, but he had trained somewhere in America.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mr. Wesley Powell.
Story_ID: 28435
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were saying Mr. Wesley Powell, he was a black Jamaican who actually went to the--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --United States and came back?
Speaker 2: And launched Excelsior School [in Kingston, Jamaica].  And I went there when the school was absolutely small.  And (laughter), I didn't particularly like the school.  I didn't like being away from home to begin with.  But more important to the case--
Speaker 1: Well, how old were you when you were sent?
Speaker 2: Eleven [years old], was I eleven?  Four to sixth, twelve [years old].
Speaker 1: Twelve?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute.  Let's hold right, let's hold that in our mind frozen--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --for a second, but when you were in elementary school in, back in your hometown [Brice, Jamaica], was your father [William Benjamin Reid] still a director--he was still the head, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: And were there any--would you consider your father like a mentor to you at that age or was there any teachers there that were like role models and mentors to you, that you remember specifically in elementary school?
Speaker 2: No, not from the learning point of view, but he was surely a role model as far as organizing things, and, you know, getting things done if something has to be done, you must do it, from that point of view.  And his search for education, although I did not so recognize it at the time, was exemplary.  I remember we hoped that he would go to Kingston, that on one of his frequent visits to and from Kingston, he would return with a gramophone because we knew other people had a gramophone.  And you didn't need electricity or even a battery.  You could wind it up with your hand.  Well, what does he come back with?  Eight volumes of 'Castle's Book of Knowledge' (laughter).  Now, that's not what my sister [Minette Reid] and I wanted.  But, you know, she and I would pore over that book, those books, and, you know, we would come out of it knowing about people and places with strange names (laughter).  And although I don't think we realized it, we were traveling in that.  And both her and me--but my sister was one year older than me, have traveled extensively, you know, to various places and, which we first learned of from those 'Castle's Books of Knowledge'.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28436
Speaker 1: So you were about twelve [years old] when you went away to Excelsior School [Kingston, Jamaica]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so I guess you were a good student, you were a pretty good student too?
Speaker 2: No, far from it. (laughter)
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Because, remember by this--when I went to Excelsior my sister [Minette Reid] was a year ahead of me.  And she had won one of these island scholarships that, by which she was able to get to the premier school at the time in Jamaica because she had the scholarship based on her work with me.  I had--
Speaker 1: What was the name of the premier school?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: One of the best schools called St. Andrews High School, which is, which--she's one of the people who made it--well, I guess her--the teacher's students are usually expected to do well and get one of these scholarships to go to one of the premier schools.  So she did.  Well, I did not, and so my poor father [William Benjamin Reid] on a retiree's salary (laughter), had to pay my boarding expenses at, at Excelsior, at the school.  And the first thing that really bothered me was that between Friday night and Sunday, the--you couldn't get any hot food because, you know, the Seventh-Day Adventist can't work on Saturday.  So all you can eat is stuff which was made the day before.  Furthermore, you can't eat pork (laughter), which was a good part of my diet at the time.  And then except for a few of us boys around, everybody else was at the Seventh-Day Adventist, what was it, Citadel Church, whatever, which was just half, about a hundred yards away.  And I think maybe that's why they put the school there so that it was close to the--so to make matters worse, so my father took me and had me board at the same place with my sister.  And now, I was in walking distance of the school, of the high school.  And it turns out that the path which I followed took us through the places where it was the greatest collection of musicians who came and hang out there, at a piano studio where people took their pianos to be fixed or whatever.  But then all throughout the day there would be excellent musicians, etcetera, people who used to play at the holiday spots on the Northern resorts of the day.  And that interested me much more than Latin which was essential in those days.  And so I wanted to quit school (laughter).  I came second to last in the class.
Speaker 1: Did you?  That's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I came second to last in the class, and my father took me out.
Story_ID: 28437
Speaker 1: So other than your father [William Benjamin Reid] testing his urine [for diabetes], did you have any other connections to chemistry when you were young?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, oh, no.  I mean I was so uninterested in Excelsior [School, Kingston, Jamaica] anyway.  So he took me out of that and then he heard about this school in the mountains, I could say or the foothills of (laughter) of the--well, it's the foothills of the second highest mountain, which is called Blue--not Blue Mountain, Bullhead, Bullhead Mountain.  But this school didn't even have a movie house.  At least my village had a movie house, and I just had to concentrate on my work; did reasonably well for some things.  Now, at this school, you enter in grade, you enter into Form 3A, 3B, 4A, 4B.  At the end of 4B, you had to write an exam which came from England, and it was said to teach all the people over the entire British Commonwealth, the sort of levels which they should attain, and it was sent out by Cambridge University [United Kingdom].  You had to write the exams, send it back to Cambridge and, to be marked, and then the results were published in the newspaper.  You could get Grade 1, Grade 2 or Grade 3 where the best is Grade 1.  And I got Grade 3 (laughter).  And I, with a Grade 3, I should not have been allowed to continue.  My sister, by contrast, got a Grade 1.  She could have continued but decided not to.  Well, I was allowed to go on because I think the school which I, my school, needed as much financial support from parents as possible.  That's one reason, but they also needed people, I believe, who may have been not working at their full, full credit.  So I stayed on for another two years, wrote a second set of exams from Cambridge, the Cambridge Higher School certificate.  And I did reasonably well.
Story_ID: 28438
Speaker 1: By this time [when Fraser-Reid graduated from high school], I was seventeen [years old], and I was wondering what happens to me now?  Most people at this time with that, with that school leaving certificate, it was--you could get jobs in the sugar estates.  They wanted them.  You could get teachers' jobs.  My headmaster chose to ask me to come back to school to teach.  So after being, five years--four years at the school as a teacher--as a pupil, I then returned, and then was sub--was going, was becoming a teacher.  Now, all of these years at the school, we had not had a science teacher of any--no, no science teacher.  You know, there were people who had read the book the night before.  But no, no bachelor's or master's degrees.  Well, for--I had always been interested in the sciences, even what I could learn because one of the subjects we had to learn was biology.  So that, you had to dissect frogs and things like that, and, you know, that--I got some idea about how the nervous system works and so on.  But two years, when I was, what nineteen [years old]?  Nineteen, no twenty, yeah, when I was twenty, the school had its first science teacher, who turned out to be an excellent friend of mine.  He was trained in physics and mathematics, at an English university, at a British university.  And he and I soon became friends, and I took to helping him set up the labs.  A building had just been made for the first science building.  And his name was Stanley Sheppard [ph.], a very, very good friend of mine, Stan Sheppard.  And as I helped him set up the labs, I got into an idea of doing chemistry.  And he helped me as well as he could, and that's when I decided, you know, I really need to take this seriously.  And I bought the book, 'Teach Yourself Chemistry', read it, and decided that I was going to, to study this.  I then applied to Queens University [Ontario, Canada], and for one reason or another, I was accepted.
Story_ID: 28439
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna go back a little bit.  Now, you read, not only chemistry, but you read physics too, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You didn't look over a physics text?
Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't read physics--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But you--
Speaker 2: But Mr. [Stanley] Sheppard wanted me to study, but I simply couldn't do it.  I was also, at the same time, realized that I needed more mathematics.  And I have a book which I can show you later, which I was teaching myself mathematics at the same time, with Stan's help.
Speaker 1: So how far did the school go in mathematics?
Speaker 2: Well, the English system, for your last two years, you focus on three or four subjects.  You're--and I focused on economics, zoology, botany and geography.  There were other people who were focusing on mathematics.  There were some more focusing on the Latin and so on because at that time, the English system, you were only required to focus on three subjects or four subjects.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you, now, this is--your high school was Clarendon, right?
Speaker 2: Clarendon, yeah, it's called Clarendon College, but it's a high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, all right, so I have a note here that the staff really didn't know chemistry or physics--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: --that taught there, so.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: There's no one there to teach you, right?
Speaker 2: No one to teach it.  And, now, interestingly, another point is that during all these years of my time in Clarendon, there was only one person with a bachelor's degree of any type, and it was the headmaster, the principal, I think you meant.  But at the school, he was called, yeah, the principal, yeah, called the principal, I think, although the word you used was headmaster.  And how did he get his?  He was one of these teacher college products, just like my father [William Benjamin Reid] was.  But they had set up connections to London, University of London [United Kingdom], and many of the people like this headmaster whose name was Stuart, S-T-U-A-R-T, Mr. Stuart, he had correspondence courses with London.  And that, you know, you would study mathematics and they would send you things to test, and that's how they got their degrees.  And two of his are mathematics and Latin.  And as far as the school, as far as the school under him was concerned, the--it seemed to us anyway that the people who he favored most, academically, were those who were specified, doing mathematics and-or Latin in these exams.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: So you graduated from high school in what year was it?
Speaker 2: 1951.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1951.
Story_ID: 28440
Speaker 1: Now, when was Jamaican independence?
Speaker 2: '63 [1963], so I was actually doing my Ph.D. in Canada.
Speaker 1: When that happened (laughter).
Speaker 2: When, yeah.  As a matter of fact, the book I was telling you that I was doing my practice mathematics in, the picture on it is King George (laughter), you know, the picture on the cover is King George.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1951, high school graduation.  Now, when you--did, how did you select--now, you knew you wanted to go to college, so you read the chemistry book to get up to speed with that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, how did you select Queens College [Ontario, Canada]?
Speaker 2: Which school to go?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, here, I must--okay, I'd like to put this story in there because it's very, very important to where I end up.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I had been teaching as a junior master in the school [at Brice, Jamaica] since 1951, and one of the leading candidates in the little village where the school is, a village, Chapelton [Jamaica], was the Jackson family who were merchants.  And Mrs. Jackson was like a fairy godmother to the school.  Her--I've been with her, I've known her children.  I was in class with one of her boys, played on the soccer team with Eddie, with him.  And she would--Eddie was gone, Eddie was gone to Switzerland to do medicine.  Mikey's gone to America to do medicine.  And she called me in one day.  She was standing in her store, and she said, Mr. Reid, what are you doing?  What are you doing with yourself?  Are you just gonna stay around here?  And I said, well, what am I to do?  She said, well, aren't you going away to study and get qualified?  And I said, well, Mrs. Jackson, you know, you can send away Eddie.  You're a merchant.  So you, you have money, but my father [William Benjamin Reid] is a retiree.  He just has a pension, so he can't send me away.  And then she said to me, well, how much money do you have in the bank?  And I said, I've, the bank?  And she said, well, how much do you pay for food?  I said, I don't pay for food.  I live at the college, so I get food.  She says, so you don't pay for rent?  I said, no, I don't pay for rent.  And then she said to me in Jamaican, "What you say, boy?"  You're not paying nothing for rent.  You're not paying nothing for food.  And you don't have nothing in the bank account?  Don't you have any ambition?  (Laughter)  And she mentioned a few things that I shouldn't spend my money on (laughter), but she said, now, you bring your check to me at the end of every month.  And she took my check.  How much do you owe for this?  How much do you owe for that watch, same watch?  How much do you owe for that watch?  And so on, so she did this--that much for cutting your hair.  All right, this is your commitment.  I'm gonna put the rest in the bank at the Post Office, the government post office.  And when I decided that I wanted to go away, I went and checked with her.  There was enough money there to spend, to send me away, to pay my way, and my family came through with the rest.  So I wanted to get that in because that lady, you know, she adopted me.  And if it weren't for her--she taught me all things like budgeting and things like that which, well, my father, (unclear) just--she was the person who is most responsible, I would say, for me being able to leave, leave Jamaica.  The headmaster of my school was not particularly interested, although I think he had his own difficulties and so on.  So--
Speaker 1: That's a remarkable story.  So this Ms. Jackson--
Speaker 2: Mrs. Jackson. And she extracted a promise from me that wherever in the world I was, I would be there for her funeral.  And I have her thing from--she died at 100 years.  But probably the, one of the biggest rewards I've got was the medal I got from the Royal College, the Royal Society of Chemistry in England, called the Haworth Medal.  He [Sir Norman Haworth] was a person who established carbohydrate chemistry.  And it is still today considered the premier award of carbo--for carbohydrates, the Haworth Memorial Award.  And I gave her one of these, these medals on there which you can look at later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I gave it to her when she was ninety years old, at the celebration of her ninetieth birthday.  And she, her son sent it back to me afterwards.  So I really, I cannot speak too much of Ms. Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay, Okay.
Story_ID: 28441
Speaker 1: So, this, so with the help of the money you saved and with the money from your family--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you can go to--
Speaker 2: Go to university.
Speaker 1: university.  Now, why Queens University [Ontario, Canada], in--
Speaker 2: Why Queens?
Speaker 1: --in Ontario?
Speaker 2: Why not America?  Well, if you remember, that was 1956, when I was enrolling at Queens, and you can remember what was happening to blacks in the United States.
Speaker 1: The Montgomery Bus Boycott--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Emmett Till [African American boy who was murdered in Mississippi at the age of fourteen] had been lynched in '55 [1955].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And all these things were in the news, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, very much.  And, you know, my family and everybody just didn't like it.  But anyway, going to Canada, going back to the days of connection, days of, when we were all British subjects, you know, Canada was a British subject, Jamaica was a British subject.  And many of our people had been trained there.  So I talked with some of my friends who were there, and they said, oh, you must come to the University of Toronto [Toronto, Ontario, Canada].  That's where, oh, come to McGill [University, Montreal, Canada].  Well, I applied to go to these schools, and they had already closed their thing because this was June.  So I said, well, what about Queens [University]?  Oh, yeah, apply to Queens, man, you may get in, and then you come to Toronto next year (laughter).  So I go to Queens, and I loved the place so much.  I really enjoyed it, so I--that is how I came to go to Queens.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 28442
Speaker 1: Now, were there any other Jamaicans there that you knew at Queens [University, Ontario, Canada]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You were the only--I mean were there any other black people there when you were there?
Speaker 2: There were I think fifteen of us in 2,000.
Speaker 1: Okay, in 2000?
Speaker 2: In a class--I--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Fifteen people out of 2,000 students.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I think that's what it was.  It may have been fewer, but they got--there was a link between Queens University and Bermuda so that we had a lot of people coming from Bermuda to Queens to train as teachers.  So as I think right now, I think (unclear) there four or five Bermudians who were there.  Then there were subsequently a few people from places like Trinidad.  Yeah, we had a few other West Indian islands.  Trinidad, had, yeah, Trinidad had three.  So that was a big number.
Speaker 1: You know, so Trinidad, Jamaica and Canada are all part of the British Commonwealth, they called it in those--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the British Commonwealth.
Speaker 1: Which had like, you know, legal interactions and, you know, it's, you can move throughout the Commonwealth, without--
Speaker 2: You can move to other Commonwealth countries at that time, no problem getting a visa for this and student visas were very, very easy to get.
Speaker 1: Now, was it, likewise, was it easy to get in the United States, as easy?
Speaker 2: I think so.  Like one of my, well, one of--one of my school mates in high school, he--they went to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  And many of these guys going up to Howard, yeah, they could go to Howard.  And I might have done that, or they could go to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  If the climate at the time was better because, you know, going to Tuskegee, when there's all of that rioting down there was not something which, which was appealing.
Story_ID: 28443
Speaker 1: Okay, so just to, before we get too far along, just to go back to this self-taught chemistry.  Now, this is quite a feat, isn't it?  I mean to teach yourself chemistry?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did you, you know--
Speaker 2: And (laughter), the trouble was coming up very quickly because much of the chemistry that I had taught myself had not, it had very little practical side.  So, in chemistry there's a practical work.  So, in my first lab at Queens [University, Ontario, Canada], the instruction sheet was handed out, and it said, you are provided with hydrochloric acid of such strength.  Prepare yourself a solution of such and such density of let us say--such and such density.  So I'm confronting what does density mean (laughter), and here I am the only black person in the lab (laughter).  Was I---(unclear)?
Speaker 1: And you had no laboratory experience at all?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know what these, what the language meant.  So I turned to George Neville, I can remember George, a Canadian and my neighbor.  And I said, George, what's density?  He looked at me (laughter) and then he told me, and we went on from there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, this seems like this would be a difficult first year.
Speaker 2: It was, it was, and I worked and studied like hell.  And I--it also helped that I had a terrible budget because, you know, all the money that I was using at that time, I had to obtain by myself working which was--my favorite type of work was selling the programs for the football games because I didn't understand the football anyway.  I didn't know it.  And if I wanted to see the game, I could get in as a program seller (laughter).  So I would sell these--we had a good team, Queens had a good team, and I would inflate the prices and nobody cared (laughter).  So I, I think my budget for the week was six dollars.
Speaker 1: So this is, is this American-style football or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, it wasn't soccer.  They were actually playing--
Speaker 2: No, we had--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Had (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We had a soccer team we knocked around on Fridays or something.  No, no, no, it was American-style football.  I didn't understand it.  And in any case, at the time, you know, when they're playing these games, September, October, it's far too cold to be out there (laughter) for (unclear) standing there, (unclear) expect me to be out there in that cold at this time of the year.
Speaker 1: Was that really a big shock, I guess the coldness?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, and I, of course, had to wear what I had.  Warm clothing and something like that wouldn't, I didn't have it.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have any warm clothes at first--
Speaker 2: I didn't come up with any.  I didn't have money to buy any.  I can remember going to church in just my suit.  That's the way I would have wore it in the West Indies.  So that was hard.
Story_ID: 28444
Speaker 1: But I learned a lot because some parts of chemistry involve a lot of physics.  And I mention that only because I think this is one of the most interesting things that came up.  I was due to graduate in May, and in February, the registrar called me in to come to see her.  And she says, you haven't taken any physics since you're here at Queens.  I said, that's right, Ms. Royce.  And she went on to say, and there is no physics on your record at Clarendon College in Jamaica.  I said, no, we didn't have any physics teachers.  She says, oh, I don't know what to say because we can't allow you to graduate without any physics.  And then I fell right to the floor.  And then she lifted me immediately and said, why don't you go over to the high school, speak to Mr. Earl, and ask him if you can take the physics exam with his students.  I went to him, and he was a very, very nice man and said, oh, that would be fine with me.  You can do that.  But I don't know when you would study for it because you, your last exams are whatever.  And the exams for physics is two weeks later.  So how can you do that?  And I said, I'm gonna do it, sir, because I had to study so much physics on my own to understand the chemistry because there's physical chemistry, and there's organic chemistry, and there's ana--and so you have to be able to know what this is.  And one of my dearest buddies--he just passed away, gave me his book because he had used it in the first year, and I still have it (laughter), still have Barry's physics book.  And--
Speaker 2: So you studied Barron physics--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: No, my friend, I'm sorry, my friend was, his name was Barry.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he was from Trinidad.  And he, so he said, here, I'm not gonna use this again.  He was studying geology.  So he gave it to me (laughter), gave me his physics book.  And I looked at what--and discovered that really the chemistry I had been studying in physical chemistry, just has physics married to it, so to speak.  So all you need to do to master physics for the high school chemistry is to divorce the two subjects.  And so I went and he gave me some back exams, Mr. Earl, the teacher at the school.  And I could solve them by just looking at the physics I knew.  And I got an A in it.
Speaker 2: That's very good.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 28445
Speaker 1: We can't get you out of Queens College [Ontario, Canada], without asking you about J.K.N. Jones.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, you were, and the research you were doing it as an undergraduate for him, right?
Speaker 2: The, well, a lot of that was just exploratory stuff, and he had come from England a few years before I enrolled, and--okay, before I enrolled.  I had, for the first summer, I had worked and made a lot of money at the Polymer Corporation which is a synthetic place and hires summer students who do well in their, who had done well in their exams.  So I was being paid handsomely in the summer of 1957.  But by this time, I had wanted to--I'd been thinking of now going on to graduate school, and realized I would need some money.  In addition to which I won some scholarships because I had ranked so highly in my class.  So I wanted to do an internship.  I had studied about plants with a very eminent professor from, (unclear) professor.  And he, his idea was to do experiments with plants using radioactive carbon dioxide and trace where it showed up, but then you would kill the--you would terminate the plant after so many months or whatever and see, you know, tests some of these.  And that was fascinating.  But I also wanted to do something in the Department of Chemistry.  And I went to Jones and he agreed to have me, and that's where the--I met with the, you know, I met the people who are in this Splenda (unclear) book for the first time.  But in that summer, in the last--the summer before, summer--
Speaker 1: Is this [Tate and] Lyle [company], something in Lyle, the firm, the British--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: It's something in Lyle, right, the--
Speaker 2: Well, of course, we didn't know at that time because nobody knew how to put the chlorines in the sugar, and that's what he started to do.  And it's interesting how that happened, and interesting, and why the substitute for sugar was necessary.  The, most of the sugar which comes from the West--which had come from the West Indies, was now being supplanted by sugar grown in France and in Idaho because it came from sugar beet, and that didn't require this horrible circumstances of growing, growing and reaping and whatever as did sugarcane.  So, from that time they, the overhead of sugarcane started to slip down.  And the Sugar Foundation of North America would give anybody support if they could come up with an idea to use the surplus sugar.  And Jones got surpluses from sugar to make, to make pesticides and things like that.  And that's what was going on in his lab when I was there.  And I never followed this until I was asked to be the expert witness for the case involving sugar--state and--Tate and Lyle--
Speaker 1: Tate and Lyle, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the English company.  They would give money, they were giving money to the English professors also to find other--to try and do something else with sugar.  So getting free sugar to do something else was (laughter) quite easy.  At this time, I was, I was after, I came after that interest.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was all mysterious to you at the time.  You didn't know all this was going on?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, oh, no.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The only thing I wanted to do was to find some time that, find something to get me into graduate school.
Story_ID: 28446
Speaker 1: Okay, so in '59 [1959], you got your bachelor's degree from Queens--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --University [Ontario, Canada], and now, it says here that you continued this research with Professor [J.K.N.] Jones, right?
Speaker 2: Professor [Raymond] Lemieux.
Speaker 1: Lemieux, okay.
Speaker 2: Fifty--no, I was doing by the time I graduated.  Let me get the dates right.  Yes, I--he really introduced me.  My introduction to formal sugar chemistry really didn't begin until after '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's when you actually worked with him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I worked with Jones from, how many?  Just one year.
Speaker 1: We were saying before this started, this is, sugar is a product that really was the, the labor needed for sugar was the reason for the slave trade, basically?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, and they say it's, there's a book called 'Sugar' that really points that out.  And, you know, if you look at the complexion of North America, it's all due to sugar, even (laughter) (unclear) Negroid people of African features, any part of this world.  So that, and to a large extent, the Chinese who came early like, we're talking about 200 years ago, came after the abolition of slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so Britain had to find somebody else to produce the sugar.  And so they went to the their colony in China where the city of Guangdong [China] is and got Chinese from there.  So the boys I was at school with, my Chinese buddies and friends I had when I was at school in Jamaica, they're all people from that part of China.
Speaker 1: And the sugar, the culture of producing sugar was, had a horrendous effect on human beings in those days.  I mean I just, I mean anybody can read about it, but that's, the legacy of Jamaica's' black populations working in that horrible--
Speaker 2: Horrible.
Speaker 1: --condition where they were basically worked to death and then replenished with fresh people.
Speaker 2: That was how the slave traders made their money, when some guys get rickety and old, you know, off him and bring somebody else.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is, this is interesting.  So you're from Jamaica, and you get into sugar research (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: This is interesting, it's kind of ironic.
Speaker 2: You know, things like that I didn't, I hadn't thought about (laughter).  But it's just the way things are now, sugar is being replaced by Splenda because of the diabetes around the world.  And the, the Chinese who won in the legal battle are fighting against the people who lost over Jamaican sugar (laughter) as we speak (laughter).  And as it is, the government sort of sold off all the rights to it all, so I was in Jamaica some time ago to pick up that award, that one with the net around there.  And I went to the Department of Labor and asked, you know, they have no idea about it.  I said, well, who regulates what Jamaican sugar is sold for?  Well, the people who are buying it.  I said, buying it from whom?  The Chinese own it because they, the government may have sold the rights to it to--
Speaker 1: So is this the British government in the colonial days sold the rights to the Chinese or the Jamaican government under--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, today's.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: Today's, yeah, very, very disturbing (laughter).
Story_ID: 28447
Speaker 1: Queens College [Ontario, Canada], and so you went on to get your master's degree--
Speaker 2: Alberta.
Speaker 1: --from --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: From Jones.
Speaker 1: From [Professor J.K.N.] Jones, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Working with Jones.  And who were some of the other, did you have any other mentors at this time that you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Professor Moir, M-O-I-R.  He was probably even more of a mentor because I took a summer, a reading course with him where I choose or he assigns a book to read.  And he said, I think this would be good for you to--this, to read.  And it was a sort of how chemical reactions work, a series of lectures that had been given at Cornell [University] by the eminent English professor of chemistry.  And I, I enjoyed the book, I enjoyed the book.  And, you know, I would go in and talk to him.  We'd sit and talk about chemistry for, for an hour a week.  And I wanted to study with him.  And he said, no, I think you'd better go to work with Dr. Jones.  And I discovered he didn't have any money.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: But I was glad because I was able to transfer some of the technical stuff onto what Jones put me.  And Jones was a wonderful person for saying, you know, why don't we take that over there and mix it with that over there, and keep track of what happens?  And he was just very observational in that whereas Moir would have said, why don't you take that over there and, if you think it is, it has nitrogen in it or oxygen in it, then treat it with this reagent or that reagent, that should tell you which it is and so on.  But they were both, both very, very, very cordial.  And by the time they're talking to me, I had ended up with a first-class degree.  It's interesting.  But I wanted to tell you this, while I was doing the internship for Jones, and you know, those guys were trying to put chlorines in that, I didn't do very well in the lab.  I, my practical work was terrible.  So when the, when the biologist, when Dr. Moir said to me, rather, you should go work with Jones, I was terrified.  You should do your Ph.D. with Jones, because I had this thing, you know, I'd done so badly in his lab (laughter).  So I walked in, and I said to him, Dr. Jones, could you accept me as a graduate student for next year?  And very kind, generous man, he said, "Well, I don't know Bert, I would have to think about it because I only have two spaces left.  And what am I going to do if a student with a first-class honors degree comes in and wants to work with me, if I (unclear)?" (laughter)  I said to him, well, I have a first-class honors degree, sir (laughter).  He nearly fell through the chair because I was so incompetent and bad hands on the bench, you know.  Chemists are supposed to have good hands, not supposed to be breaking and mixing and--so he said, so he said, oh, he said, and I have a full scholarship to do a master's degree (laughter) (unclear).  Poor man.  So he said, so I think I'll have to take you then (laughter) 'cause at least he wouldn't have had to pay for me.
Story_ID: 28448
Speaker 1: But by the time I spent two years with him [Professor J.K.N. Jones at Queens University, Ontario, Canada], I had obtained a scholarship which goes only if I can be boastful about it, for the best students, from the National Research Council because the intention of the scholarship is to try to identify new, young chemists for Canada.  And I obtained the scholarship and it was my, my--you can go to any university in Canada.  I chose [University of] Alberta because I--for reasons for which I won't take time to go into here.  And that's when, that's, between 1961 and 1964, working with Professor R. U. Lemieux, who was very, very, very different thinking.  He had gone to, he had done his expert work in the United States.
Speaker 2: Now, this is Raymond Lemieux.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he was highly respected, mechanistic worker, so that if something happened, if you mix A and B, and you get C, he would be very, very interested in how that happened.  Why did you get C and not D, that sort of thing.  And so he put me on an interesting project, and it allowed me, quite frankly, to see how the experts do it.  And as a result of that collaboration, I got another National Research Council scholarship for people with Ph.D.s.
Story_ID: 28449
Speaker 1: Let's talk about what your dissertation was about--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --what your thesis was at the University of Alberta, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  We started by using a readily available derivative of the sugar glucose, commercially available, I should say.  And we carried out a series of reactions on that, largely, because Professor [Raymond] Lemieux was trying to make an agent to be used in a type of insecticide or an--insecticide is the wrong word, antibiotic, not insecticide, antibiotics because at that time, there were certain nitrogen-containing antibiotics that were proven to be very, very effective.  Let's see, Erythromycin, is that--I'm trying to remember the name of the chemical, you know, when you get cut or stuck by a (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: There are others.  They come in little tubes, and you squeeze--I can't remember.  These are, these are just antibiotics that you can rub over yourself if you scrape your knee or something, just to make sure it doesn't get infected.  And he was very much involved in that, and so his idea was to try to make models of these antibiotics.  But as frequently happens, the route that he had planned didn't work.  And so his interests was immediately lost because that's where, that's how he was gonna get rich, if he could do this.  Well, I decided that I was gonna see what these things are.  And he would luckily, leave me alone because if he wanted you, if he had his mind set on you doing something, he would, he would--he wouldn't wanna listen to anything.  So he left it to me, and I came up with the solution to this.  And when he saw what the, his planned experiments had produced, he got into it right away.  And I know that we published a series of four papers, one after the other in the Canadian journal.  And that was valuable to me in many respects.
Speaker 1: Now, let me just go back here and try to make this clear.
Speaker 2: Okay, sure.
Speaker 1: So what was the problem and what was the solution that you came up with?
Speaker 2: Okay, the sugar, the derivative, the commercially-available derivative, sugar, that I had mentioned, yeah, that one, had changed structure.  Well, let me see how best to put it?  The, it was, it had lost water so that instead of a single--so that you had, instead of a single bond in the starting material--now, the commercially available was molecules--you had a double bond like that.  Normally, you would have only one bond, but now you had two bonds.  And so this bond, this double bond is a center of great activity.  And his idea was to introduce nitrogen at one point and one point.  But this is difficult to do simultaneously.  So he would introduce nitrogen here, do something and introduce the other nitrogen here.  Well, unfortunately, that just didn't go that way.  And it, what it gave at the time, was a mess which did not have the double bond anymore, and therefore, was not really useful to him.  But it provided new chemistry because this was a reaction which had not been seen before.  So although it was not giving him what he wanted directly, you could probably find a way around the abnormalities that were, of the product.  And it was my job to do this, and I--that's the sort of thing I liked to do.  So I don't know if that makes it any clearer.
Speaker 1: What did you do then to solve it, you know?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, the first thing I did was not to track nitrogen to the double bond but to add something else which is a standard reaction for chemical double bonds, bromine.  In fact, that's how it's--you test something for bromine.  You put it in there, and the color goes (unclear), or iodine.  So I did that, and that turned out to be a beautiful reaction, which then led us to look at the other halogens that iodine and the others, and out of that came a whole bunch of new chemistry which, much of which I used in my later work.
Story_ID: 28450
Speaker 1: So you graduated second in your batch, I hear?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: With a first-class honors degree, which earned you scholarships, you know, to go on and pursue post-graduate studies?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you went to Imperial College?
Speaker 2: Went to Imperial College, went across to London [United Kingdom].
Speaker 1: In London, yeah, London.  Now, this is for someone in the British Commonwealth, this is the big thing.  Now, you're in London (laughter).
Speaker 2: I was very much interested in London.  And this was for a personal, a doctorate, so, you know, even to get into his lab, to be accepted by him, even if you have your own money, is, was quite remarkable.  He eventually won the Nobel Prize, Dr. [Derek] Barton.
Speaker 1: Now, who was this?  How do you spell his name now?  This is doctor--
Speaker 2: B-A-R-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Dr. Barton, now, he's a Nobel Prize winner [1969 Nobel Prize in Chemistry] that you worked with--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in London.
Speaker 2: He got it just after I left.
Speaker 1: Now, was he doing the same, was he doing research on sugar and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --and carbohydrates?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: He was doing research on photochemistry.  When you shine light on compounds, you know, you can get reactions taking place.  And it was something which was coming out just at the time, and I thought I'd like to get into it so that when I get my own lab, I will explore photochemistry on sugars, which I did (laughter).  So the, so I went to his place, but then he had other ideas too (laughter), which he wanted me to look at.  And I never did get, sort out the project which he gave me while I was there.  But I think we became very, very respectful of one another, and when I left him after two years, although we'd never published anything together, he was really very, very supportive of everything I did.  I have somewhere, you know, these little handwritten notes that would appear.  "Bert, I saw that paper of yours in so and so.  That was very interesting.  Did you think of this as an alternative?"  (Laughter) And then he would suggest (laughter), and, yeah, he is a great man, wonderful person, although he didn't, didn't have that personality when I was working for him (laughter).
Speaker 1: So this was a missed opportunity, maybe on the, on his part?  Were you the first black student he ever had?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had students from all over.  When I got to him, remember he got the Nobel Prize only two years later.  As a matter of fact, I can remember one of the letters--I wrote a letter to him after he got it, and I said, I don't understand why it took you so long to get the Nobel Prize while other people in England have got--no, no, he didn't get the Nobel.  He got knighted first.  So he gets knighted--
Speaker 1: Before he received--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My mistake.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He got the Nobel [1969] and then knighthood.  But I was asking him how people, how come people have knighthoods and you haven't got one?  And he replied to say, "Thank you for your letter, Bert.  Don't worry about it.  The only people how get knighthoods are people who do nothing, who work on committees without pay." (laughter) And two years later, of course, he got the--he had to be knighted because, of course, he got the Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 28451
Speaker 1: So in '66 [1966], now, you're married by this time, and you haven't told us how you--
Speaker 2: I married--
Speaker 1: --how you met your wife [Lillian Lawrynyuk], now?
Speaker 2: --in December before we--
Speaker 1: Of '63 [1963], right?
Speaker 2: '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: '63 [1963], all right.
Speaker 2: Now, that to me is very interesting because my wife is also a Queens [University, Ontario, Canada] graduate.  And I had met her there.  We weren't dating or anything like that at the time.  She was, she was at the university on a scholarship from the government in healthcare to do her degree in nursing.  And she got posted, would you believe it, at Edmonton [Alberta, Canada] because she had to work in a hospital--she, the basis of her being sent is that she had to go and join the service.  She couldn't go for a commercial job.  And (laughter), how did she and I meet up again in Edmonton?  Well, it's a funny story, but this Australian--no, we had, yeah, there's an Australian student and a student from Ukraine who were in my Ph--in my post-Ph.D., my Ph.D. class, my Ph.D. class with [Raymond] Lemieux  And they used to have a--they both had girlfriends in the nursing campaign.  And they came through them from one Ukrainian nurse--my wife is Ukrainian or born in Canada, of course, the Ukrainian, one Ukrainian let to the second one, and I got to go out with her.  The Australian guy, that guy, did Bruce get married.  I can't remember.  He got married, the Australian, I can't remember where his wife came from.  But it was because of that (unclear) because she was working for the nursing.  But that wasn't planned or anything, strange as it may sound (laughter).  And so we got married just at the end of my time there because by this time I had been wanting to, you know, state what my future would look like.  And I was about to apply for the Canadian, for the National Research Council scholarship that would take me to England.  So.
Speaker 1: Now, did she go with you to London?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, the National Research Council as far as I was concerned was forward looking in those days.  You could, the terms of my fellowship was that the National Research Council, post-doctoral fellowship, which you could take--overseas post-doctoral fellowship, which allowed you to pick and choose your country because if there was an eminent scientist living in Timbuktu, you could use it to go there, and the government would pay your family's ways.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she came with me.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so she was there throughout your stay at Imperial (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: England.
Speaker 1: --college.
Story_ID: 28452
Speaker 1: And now, in '66' [1966], you returned to Canada to the University of Waterloo?
Speaker 2: '66 [1966], not '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: '66 [1966], yeah, '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Near Toronto [Canada], right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And you continued, then you got back on the sugar chemistry research?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, what--now, I have here that you were determined that sugar could be used to create many carbon-based chemicals, medicines, plastics and paints.  And is this, now, this sounds like George Washington Carver [pioneering African American scientist] almost with the peanut.  I mean you, so all these things could be created with sugar?
Speaker 2: I don't know about paint, I don't know about paint.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'll scratch that one out.
Speaker 2: But because of my training with [Raymond] Lemieux, I saw that these could be used for compounds which themselves are not sugar.  Typically, the synthetic work that was done in sugar which is, you know, such a great source of material.  You know, you have starch.  That's a sugar.  You have glucose.  These are easily obtainable sugars.  But most of the work that was going on was taking one sugar and making another.  Now, part of that is because of the repertoire of chemicals that we had.  Sugars are very easily abused, so, you know, they burn, as you know.  So you can't use reagents on them that are too strong.  And I was fortunate to come in at a time when the reagents that you could use on sugar were now available much more readily.  Well, we were in Canada, University of Waterloo and I remember this so clearly.  We, one of our seminar speakers had come from the Canadian insect control, whatever.  And Canada had a big problem at the time with beetles eating the lumber.  And the cost to Canada was in the billion dollar range.  Okay, well, I asked, well, we asked this guy to come and give us some lectures on how the insect, the insect damage to the trees, how bad is it?  And he introduced me to then practice, developing practice, particularly in Alabama, to try to fight insects by using insect pheromones.  And he said, well, we have pheromones of the beetles that do it, and I said, what does it look like?  And so he drew up on my blackboard in my office a structure, and I said, boy, that doesn't look--I'm not familiar with that type of structure.  And he said, well, if you think about it, let me know because he has to go to speak with another professor.  Well, he left the thing on my board, and I then took it and built a model of it.  Do you know what I mean?  A chemical model, you know?
Speaker 1: Explain it.
Speaker 2: Well, most of the time when you look, if I--normally, the molecules as they're drawn on the blackboard are only drawn in two dimensions.  But the molecules are in three dimensions.  So I, with these models, you can make it in three dimensions, and so it's totally different from what you're seeing on the board.  I turned it around.  I said, oh, my goodness.  This is so and so and so and so.  And I decided that, you know, this may be an interesting thing to synthesize.  And I applied to the Canadian Research Council for, I remember it was only 68-, $68,000 for a student and me to try to synthesize this.  And we did, and there's a picture of Brian up there, and me, plotting the synthesis of this compound.  And so that, we did synthesize some of them, and it was published in the British newspapers.  And so everybody became aware of our ability to synthesize insect pheromones, frontalin, various insects pheromones from various insects from sugars.  And the one that is from Alabama-(unclear) I can't remember.  But the use of it really killed a lot of this, the beetle, the pests that used to affect the cotton, the boll weevil. The boll weevil, was one of the things [pheromones] that we were trying to make.  I don't think I mentioned that.  But that was one of the first ones that we, you know, got interests in.
Story_ID: 28453
Speaker 1: Now, the one for the, the forest beetle in Canada really set us in a good position to understand why sugars were such excellent starting materials for certain types of things.  Compounds--and I have some props here which I plan to use--
Speaker 2: Of course, the (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Most things that are produced in nature, it could be sugar, it could be milk, it could be an insecticide and antibiotic, they have (unclear), which is called, they're asymmetrical.  Now, to illustrate that I'll do that, I'll show that with these socks.  Now, if I ask, these are shoe, athletic shoes, athletic socks rather.  If I asked you which of these is the left footed, for your left foot, and which is these, for your right foot, which would you take, right hand or left hand?
Speaker 2: For my left foot or my right foot, I'd take the one in your left hand.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because the brand of the sock is written on the inside (laughter).  That seems like that's a better place for it, I don't know.  That's the only reason.
Speaker 1: You'd take this for your right--
Speaker 2: Right foot, yeah.
Speaker 1: In other words, if you were to put this one on your left foot--now, you'd put this on which foot, did you say?
Speaker 2: I'd put it on the right.
Speaker 1: On the right, so, if I try to put that sock on this foot, it wouldn't fit.
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.  It looks like it'd go on either one.
Speaker 1: No, no, no (laughter), you have to choose.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, you have to choose.  Okay, it looks like either sock will fit either foot, but, you know, I just--
Speaker 1: Well, the fact, well, let me try the experiment with this.
Speaker 2: Well, with the gloves, yeah, that's certainly.  You have to make a choice there.  Yes, with the gloves, right, yeah, so I would chose the glove in your left hand for my right hand.
Speaker 1: Good.  You missed this, okay, because this one would not fit here.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So your gloves are asymmetrical whereas this is symmetrical.
Speaker 2: So either one will fit.
Speaker 1: Either one will fit.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well, that is the same thing that is true of chemical compounds manufactured in nature.  There is an asymmetric quality--where am I here now, sorry.  There's an asymmetric quality to these which, if you think about it, this one is the mirror image of that, and all these plants have this quality where it is left handed or right handed.  They're identical, but one is left handed, and one is right handed.  And most of them in nature occur as only one hand, and if you take the wrong one, it can kill you.  So that right handed glucose is sweet.  Left hand, left--right handed sugar is sweet.  Left handed sugar is bitter.  And people, of course, go why is that?
Story_ID: 28454
Speaker 1: But obviously, there are medicines that you're gonna use.  If you're using a naturally occurring medicine, you're okay, but if you're using one that is manufactured in the lab by me or by my chemist, there is no difference between them.  So what you end up with is a mixture of the two, and you have to separate them or you may kill the patient.  You can't give the thing which is a mixture of right and left.  You have to have it--that happened in the, oh, it was in my head a minute.  There's a famous medicine which was used against women--
Speaker 2: Thalidomide.
Speaker 1: Thalidomide.  Sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the one that caused all the birth defects, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's exactly right.  And the only problem was that in the wrong, there's about few percent of the wrong one in the drug that was administered.  So you must not only have the, the right one, but you must have it completely right.  Well, that was true, that is true for most things.  And it's certainly true for the pheromones.  The only thing, the beetles have taken it to a much more sophisticated extent.  If I start with sugar, glucose, itself, I can only make one of these, that one or that one.  I'm not sure which.  And so you have to do it purely.  But the, but the insects are so smart that when they're communicating by pheromones, they communicate with 30 percent of this and 70 percent of that, 30-70 mixture.  So when they want to reproduce, the sex pheromone is that mixture.  And you can go all the way down British Columbia [Canada] on the West Coast and down to California, where it is the same insect, but the pheromone is this or that.  It's different mixtures of the same compound.  So that helps keep it within a certain genus of the compound, of the--
Speaker 2: So it maintains, so it means that the, if you try to use pheromones against all the beetles, some of them are gonna survive anyway regardless, you know--
Speaker 1: Oh, indeed--
Speaker 2: --because they're not gonna be susceptible.
Speaker 1: Right, and so the question that was worrying my friend who worked for the government was, how can you produce this in a large, large enough scale that you can deliberately mix what you want of these two.  And that was what we were working towards.  And unfortunately, he got stole away from Canada (laughter), just at the time to work with the Boston [Massachusetts] place that was doing pheromone chemistry--I can't remember the name, because they had found a way to do this for the boll weevil, and that had a great impact on the supply of cotton.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the boll weevil devastated the crops--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --in the South.
Speaker 1: In the South, yeah.  And I wish I had kept (unclear), but my university, University of Waterloo [Canada], you know, wrote up how jeans will be cheaper (laughter) because Professor Fraser (laughter) is working on it (laughter). I said, gosh, I don't want that (laughter).  But that was how I got into the idea, you see, of using sugars in a way that had not been done before.  So I'm synthesizing things which are not sugars, and, of course, that may be, look at more and more interesting factors, targets that we could synthesize.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 28455
Speaker 1: You worked on-- you were at the University of Waterloo [Canada] until 1980, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what happened, and now, you went to the University of Maryland.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you manage to leave Canada?  I thought you--
Speaker 2: It was very tough, very, very tough.  And I didn't leave Canada actually.  But I, I'd been very, very fortunate to work with some amazing young people.  But eventually, you needed machinery, more exotic machinery.  If we were--we had started at the bottom when I came in 1966 because at that time, I think the--well, it was a fledging department.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the only way I can put it.  And we wanted, me and another young chemist were there, wanted to turn things around.  And we needed machinery.  It, Victor is his name, and he is, himself, turned out to be a very eminent Canadian chemist.  But the machinery that we needed to do our research, I would take the samples of his students on Monday, drive thirty-five miles to have them analyzed, and then some time later in the week, he would take his samples, along with my samples, you know, we'd take one another's samples and have them analyzed.  And we had to do that on our own time, our own money.  It's impossible to do it.  And here was I, now getting interests in my work from all over the world and being--and there was no prospect of getting this.  And this came just at the time when the guy who had gotten me interested in insect pheromones, he had left, he had gone, gone to Boston [Massachusetts].  And then I got these calls from various universities south of the border, [University of] Maryland being one.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's a case of, you basically outgrew the capacity of the school in some ways to do the research that you were--
Speaker 2: I think that would be a--and, you know, I, my wife [Lillian Lawrynyuk] and I are going over all (unclear).  Most of the foundation of my subsequent chemistry was done in those fourteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the offer to come to the University of Maryland, 1980.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, you're basically drafted by them in some ways--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because of your reputation.  So, now, you accepted a--now, did you come in as a chair, department chair?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.  I don't want nothing like that (laughter).  I, no, I didn't like that.  I'm not a very good administrator, no.  I luckily--in fact, that may have helped me to leave Waterloo because they wanted me to become chair of the department.  And I don't like that.
Story_ID: 28456
Speaker 1: All right, now, so like in Canada, I guess you had a large percentage of your time could be spent in research, at the University of Maryland?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: So you're teaching, well, did you teach any at all?
Speaker 2: It's interesting because we--I did.  And the situation was very different than it was, than I used to see, that I was to later find out because the University of Waterloo [Canada] was not trying to make itself a financial earning system.  So they would split the student population that wanted to study, the students who wanted to study organic chemistry, for example, into those who really shall I say, needed in their curriculum--for example, if you're in agriculture, then you're gonna need some, nursing, you're gonna need some organic chemistry.  Then there are those who will make a career of it, and they were split out.  And that was done very, very efficiently and without problems at the University of Waterloo.  And that helped Waterloo to attract a very bright cohort of students who, you know, immediately were sucked up to the prestige to Caltech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California], to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles], to [University of California] Berkeley to do graduate work because they did so well.  And these guys would just knock away the GRE [Graduate Record Examination] exams.  So, so that was very satisfying to teach the upper elite of students, if I can put it that way.  And many of them joined the lab, were allowed to join the lab by something that was suggested by a genius on the faculty.  And the question was here are we, a fledging university.  How are we ever going to get to compete with Toronto, University of Toronto [Toronto, Canada], McGill [University, Montreal, Canada], all these places to get students.  (Laughter) And this guy said, what we'll do is we'll offer them a scholarship, and the terms of the scholarship, it was called the Chem-13 [ph.] Scholarship.  In that time, high schools in Ontario [Canada] had thirteen grades.  What was the Chem-13 Scholarship, not money.  The idea was that the Chem-13 incoming student, the freshman, got to spend time in a professor's lab.  So he would immediately come in the lab for so many hours a week and, you know, mingle with the graduate students and so on.  And among many of the students who started in my group, started as Chem-13 Scholarships.  And one of them who subsequently went to Berkeley, he had papers published in his third year.  He was going to meetings and giving speeches at meetings.  And so that was one of the big attractions of the school.  And I was very sorry about missing that.  But part of the reason was that although it was good to get the extra pair of hands doing work, anything like the chemicals they were using are not usually thought of.  And so, so that was the part of that, and as you know--I don't know if you know--maybe you don't know, that the University of Waterloo at the moment I think is Number One in Canada.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28457
Speaker 1: So University of Maryland, what was that like?
Speaker 2: It was okay in one sense.  It was, there were a group of good people working there, but it's a huge faculty.  I think at the time I was there, there were fifty-six people.  I, in the two years I spent there, I don't think there was one faculty meeting that--I didn't get to meet all of my colleagues because, you know, they're never around for the same meeting and so on.  And again, because of that they're, I left on the promise of better equipment.  And it was not forthcoming.  And so that was one of the reasons I left.  I left and went to Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so--
Speaker 2: Because the type of work which I'm doing, if the people I'm competing with have much better--you have to be competing at the levels they're competing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you were only at Maryland for two years--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and then you went on to Duke.  And at Duke, now, did you come in as a special professor--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Just as a faculty member?
Speaker 2: I just came in as a normal professor, faculty member.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 28458
Speaker 1: So you started in 1982 at Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina], and your research is, let's see, now, it says here that your team developed a unique process to combine simple sugars into oligosaccharide.
Speaker 2: Oligosaccharides, oligosaccharides.
Speaker 1: Oligosaccharide.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's something like the rungs of a chain, you know, you--imagine that you have a chain, but you can have branches up and down, sideways.  And so you have a network of, what do you call the individual units on a chain?
Speaker 1: Links.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you can it linked to the right, to the left, to the bottom, to the sideways, which you don't see how difficult that is in two dimensions until you make a model of it.  But we developed a way to do that, and I think that is what led to our success in that direction.  And because what we developed was a novel way of hooking two of those together, that we could regulate how the links are developed.  And it took some while that we were able to synthesize a complex sugar, which at the time was, had twenty-seven links and was the largest oligosaccharide ever synthesized.  And it taught us some interesting things.  The large, this largest oligosaccharide that you have really has two pieces, one attached to the other.  I didn't, I don't think I wrote this information (unclear), but it's very fascinating that one of them has been, is of interest for bladder cancer.  And the other is of interest for tuberculosis, identifying tuberculosis (unclear) pieces.  So this piece is tuberculosis.  This piece is malaria, and, of course, you go to a place like India which has both.  So it raised a lot of--probably purely accidental (unclear), but the idea of synthesizing these separately, and taking it further has been virtually terminated in the last few years.  We, as I said, we started on this trail because we hoped that it could attract funding from the venture capitals.  It didn't, and it was just difficult to find the support over the years.
Story_ID: 28459
Speaker 1: In 1988, you were nominated for the Nobel Prize in Chemistry.  Now, what was this for?  What did they nominate you--what research?
Speaker 2: The, hooking the sugars together, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that was a hundred percent chemistry.  And, I'm in contact with people in Sweden a lot since I've had several students from Sweden.  In fact, the first student to join my lab, my, you know, non-profit lab was from Sweden.  He had earned his Ph.D. in chemistry.  So I get, you know, I know people who are in the committee.  So I get leaked, (laughter) about what it is and they, I think one of the reasons is that the prize for the next few years is probably going to be given more to biology chemistry.  So even if you're able to synthesize a certain molecule and it's been difficult to synthesize, and it's unique, you have to, it has to find its place in the pantheon of biological stuff.  And probably it's justified because I think the people who are, who do synthetic chemistry have earned the Nobel rights for quite a few years and the biologists have not been drafted as much as they should, although I think they're doing very well for the next few years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the trouble with that, of course, is that a medicinal chemist is still needing to work in chemistry, even though he may be applying it to biology, he still needs chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So medicinal biologists, you mean, still needs chemistry if he's--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sorry, yeah.
Story_ID: 28460
Speaker 1: Now, in 1988, it says here that you attended the International Symposium on Carbohydrate Chemistry in Stockholm, Sweden and were featured--and you were featured in both the scientific and cultural programs.  So you played the organ or the piano--which one?
Speaker 2: The organ.
Speaker 1: The organ for entertainment after the--
Speaker 2: I have a picture of me practicing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you continued to play an instrument in, you know, as you--
Speaker 2: Not really (laughter).  It was difficult, well, any instrument you play, you really have to practice.  You have to practice, or if you don't, your fingers feel it, and, you know, that's so frustrating.  I set out to play this piece I know so well, and my fingers won't cooperate (laughter).  So I restrict my playing of the organ to maybe joyous occasions or funerals of my dear friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, some of the complicated things that you could once play, you don't play anymore?
Speaker 2: I can't do it, can't do it anymore, yeah.  I don't know, I don't know how I did it.  I went on a lecture tour of Australia, and Lillian [Lawrynyuk], my wife and I were trying to figure out how many recitals did you give (laughter).  I can't remember, but, you know, it means that when other people are having fun or something, you have to practice because all these different pipe organs are very different.  They sound differently, and so you have to know where the (unclear) knobs--it's not like a piano.  The knobs are on the right over here, on the left over there or whatever.  So you have to practice.  I gave one recital at, oh, my gosh, it was in Canada, in Memorial University in Newfoundland [Canada].  I don't think that's there, but I gave a series of three lectures and a recital.  Well, in order to get to the, practice for the recital, I had to go practice every morning.  But it was enjoyable.  I, I like doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay, you did the same thing in Seville, Spain in '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That was less, less--what's the word I want?  It was identical--it was definitely extemporaneous.  I had, every, most of the carbohydrate chemists knew that, of my ability to play the piano and organ.  But there's a fantastic church in Seville, the Cathedral of Seville, which is a transformed monastery.  They have now, so it's a, it a--did I say monastery?  No--
Speaker 1: A mosque or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Mosque.
Speaker 2: Mosque, can't--mosque is the word I want.  It's a transformed mosque.  And it's been preserved ever since the Boers were, the North Africans were in Spain.
Speaker 1: Now, is this the Alhambra?  Is this what we're talking about?
Speaker 2: No, the Alhambra is a, is not a church.  It's a, it's where they had their defenses.
Speaker 1: The palace, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's closer to Toledo [Spain].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And so I think the conference had been visiting the church as something to see, you know, because you look over here, and you can see the remnants of Islamic occupation.  And the organist of the cathedral played a recital, and then at the end of it, one of the organizers of the (laughter) of the conference said, "We have a scientist here who's also (laughter) an organist, and we would like to invite him to play."  And here she comes (laughter) over, and she takes me up, and I have no music.  I haven't memorized anything.  So I guess one of the advantages is that on the piano, I can also play jazz (unclear) (laughter).  So I was able to play for a few minutes, and just a magnificent instrument.  It was a joy playing that.  That's one of the great things about that.  You know, I'd go off and people let me play the organ in (laughter) various places.
Story_ID: 28461
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you've published, you know, over 250, well, you published over 250 papers by 1990.  So I mean it's a lot, I mean, so you get a lot of--is your work cited quite a bit--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --by the scientists?
Speaker 2: It's more like 350 now, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what would you summarize as the scope of your research today?
Speaker 2: At this moment, we're using sugars to make nucleotide oligosaccharides, something like--everybody knows the word DNA.  But it stands for deoxyribonucleic acid.  But there's another absolutely essential cohort, and it is oligoribo, oligodeoxyribo.  So before the ribonucleoside part, put in oligo.  And it's a, that's an essential compound.  RNA is used to transfer messages to DNA and tell it what to do.  Part of the, part of the--it has been kind of, I would say, ignored over the years.  But within recent times, something very interesting has been found.  Everybody or most, many people will know that DNA carries information about disease states, for example, about my diabetes.  It carries information about your features so that my son and grandson look like me.  But that may not get there.  For example, there will be a part of DNA that is to tell my grandson that you must have a nose like your grandfather.  But that piece of our RNA constitutes only about twenty units.  So that's all you want.  And over the last few years they have found that there are bits and pieces that are floating around in your system.  And sometimes those pieces of oligoribonucleic acid will snap onto the part that, to transfer that particular gene, whether it's my nose or diabetes or some other inheritable disease.  And so what happens, it snaps onto it, cuts it in two.  This is reformed, and so this gene becomes silenced and unable.  And so there're, some of these diseases will not, will communicate certain forms of cancer.  And so being able to synthesize 20, 30 of these little units is very valuable, except that the chemistry to do that is formidable.  It's 10, tens of thousands of times more difficult than to synthesize DNA.  So the machines which they use to churn off whatever they want with DNA, it doesn't work with these, and the reason is a particular oxygen, and we know how to deal with that, or we think we do.
Story_ID: 28462
Speaker 1: And, in fact, we have been given a grant from the National Research--National Science, National Science Foundation [NSF], and we are very proud of that.  We are just trying to organize it right now because normally when you apply to these agencies, the application is sent out to a bunch of experts who, they say, it's worth it, only 50 percent, 80 percent and so on.  Well, we had trouble with the committee because of some other things they were saying.  And so we were about to reapply, and we got word from the director of the NSF program that we, that funds us, and they said they have decided they're gonna give the grant inside.  They are making the decisions that they want to fund this research regardless of what the other people.  And that's called an EAGER grant, and EAGER stands for--well, EAGER, that funding source is for programs or research, research efforts that are of high risk, but of high pay off.  And they only, they give it from there without any outside mentoring or anything like that or investigation of the project, the problem.  So we feel very, very proud of this, and we have people lined up who are gonna be able to work on it, we hope.  Because, of course, I'm not blaming the committees who thought something was wrong because but I, you know, you look at some of the steps that you're about to do, and there is no, no precedent that you can work off, which doesn't mean that it won't work (laughter), which doesn't mean that it won't work.  It means you haven't had a chance to try it.  And there are some people who prefer to, you to take the chance first.  And that would have been fine in another climate, but not in this climate of scientific funding which is, which is so underfunded, really.
Story_ID: 28463
Speaker 1: I read here that you had hoped to use some of this research to make strides toward a cure for AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I can also tell you how that works.  When I was at Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina], we were doing some work on malaria, (unclear) oligosaccharide.  And this student had completed this very nice piece of work.  And then, what had been known about the active center in what is called GP-120, which is GP-120 is a ring of, a ribbon so to speak, of the AIDS targeted center.  And the important part of that is called, it was a V-3 Loop, which had been found in all of the AIDS, versions of AIDS that had been at the time found.  And attached to this V-3 center was the complex carbohydrate that my student had made.  Well, one of the biochemists at Duke suggested that they could make the ribbon.  And this was a ribbon of, of different amino acids, that they could make this ribbon of amino acids.  We should make the sugar part, and then we should attach both of these together.  We must get this funded.  Well, we sent it in, and it was rejected out of hand with a snotty remark saying that they think they can make this type of compound without the use of the carbohydrates, just focus on the proteins because the carbohydrates chemistry is very difficult.  And I mean I could tell you why it's very difficult, but the reason, the reason that they want, they gave it up was because it was too difficult.  Well, that was 19--well, I don't--what year was that?  What year was that when that, (unclear), but I was still at Duke.  I left, and I was at a conference in Jamaica, a real serious conference in Jamaica on medicinal stuff.  And the person who used to be the head of the NIH [National Institutes of Health] at the time told me that after all this time they have decided that they really want to take a look at how the carbohydrates, the complex carbohydrates affects it.  And so I'm not sure where that stands, but by that time, I'd lost my interests in that, in addition to which the person I was gonna work with, unfortunately, passed away.
Speaker 1: But the possibility is still there, and somebody'll pick it up, somebody's going to pick it up and try to move it--
Speaker 2: I, well, I'm trying to remember the guy who--he was at NIH himself, and then went to the, is at the University of Maryland.  And he was one of the persons who was up for the Nobel Prize for discovering of the AIDS, as--the structure of the AIDS virus.  It went to a French guy [Luc Montagnier], but it was this other, the American who is--gosh, I'm having trouble remembering his name [Robert Gallo].  And I don't think I'll (unclear), for so long (laughter).
Story_ID: 28464
Speaker 1: People often ask scientists, you know, like what is your big discovery and that sort of thing, and what is--you know, I guess in relationship to their legacy, but what would you say in terms of your professional legacy now, what would you say it is?
Speaker 2: Reducing, transforming carbohydrate chemistry because--okay, transforming carbohydrate chemistry.  And what do I think is this.  If you take, well, there are three compounds in nature which do a lot of regulation of what happens.  There are--the word "oligo" means there are several of them.  So there are oligosaccharides which means that there are chains of sugars linked together.  Okay, an example of which, if you wish, is starch.  There are oligopeptides.  That's a little different one, which is the components of proteins.  And these not only, you know, in meat, they're in meat, they're in a lot of--they're in, they also exist in chains, in complex forms.  And there are also oligonucleotides which is DNA.  The last two, some units that are in DNA could be described as having, the monomers that I want are the chains, you gave me the word--
Speaker 1: The links, the links--
Speaker 2: The, the--
Speaker 1: Links.
Speaker 2: The link.  The links have a head and a tail.  So to link one to the other, the head has to (unclear) at the tail.  Okay, one head and one tail.  And that is also true of the oligonucleotides, but the oligosaccharides, there's one head and a tail, but on the head are other, but--yeah, let me--there's a head and a tail like that.  On this one, this also has a number of links, places where you could make the link.  So a head could contact there, it could contact there.  It could contact there, it could contact there.  So to begin with it's more complex than the oligoproteins and so on.  But it becomes worse because on this, if you have a point of linkage here with another sugar.  The sugar can link it in one of these ways.  So to begin with, you have one sugar, two sugars can link together to give you twenty-nine different compounds.  So you have to be, you have to make up your mind, what are you gonna make?  So putting them together is much more complex than putting together a protein.  Well, I think we have, we have developed a method so that when this head meets that tail, it goes like this, and there is nothing else around here for it to attach to, that--our methodology has made it so that it is very specific.  So you only get one linkage rather than several.
Story_ID: 28465
Speaker 1: But there's also the problem because since this, these sugars have different numbers sticking off, this could go after that.  It could go after this--these are different compounds, but they are all two glucoses linked together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, but because this, remember, has a left and a right side, it could come in like this.  And that's a different one also.  So you have to be able to assemble these with the proper symmetry and our method of linking called, (unclear) which I (unclear) (laughter).  But that allowed us to do that, and I think that's the big achievement of our work.  And not only, by the way, does it allow the link to come on the middle finger, rather than any other, it allows it to come in with the proper orientation.  So that is selective in that way and selective this way.  This is stereo--well, I won't go into the language because that is very (laughter), very complicated, but there're symmetries that you are to take into consideration.  Otherwise, we could end up with (laughter) just a terrible mixture (laughter).  I was trying to remember what one of my graduate students said, well, what did you get? (Laughter) I won't tell you what he said (laughter).  But it begins with "s."
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 28466
Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in the, in NOBCChE [National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers] at all in your career?
Speaker 2: I spent some time with it when I was at Maryland [University of Maryland], when I was at Maryland, then, for a lesser extent at Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina]--
Speaker 1: That's the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And when I subsequently left, there was a part that was starting here at NC [North Carolina] Central [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  And people used to come from here, we'd go down on a Friday or a Saturday, people from (unclear), but somehow it didn't, didn't work, didn't work out.  I was interested in doing that because I was aware of some of the work that had been sponsored by the organization and that I was even privileged to have, to receive the Percy Julian Prize [in 1991].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you received the Percy Julian Prize in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when did you, when did that--
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: Well, you can name--that's all right, just, but it's important that you received it.  I mean it's really a big deal.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's great.  And so--
Speaker 1: I think it's about '90 [1990] or '91 [1991].  I would need to--
Speaker 2: Not '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: --need to--, I thought I seen that in, in some of my information, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And that's, there're, they're, you know, all the lectures which I've given to historically black schools over the years, Morris--[Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia]--small, but you never hear about Morris College is one, for example.  And, of course, there's Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland].
Story_ID: 28467
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I would wish that some of them would be more bold and, you know, not to seek comfort zones quite so much.  I knew I'd taught some African American in my classes when I was at Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina] and Maryland [University of Maryland], and they were very hesitant about seeking help from fellow students.  And, of course, I know realize, and that was one of the things I learned when I came to the South, for example, that the--many of the people who I was teaching--down here at Duke, for example, had a totally different background, and a different feeling than those who I taught elsewhere.  And I reflect on it myself, to the extent where if I told you about my first lab when I was at Queens [University, Canada], and I didn't know what density meant.  Who was I gonna ask?  And I, you know, I am black.  Is this guy gonna look at me as being stupid or something?  Well, I just didn't care. (laughter)  I was gonna ask him.  All I wanted the information, and I don't have that, well, I don't have that reflected where I came from.  I'm not sure, except that we had so many teachers who were white coming from England, you know, and we would not be timid about them or anything--timid about asking them and that has helped, I think, myself and the throngs of West Indians who have gone to places where they probably were the only person in town.  My friend, my classmate, Eddie, studied medicine in Switzerland.  So I don't know how that idea, how well that idea has worked out to the students to be not afraid.  And I've (laughter) had my problems about, some of this because I think that if you can get into the best university in the state, then you should try.  And it pains me sometimes when I hear students at, well, say the University of Cal--U-C, University of North Carolina, praising the fact that the blacks now have their own dormitory.  What?  I mean I was, I remember when the riots were going on, and I think if that had been proposed back in the 1960s, that the idea was to have a, the black students confined to a dormitory, that would have been rejected, it seems to me.  But--
Speaker 1: It's complicated (laughter).
Speaker 2: It's complicated.
Speaker 1: It is a complicated--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I started some of this when I was in Canada because, of course, there were Canadian universities who were looking for black students, and they didn't have as many.  So that was necessary.  In fact, I was looking to some places where I had been invited in, to speak all over Canada.  And that idea is very much there, about more blacks getting also into chemistry, into science, pardon me, because that was at a time when that was, the ideas (unclear)--one thing you should know, incidentally, is that the National Science Foundation [NSF] gave me funding at Duke to hire college students, black college students to come and work during the summer.  And I had to make a report on that.  That was, the idea was floated by an officer at NSF, and I ran it myself for quite a while.  So we did that, and somehow the money for that just disappeared.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I did that for some years.
Story_ID: 28468
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us something about your family?  Do you have children?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have two children, Terry, boy, and Andrea, girl.  Terry's forty-five [years old], Andrea is about forty-nine.  And Andrea was born in England, and they both have American and Canadian citizenships.  Terry was born in Canada and went to--I think they went up to high school, Andrea and Terry went, came down and did middle school here [United States].  Then they wanted to go back, go to university.  Terry was a very good athlete.  And he got a scholarship and whatever at [University of] Michigan because he was a runner.
Speaker 1: Okay, track star, okay.
Speaker 2: But he turned it down and went back to Queens [University, Canada], both he and his sister, went back to Queens.  I guess they had heard so much about the school from us [Fraser-Reid and his wife, Lillian Lawrynyuk].  And then Andrea did her law degree at Georgetown [University, Washington, District of Columbia] and works at a, in Washington.  Terry went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], got a scholarship from MIT after Queens.  And then he worked for a while and then went to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] for his MBA [master's in Business Administration].  And he's now back in Canada, director of a huge company that puts up skyscrapers (laughter) for various reasons.  So that's it.  Andrea has twin grandchildren who are now fourteen, going fifteen and Terry has a two-year old son.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That is my Canadian family.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, and you and your wife have been married for now, since, fifty years--
Speaker 2: Fifty years this December.
Speaker 1: 1963, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 28469
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy, well, how would I like to be remembered?  As a good person.  I am, yeah, I think, as a (laughter).  I've never had that question asked because would I leave a legacy?  I never did any piece of work that I was involved in for honor or accreditation.  I just wanted to do something that would be useful, like, you know, the work, the work which I have been privileged to do with so many wonderful students from, oh, I don't know how many countries.  I can't remember the number, over ninety or something, foreign students in my labs (unclear), and to be able to, have been able to guide their research, I think--as a good person.  I think that's what I would like to be remembered as.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 28470
Speaker 1: Go ahead and tell us about this first photograph, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, left to right, that's Andrea, our daughter and Lillian [Lawrynyuk] my wife with me when I got the Hudson Award from the American Chemical Society, premier award.
Speaker 1: About what year is that?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: About what year is it?
Speaker 2: Ninety one [1991].
Speaker 1: That's me giving the Hudson Award lecture in the, interestingly, in the bar which was in Cheers (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And those are our children with a guest, with me, Andrea, Terry and his mother.
Speaker 2: That's me receiving the award from the president of the American Chemical Society [ACS].
Speaker 1: My group around the Terrapin on the University of Maryland.  Now, that practice of photographing the group with the same type of T-shirt is something our group started.  And I think one of the other slides will show the--there, there's one of them at Duke [University].
Speaker 2: And it's just a bunch of my students who were there.  There, again, another year's set of students.
Speaker 1: See every year we had a different T-shirt, and there's, now, those are some of my students--some of my coworkers at the Institute [Natural Products/Glycotechnology Research Institute] when I established it.  And you'll see that they're all wearing different hats, and that's because everywhere I go, I'm either presented or I get a hat.  My, you notice me wearing that thing with all the feathers.  That's what's going to be my--the German student who is on the right with the jacket, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, that was a big meeting.  It was in Sweden at the, by, where the Nobel committee lives, and it's, this is the fabulous place.  And those were some of the leading people at the time in the synthesis of the left-handed and right-handed molecules.
Speaker 1: Okay.  One of your ancestors (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my father [William Benjamin Reid] (laughter).  I tell everybody it's my grandfather when he was fighting for the Jamaican Rev--actually, it was, I was in Las Vegas [Nevada], and walked into this place, and they dressed me up like that (laughter).  And, yeah, (unclear).
Speaker 1: About what year is that?
Speaker 2: That was about '77 [1977], and this one was, oh, '82 [1982], and--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And I, I see that I had so many Haitian students, so many Chinese students, I got dressed up in all these places.  You know, they just put all of that stuff on you (laughter) and take a picture, was that empire.
Speaker 1: This was the lady who I am so indebted to, who really took me under her wings and showed, made me save my money, showed me how to save it and made it possible for me go to Canada.
Speaker 2: Ms. Jackson, right?
Speaker 1: Mrs. Jackson.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: And that was me with my Masters of--Master of Regalia.
Speaker 2: Now, this was me when I was teaching at Clarendon College [Jamaica].  And I am on the left, of course--the other way, sorry.  Yeah, I'm there.  And beside me is the person who started to teach me chemistry, who encouraged me to do chemistry, although he really hoped that I would turn to physics.  And it's under his tutelage or his encouragement that I went to him and bought 'Teach Yourself Chemistry'.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Stanley Sheppard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Stanley Sheppard.
Speaker 1: These were my high school mates.  Me, I'm on the far right, and we were--we call them monitors.  They were, you know, we could give detentions to students and the head boy and the head girl are sitting at the front.
Speaker 2: That's at Claire College, right?
Speaker 1: Clarendon College, yeah.  And this was my last year.  This is the other group of, in high school.
Speaker 2: This was the soccer team, and I am--where am I?  Here.  That was me when I was about fourteen [years old], and this was a year later with my first suit, a hand-me-down from my brother.
Speaker 1: This was my bachelor's degree at, at, and this was me showing off my muscles (laughter).  I was about thirteen or fourteen.  We were going through this intensive weightlifting scheme.  I was so embarrassed.
Speaker 2: This was the executive of the West Indian students at Queens [University].  And the person in the middle at the back, he was the person who lent me his physics textbook, and unfortunately, I never had a time to give it to him before he passed away, Barry.
Speaker 1: Barry, from Trinidad is on the left, and there was thing put on every years, and he organized dance troupes, and so we were to dance with these girls.  And I don't know where he came up with all these fancy moves (laughter), but I know that one of them is, I dropped the girl (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, we have these shirts which say on them, "Fraser-Reid's Rowdies", and this was done by Bryan Fitzsimmons who is here.  He was the idea who came up with it, and it shows, he put together--what should I call it, a page, where I was doing an experiment in the room beside, and there was an explosion (laughter), and all the students are running out of the room (laughter). So that is a picture on, you'd have to zoom in much towards (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And this is where?  At--
Speaker 2: This was [University of] Waterloo.
Speaker 1: Waterloo (unclear).
Speaker 2: And then we took the practice of changing the T-shirt and so on and getting a group picture at the other universities.
Story_ID: 28471
Speaker 1: This one, I visited South Africa twice, once before Apartheid was lifted and this time was after Apartheid was lifted. This was only, what, how many years ago, five years--five, six years ago.  And I'm there with a bunch of graduate students.
Speaker 2: And here, I'm with a bunch of graduate students in India at the Indian Institute of Technology [IIT].
Speaker 1: And this was last year.  I was being interviewed for 'The Hindu' [Indian newspaper], and in my questions, I replied about, you know, their interests in using our work and so on, and that was the article.
Speaker 2: Okay, these are my musical days.  That is me practicing for a recital at the University of Sydney in Australia.
Speaker 1: Practicing for the recital in 1988 at Sweden, Johannes Kirk and with the eminent maestro at (unclear) in Paris [France].
Speaker 2: Okay, these were, this was my sister on the right and my daughter.  My sister was really, really my substitute mother, really, because she really looked after me.
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Andrea, Andrea and Joyce.  And this was at my son's wedding.
Speaker 1: This was Lillian [Lawrynyuk; Fraser-Reid's wife] and me in December 21, 1963.
Speaker 2: And this is me, my son and his grandson--and his son, pardon me, the day of his, the grandson's birth, very shortly after.
Speaker 1: Names again.
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Names again.
Speaker 2: Oh, sorry.  My son is Terry, and the young man is Sam, Samuel.
Speaker 1: Oh, that is my son's wedding.
Speaker 2: And this is what my fourteen-year old grandson describes as Lillian's brood because it has all, he's, there's my--his mother is beside him, and his twin daughter is across beside Terry, and the baby, Samuel is down there.
Speaker 1: And that's me toasting Terry and his bride.
Speaker 2: Now, this is all of my living, well, they were living at that time.  One of my siblings had died.  But my brothers are Dudley on the left, and in the middle, Gilbert, and then my sisters, Joyce on the left and Pixie [Minette] beside me.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a more extended family in Jamaica because we got together for a real blow out in 1986 where all the people on the island came.  And, of course, we have to eat, so there we're, we've resorted to inside to eat.  And, again, this is a collection of the relatives in Jamaica.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: Now, these are all of my students.  Well, at this time, Lord Duke had a party at the house, and they are wearing hats from all over the world (laughter).  Some famous ones are the one in the middle, is a--the middle is the hat of a Russian Air Force general.  His name is in the hat.  I bought it in Hungary for a few dollars (laughter).
Speaker 2: I see you have a hat collection.
Speaker 1: Yes, I do.  I have about, oh, thirty, including a keffiyeh like what Arabs wear and so on.
Speaker 2: Now, this is one I did not--that I talked about briefly.  My, it's my first summer job in Canada.  And I was permitted to take the job because at that time, my visa did not allow me.  So that is, I was permitted because of the government, and because I think (unclear) wanted to show that they, you know, they didn't have any prejudices against who they could hire.  And they were looking for students at the top of their class to hire.  As a point of interest, I didn't operate that machine (laughter).  Somebody else did (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, I think the headlines, the headlines say it for itself.  And the person studying, the person sitting there and I were discussing what was going on.  He was trying to make the, the insecticide, and he graduated and went on to do his Ph.D. at Cal-Tech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California].
Speaker 2: And this was my first Asian student, Steve Tamhu [ph.], ended up being the director of chemistry at one of the labs of Merck.  And we're discussing some chemistry.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that was me practicing on the organ at the mighty Flentrop organ at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, I'd, invited to give some lectures at Warner-Lambert [lectureship series] which was in, let me see--
Speaker 1: At Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan] and it said, it was 1990--(unclear).
Speaker 2: Michigan, yeah.
Speaker 1: I think you could call this the Young Chemist Award of Canada in 1978.
Speaker 2: And that is our book ['From Sugar to Splenda'].  That just came out last year.
Speaker 1: Okay, that--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: And that's it.
Speaker 2: Oh, great, great.
