Story_ID: 638673
Speaker 1: All right my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Lula Mae Ford [HistoryMaker Lula Ford], L-U-L-A, M-A-E, F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 11, 1944, Pine Bluff, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what it your occupation?
Speaker 2: Presently I'm a Illinois commerce commissioner, my former career was an educator.
Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five--oh I'm sorry what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 21, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're presently at 1900 South Michigan Avenue, in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: The HistoryMakers office?
Speaker 2: HistoryMakers office, correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 638674
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.  And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Shrimp.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, blue.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year, Christmas.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, Pine Bluff, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite saying is, everyone tells me my favorite saying is help me Jesus (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, is that uttered in times of stress?
Speaker 2: All the time I say, "Help me Jesus, help me Jesus, help me Jesus, help me Jesus" (laughter).
Story_ID: 638675
Speaker 1: Well I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And your father's [Chester Ford] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Nola, N-O-L-A, Jenkins Ford [Nola Jenkins Ford], J-E-N-K-I-N-S--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is August 17th, 1917 [sic. July 17th, 1917].
Speaker 1: Okay and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Rison, Arkansas, R-I-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side.  How, how far back can you trace that group?
Speaker 2: I can trace back to my grandmother [Sallie Borders Jenkins] was thirteen when she married my grandfather.  His name was Grant Jenkins.  And she was--he was--he was--he was at least--he was--he was in his twenties.  And he had four children when he married her and they ended up having eleven.  It was four--it was ten. Because it was a total of fourteen in the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, you can't go any further than Grant Jenkins?
Speaker 2: I can't go any further than Grant Jenkins because he was dead when I was born and, and, and I don't, all I know is that my grandmother's the Borders, that was my grandmother's maiden name.  Were--she was just out of slavery in rural Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there's a tradition in the family of being in, in slavery?
Speaker 2: Yes, definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and are there any stories from slavery that are passed down?
Speaker 2: Yes, stories were that, were my family, my mother's family, were singers and all of those stories was always about around the fireplace there was always quartette singing and dancing and my mother's side of the family are tall.  The women are tall, I have an aunt [Rosie Jenkins Gooch] that's ninety-five and she's six feet tall.  And my mother was 5'10" so they were, I always say Zulu warriors or something like that.  But, they were very tall individuals.
Speaker 1: And they were good singers?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, except for my mother (laughter).
Speaker 1: I did, okay, okay so did the women sing together or the, the men?
Speaker 2: They were just a, they all sang together.  The men and the women would sing together as, at my cousin's funeral.  My aunt and uncle sang a solo, I mean sang a duet, but they would sing and tell stories.
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of songs did they sing, specialize in?
Speaker 2: We call 'em Dr. Watts [Isaac Watts] songs and just coming, spirit gospel spiritual, mostly spirituals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They did church singing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard of Dr. Watts and I think [HistoryMaker] Delano O'Banion here--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sings a leads a choral--
Speaker 2: Yeah, choral group.
Speaker 1: Does the old Dr. Watts songs and.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I can't si- I can't carry a tune but, (singing) "Father I stretch my hand to thee," then the wait and then the church members would come in and say the same thing.  I, I think it was because they didn't know how to read and they were just, there was just a, that was a way of teaching them a song.  And the words to a song, so that's the way I always thought about it.
Speaker 1: It's because of the call and response (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Call and response.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see.  Okay, now were, so they were, were they slaves in Rison, Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Yes, there were slaves in Rison, in Arkansas, you know that's a cotton belt.  A lot of cotton, my mother's were--tell the stories of how, that's what they did, they picked cotton.  And sharecropping, that's--
Speaker 1: That's what they did after the--
Speaker 2: After the war, war.
Speaker 1: The Civil War.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, so any other, any other, any s- you said they told stories, any stories from those times that you remember?
Speaker 2: Not that I remember, not that I remember.
Story_ID: 638676
Speaker 1: Any family stories or, or stories about the white pe- people they worked for or?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, certainly they would, were very mis- mischievous and my unc- my [maternal] grandfather [Grant Jenkins] was a very determined individual and he would not let people mistreat them.  And he always stood up for himself.  And I think that's where my mother [Nola Jenkins Ford] got her fiery personality from.  Because we were never--I guess in Pine Bluff [Arkansas] we were because they neighborhoods were always segregated, we never had that awe about we couldn't go this place or place, sit with anyone.  And we were always in a community where the--we would we were in, we were treated as individuals.  I, I never saw the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] ride or anything like that.  But I do know that I sat at the back of bus, and there was white and colored water when I was growing up.  And certainly I went to a segregated school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when the children would come by, naturally would spit at us and we would come at them.  And we would do vice versa, so.
Speaker 1: So, you're, what you're suggesting is the black community in Pine Bluff was developed enough that you didn't really have to deal with white people there as much?
Speaker 2: Ne- it was developed enough, yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know it was a university--I mean was a college town.  So, we had quite a bit of intelligentsia there.
Speaker 1: So, did the, the teachers lived right in the black community?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well did your mother talk about growing up, did now, now did, she grow up in, in Pine, Pine Bluff?
Speaker 2: My mother grew up in Rison, Arkansas,
Speaker 1: In Rison, Arkansas, okay.
Speaker 2: And yes, my mother talks about hard time, my mother never had a formal education, because there were so many in the family.  And they would have the teachers would come in but my, they were always in the fields working.  When, when the cotton and chopping and picking time were over, they had to get the fields for the next planting season, so.  Our, I guess because of that many children it was never a priority but, it was certainly was a priority with her to have her children educated.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about your father [Chester Ford], did he have any school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father was educated and--
Speaker 1: Well, well not your father, but her father, I'm sorry (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her father, was, Mist- we called her, her my mother called her father Papa, but she said he was a mean man, though.  He was mean and in terms of I guess because he was so much older than my grandmother [Sallie Borders Jenkins], she called him Mr. Grant.  And sometimes she said if my mother, grandmother was singing and that he'd would say stop that singing you know.  And just a very firm personality and, and wanted his children to, to just work, I don't think he had--there was a sense that they needed to be educated, from my father side, from her side.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay.
Speaker 2: I had an uncle that was born without any arms and he--my mother traveled the city, country with him.  As a matter fact he was in at Riverview [Riverview Park, Chicago, Illinois] and he could really sing too.  He was they called him Jack the Wonder Boy [Jack Jenkins], because he could and he taught himself how to read and, and certainly was featured at Riverview and could really sing.  And was a womanizer, without any arms (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I (laughter), okay.  By Riverview you mean the amusement park here in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the amusement park here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Which is now, now defunct?
Speaker 2: Now, defunct.
Speaker 1: But, in those days he would come and sing?
Speaker 2: He was come and, no they would show him, writing with his toes 'cause he could do all these things with his feet.  And just doing, a number of feats with his feet.  So, and so that's how he was featured in the Riverview.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what name did he go by?
Speaker 2: Jack the Wonder Boy.
Speaker 1: Jack the Wonder Boy, right you said that, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you would be part of what they call a side show, I guess?
Speaker 2: Their freak show.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's what, that's what it was, because I remember there was lady in there who had four arms and legs, Betty [Betty Lou Williams] the lady with four arms.  And I, I, when I came here in '64 [1964], I worked at the Riverview, in the ghost house, you know, just to tell people which way to go.  And I would always go around to see the freak show and it actually wasn't you know how they would have it more it was a lot of exploitation in my opinion in it.  'Cause the alligator man was simply somebody with terrible eczema and those kinds of things.  But, the lady did have appendages on her body.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so four extra?
Speaker 2: She was probably a undeveloped twin, at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, well did your mother have any, any stories of growing up other than just, just hard, hard work?
Speaker 2: Hard work but they always had good times I mean they enjoyed each other.  And just running around I guess in the, in the woods or chasing and each other and having a good time.  And, and people, would, who if anyone acted as if they were afraid of my uncle they would run and chase the person and make 'em touch his arms, his little hands up here.  Just devilish kinds of things.  But, then they moved to Pine Bluff and it was a little more urban.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In, in my opinion.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother move to Pine Bluff be- before she got married?
Speaker 2: No, after.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 638677
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Chester, C-H-E-S-T-E-R, Ford [Chester Ford].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and placed of birth?
Speaker 2: It's August 8th, 1918, I'm sorry 1919, my mother [Nola Jenkins Ford] was 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And her's was July 17th, I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, July 17th, all right.
Speaker 2: I got 'em confused, July 17th, seven, one, seven, that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now what do you know about your father's side of family--
Speaker 2: I know that--
Speaker 1: Now, was he born in Pine Bluff [Arkansas], or?
Speaker 2: He was born in Rison, Arkansas also.
Speaker 1: Rison too, okay.
Speaker 2: I know that my father was one of four children.  He had three sisters.  His mother's maiden name was Cooks [sic. Lula Cook Ford].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was talking to my cousin and she said, he said that they were some part, from some part of Georgia.  I don't know what part I mean, but they were, he, he did some kind of study and he found out that they were actually came from Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Cooks with an S.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, are there any stories of from that side of the family about slavery and, and the aftermath of it?
Speaker 2: No, my, my and my grandmother, my grandfather [William Ford] was dead when I was born.  And my grandmother died when I was four.  So, I never heard my, my father never talked about, I guess because he was an only son, he was the favorite child.  So, he never talked about hard times at all, other than having a lot of fun and--.  But, he, he didn't work in the fields quite as hard as my mother.  And, he did, when the--they had the school he was able to go, to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, how did he get?
Speaker 2: I'm thinking that he went to the tenth grade, as far as it went before they went to the [U.S.] Army.  And I, I'm not sure if there would have been eighth or tenth.  'Cause I know it wasn't a high school in Rison.
Speaker 1: So, so he, he was part of the Army during World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I guess okay, all right.  Now did he marry your mother be- before the war?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were married before the war, I was born '44 [1944] and had a brother born in '46 [1946].  He was in Fort Huachuca, Arizona when my mother was, he was in camp.  My mother was pregnant with my brother so, yeah.  And I have th- two older brothers, so yeah, they were born, I don't remember when, exactly when they were married.
Speaker 1: So, it's like four you, all?
Speaker 2: Oh, nine.
Speaker 1: Nine oh, okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: It was seven boys and two girls.
Speaker 1: And where do you fit, where were you?
Speaker 2: Third.
Speaker 1: You're third, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And nine, all right, okay.  Now is there a, a story about how your parents met, that they tell?  I know Rison's not that big, so maybe.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Actually my father was dating another lady and, and he had that lady pregnant, but my mother, I guess she liked him better and he married her.  I mean liked him and he liked her more, so he and she always thought that she, she was spiteful, in that way.  She tells me never marry a man for spite (laughter).  I guess she was trying to get back at that lady and so that is how they ended up together.  But, they were in a close community and went to Mount Gilead A.M.E. Church [Mount Gilead Church, Rison, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I think that's how they all met.
Story_ID: 638678
Speaker 1: So did your father [Chester Ford] join the [U.S.] Army before he moved to Pine Bluff [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: After.
Speaker 1: After, okay so they moved to Pine Bluff first?
Speaker 2: They moved to Pine Bluff first.
Speaker 1: Was there, was there a reason that they say that's why they moved to Pine Bluff?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the reason was, they were, they were no longer you know, they were not gonna do sharecropping.  And there were not a big, there were no jobs there in that little small area.
Speaker 1: So what did your father do in Pine Bluff?
Speaker 2: He was, worked for Pine Bluff Arsenal [Pine Bluff, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: So, this is a military, U.S. military installation?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where munitions and all kinds of things were stored.
Speaker 1: That's interesting it seems as though that would make for a government you know job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's always--
Speaker 1: Job, government jobs would attract more black people in the down South, yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely and he was always a government employee.  My mother [Nola Jenkins Ford]--when he went to the Army you know women would--my mother worked there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Was that the major employer in town?
Speaker 2: That was the major employer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, when you--now where did you father serve in the Army?
Speaker 2: My father served in Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact I, I was had, had asked my sister for his social security number so I could take it to the veterans bureau [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] and they can tell me everywhere he was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was in, at Fort Campbell, Kentucky, then he went to Fort Huachuca, Arizona and that's where he was sent forward to, to Germany.
Speaker 1: Do you know what kind, what, what di- division he was in, or what, what corps he was in?
Speaker 2: Infantry.
Speaker 1: Infantry.
Speaker 2: And I remember when we were very young and so naive, we said well, "Daddy, how many Chinese, Jap- Chinese or Japanese did you kill," and he said, "None."  We said, "None," you know, he didn't want to say, that was not a, he couldn't tell children he was over there killing people.  But, we would say, "None?  You mean you didn't kill anybody."  And he never talked about how degrading it was but he had good friends (background noise)--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, so we were talking about your father's experiences during the war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 1: Yeah, well he never talked about how degrading it was.  But, when I look at some of the kinds of things and look at History Channel [The History Channel; History], I know it must have been very degrading for him.  Because often times that, I'm, I'm told that they were not, had not had the training to be put at the front of the line, and to do some of the kinds of things.  But, I, I remember he said, he was very proud of his, his unit.  And I, we had pictures, but we had a fire in our home and so a lot of those pictures were burned.  But, a lot of the people that he came out of the Army with he, he, they would get together, so there was some camaraderie there.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, but he never talked about the--how they were treated?
Speaker 1: No, no, never talked about how degraded they were.
Story_ID: 638679
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, about their talents, their gifts, their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I take--my mother [Nola Jenkins Ford] seems to think I have my father's [Chester Ford] personality.  I think I have a combination, because my mother can be very fiery.  And I think if I'm on an issue I have that, but I, I know I have my work ethic from my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember when I was--I never played with dolls, because the Mohammed, Mohammeds, and these were Muslims that would come around to your home.  And I had, I had a doll when I was about, I must have been about three or four, he said, "Why are you playing with that white doll?" And I looked down at the doll and my mother said I never played with the doll anymore.
Speaker 1: So, so they were, were they a branch of the Nation of Islam, or were they another kind of branch (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, they were the ones who wore the, the maroon hats with the little fez on them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they all, all the men had beards.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there's, there's a chap-, I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's the half moon crest that they would have, but they were, they had all of--
Speaker 1: And that sounds, a like, like Moors signs to me.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They were very pro- they had a lot of pride about themselves.  And I also remember my uncle telling me when I was about eight, he said, "I know what you're gonna be."  He said, "You're gonna be a school teacher." I said, "How did you know," and he said, "Your pencils are in your shoes."  Well I didn't know at the time he was talking about my thin but shapely legs, (laughter) but it set a tone and that's ended up what I actually did.  You know it planted a seed in me.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your pencils--
Speaker 2: Your pencils are in your shoes, little stick legs or something (laughter).  And they laughed about it and I tell everybody from then on that I was gonna be a, a teacher.
Story_ID: 638680
Speaker 1: Teachers in a town like Pine Bluff [Arkansas] I guess, were well, well--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Well respected people.
Speaker 2: Well respected.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I know, the names of every teacher I ever had.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many schools are in the black community (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, we lived on, on I went to two elementary schools, New Town [New Town School (ph.)] because we lived on 4th Street [sic. Avenue].  But, my [maternal] grandmother [Sallie Borders Jenkins] the house she lived in was ours, I didn't know that.  And then when she got sick we moved to her house.  And then I went to Coleman Elementary School [Coleman Intermediate School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], which was really, it was, 4th Street was a little more developed in Pine Bluff than when we moved to 12th Street [sic. Avenue].  Which was kind of in the right at the edge of the city which was not as developed.
Speaker 1: Okay, but, but tell us about just kind of describe the neighborhood for us, what, what did it look like?  I mean the neighborhood you grew up in I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, the neighborhood I grew up in dirt road, I can show you a picture of my feet, I show them to my children when I went to school.  And they said, and they said, "Was this in Africa?"  'Cause I had on my, my little hair was all in up the askew.  But, it was a neighborhood where we had Mama Sophie [ph.] an older lady, who would care for us.  We'd have to come and sit on our front porch and she didn't allow us to go back into our own house.  We had to go across the street to get her water.  We would say she was lazy, but what she was actually doing was babysitting us.  And she could, if we went and got out of her sight she couldn't see us.  And, and we say, "Oh Mama Sophie so lazy and she makes us come across the street to get her water," but.  And if we had to go to the bathroom we had to go to her house to do it, because she didn't want us back and forth in the house.  But--
Speaker 1: So she would watch you while your parents [Nola Jenkins Ford and Chester Ford] were at work?
Speaker 2: Wherever our parents were Mama Sophie would watch us.
Speaker 1: Well, she was a neighborhood lady that--
Speaker 2: Neighborhood lady.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the grocery store, the whites lived there in the grocery store.  Of course we played together.  And ran up and down the street and played like normal children do.  Until they got older of course, then that's when the differences would take over.
Speaker 1: But, they lived in the store?
Speaker 2: Yeah, lived in the store.
Speaker 1: In the, in the black community?
Speaker 2: In the black community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the others who did not lived down the street, but it was--ours was an integrated neighbor community, you know.  It was not, like Chicago [Illinois] mostly the North and South.  But, always in the, they always lived in their stores.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did they worry about things about like black or white fountains when they were in black community (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, were none, there were none there (laughter).  And do you think we, I, I tell my girlfriends, I was talking to her early, and she said, "You remember when we never drank out of the black fountain because it wasn't refrigerated."  We said, "Oh we don't like colored water today, we'll drink white water," and we'd look at the clerks.
Speaker 1: And nothing was--
Speaker 2: No, nothing was happ- nothing happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, would, did you say the relationships between blacks and whites in Pine Bluff were fairly good for the South or?
Speaker 2: I think it was fairly good.  One of our teachers once Mr., Dr. Dedrick later on, he became a--went to college ranks.  He had an altercation and when he stood up for himself he became a hero to us.  Because they were trying to arrest him for something and there was a scuffle and later on he was exonerated.
Speaker 1: Dr. De- Dedricks, how?
Speaker 2: D-E-D-R-I-C-K.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what happened.  Do you know the story of what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, it seems that he was a--traffic violation and then they were going to police tried to arrest him and he--for some reason an altercation took place.  And he was put in jail and he got a lot of press and when he went back to trial he was, it was dismissed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, that gave him some notoriety in the black community?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: A black man can stand up for himself (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were very proud, pleased that he stood up for himself.
Story_ID: 638681
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights were, it was always hot, in, in, in Pine Bluff [Arkansas].  And the sounds were, I remember when we were--you know there were ice trucks and children playing happily all the time.  We were al- it seemed that we were always happy playing and laying up in the shade, just having a good time.  And going to church every Sunday.
Speaker 1: Now, what church did you go to?
Speaker 2: Rose Hill Baptist Church [Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  My aunt was an usher and you knew, you couldn't chew gum in church so she would always look (unclear).  I said, "She picks on us," I would tell my mother [Nola Jenkins Ford] that.  Because she would, I said, "Every time I look up she's looking in my face."  My mother said, "Keep that gum out of your mouth."  'Cause you know she would come over with a napkin, for you to put your gum on it.  But, we loved going to church and, 'cause you would get a nickel and get some ice cream afterwards.  But, I, I enjoyed it.  Judge Howard [George Howard, Jr.], who was the first Africa American on the supreme court in Arkansas,  his mother was the principal and the teacher at the school that I first started to New Town [New Town School (ph.)], Mrs. Howard [Sara Howard].
Speaker 1: So, so Judge Howard was the first Africa American judge in--
Speaker 2: In Pine Bluff.
Speaker 1: In Pine Bluff.
Speaker 2: In the supreme court in, in, in the State of Arkansas rather.
Speaker 1: On the Ar- Arkansas Supreme Court.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  You remember when Clinton needed, President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] appointed him, he, he made some ruling.  He gave a ruling that was advantageous to President Clinton at the time.  And I said, "Oh, his appointment paid off."
Story_ID: 638682
Speaker 1: You were talk- we were talking about Judge Howard [George Howard, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, so you grew, did you grow up with, with his, with him?
Speaker 2: No, his, his mother [Sara Howard] simply was a teacher.  I think he, the judge is much older than I.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, you said he was with the Clinton administration, I, I'm thinking of him as being (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was appointed by President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].
Speaker 1: Yeah, as being younger I guess.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But, he was not, okay all right, all right.  You mentioned off camera though Wiley Branton [Wiley A. Branton, Sr.], also?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Wiley Branton, he went to, he's from Pine Bluff [Arkansas].  Pine Bluff had a very large intelligent black community because people used to from all other small areas, would come to Pine Bluff to come to Merrill High School [Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  Other local small cities did not have high schools.  So, if you wanted to go to high school you had to come to Pine Bluff.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Early on to, to finish high school.
Speaker 1: And even I guess to go to high school you had to really be serious--
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely.
Speaker 1: --in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you had to leave your family.
Speaker 1: 'Cause not everybody went to high school.
Speaker 2: No, and teachers taught before they you know, they could have an eighth grade education and teach.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, high school, it's a big, that's a big deal?
Speaker 2: That's a very big deal.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, now what were you like growing up?  What, what were your interests?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My interest, I always liked to read.  I didn't like to play a lot with mud cakes and things.  I always liked to read, I could always read.  And when I was at New Town [New Town School (ph.)], we didn't have, it wasn't known as kindergarten, it was called pre-primer.  So, I went from, I re- that's how I caught up with my brother.  He, he went from, he went to pre-primer, and then he went first grade.  But, I was, I went to pre-primer, then they sent me to second grade.  I didn't have to go to first grade.  And then when I moved I went to third grade in my other school and we stayed together.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to third grade at Coleman?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you liked to read and let's see, well, well, well, did you have any mentors at, at, in, in grade school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had my second grade teacher from New Town, had a birthday party for one of our, for her son, her only child.  And she invited us and I always looked, she always tol- told us that we could be whatever we wanted to be.  And we should not let anyone say that we couldn't.  And, and even though we never had a book with our name in it, you know.  We got the book when the white schools no longer needed them.  She said that, "Don't worry about whose name was in that book first, you just try to get the knowledge from the book and that always stayed with me."  And all of my teachers were always role models for us.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were the names of some of the teachers, I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mrs. Freeman [ph.] was my pre-primer teachers, Mrs. Robinson [ph.] was my second grade teacher, Mrs. Dansby [ph.] was my third grade, Mrs. Burns [ph.] was my fourth grade teacher, Mrs. Meadows [ph.] was my fifth grade teacher, Mrs. Stanfield [ph.] was my sixth grades teacher.  And Mrs., Mrs. Mr. Carlton [ph.] was my seventh grade homeroom.  'Cause that was when we went across the street to the, we were eight, six, six system.  We went sixth grade, first/sixth grade in elementary and then you cross the street to the high school.  Because it was sixth it would start at seventh grade.  And Mr. Bateman [ph.] was my eighth grade.  Dr. Dedrick whom I talked about was my ninth.  Mr. Smith [ph.] tenth, Mrs. Jordan [ph.] eleventh and Mrs. Nolan [ph.] was my twelfth grade homeroom.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went from Coleman Elementary School [Coleman Intermediate School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] to Merrill High School?
Speaker 2: Coleman High School [C.P. Coleman High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], Coleman was--?
Speaker 1: Coleman High School, okay?
Speaker 2: Coleman always eventually after Merrill was the only high school, Coleman then had four high schools, when I was in started school, started there.  But, early on it was only one high school in Pine Bluff, and everybody had to go to Merrill.
Story_ID: 638683
Speaker 1: Was music a big part of growing up, I mean?
Speaker 2: Yes, you know we had a, we always had a band and a choir.  I was never--I started out in band and got out.  And, and never could sing so I was always a cheerleader or something like that, or in the drama club.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had drama club, cheer, cheerleader? Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Was, was a radio or TV a big deal when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Yes, when I was growing up in my fifth grade, my school [Coleman Elementary School; Coleman Intermediate School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] went to 'The Howdy Doody Show' and I, I was selected to go.  And as a matter of fact I asked somebody to look it up to see if they had that still had those tapes.  'Cause I remember looking on the teleprompter when they asked my name I saw myself I said oh.  So that was--
Speaker 1: So, did you have to go to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: No, it was, it, it was KATV [KATV-TV, Little Rock, Arkansas], they did whatever it was right there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did Buffalo Bob and all of the characters come, to the show (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no it was just an interview with the, the man I think.
Speaker 1: Bob Smith?
Speaker 2: Bob Smith, maybe?
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah he was the, the Buffalo Bob, or whatever.
Speaker 2: Right, that's who it was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I had forgotten who he was, but I know it was fifth grade.
Speaker 1: But, he was in town, at, at the local TV station?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, at, at the local TV station.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And they brought the colored school over and that's where we were then.
Speaker 1: Ah, that's, that's must've been a big thrill?
Speaker 2: It was, 'cause my folks [Nola Jenkins Ford and Chester Ford] had to go out, it was in the '50s [1950s], fifth grade, that was probably '54 [1954], yeah.  And they had to go to somebody else house to see me on television.  We didn't have a television.
Speaker 1: That's something, that, that is something, you know I, very seldom did you any black kids on TV in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the talk of Pine Bluff [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What about movies, could you go to the movies?
Speaker 2: We went to the movies but we had to sit in the balcony.  And we were glad, you know, that's prime seating as far as I was concerned.  We always, there was one theater that was exclusively for blacks where we sat on (unclear) and that was the Vester Theater  [Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and we sat on that, on the ground floor there.  But, in the other we sat in the balcony.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there a difference in the kind of movie that was shown in the black theater, than the, than the--
Speaker 2: It probably was, it probably was B movies but we didn't know the difference.
Story_ID: 638684
Speaker 1: Now was there any particular subject that you were more interested in than others in school?
Speaker 2: Probably social studies and civics and all those issues, social, I would say the social sciences.  But, because we always wanted to know about our history.  And we had interesting individuals; my first principal Mr. P. K. Coleman [sic. C.P. Coleman] was the founder of our school [C.P. Coleman High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  He, he actually started it in a church and then the land was given to, was bought from the church and that started school.  And I lived at 12th Street [sic. Avenue] and my school was on 13th Street [sic. Avenue].  So, I wasn't very far from my school.  Actually, I could hear the first bell, and then run to school.  But, it was just, I never wanted to miss school, I loved school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you were in school the, the crisis in Little Rock [Arkansas] was taking place?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, what was, how did you feel about and how did your family feel about that?
Speaker 2: Oh my, we were very proud of those individuals.  And then you know we--the big desegregation suit in Pine Bluff.  With the White Ch- Whi- Ch- oh no--White Hall School District.  And it was--we were very proud of those individuals the Little Rock Nine, so.  It was a very, very good time for us.
Speaker 1: This was what 1959 I think it was?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Little Rock Nine.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Fifty year, almost fifty years later.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well what did you, what did you all think of Orval Faubus as governor?
Speaker 2: A, a clown, how dare he defy Dwight D. Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower]?  But, we knew he was a Klansmen [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], or that's what we thought it was, you know.  But, he was doing what was, he was supposed to do for the times he thought for his constituents.  'Cause we, he didn't think of us as constituents.
Speaker 1: Did, did any of the participants ever speak in Pine Bluff?
Speaker 2: Not while I was there.  But, I'm sure [HistoryMaker] Ernest Green did it later on.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I was wondering if they, you know.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there a NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Pine Bluff?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, when I went to college [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] that was what the height of the movement in '65 [1965], you know. When they were really into it and we were doing sit ins.  My freshman orientation teacher Dr. Marshall [ph.], he had a group and actually they fired him.  He had to end up to going to Mississippi I think to teach.  And, and quite a few of the individual who were in part of that movement we had a sit in on campus.  And they, they were expelled from school.  They ended up having to go to, you know, private universities, away from Arkansas, I mean Pine Bluff.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is like about when about what time?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], no I'm sorry I went to college in '62 [1962] what am I saying, '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, '62 [1962], '63 [1963].
Story_ID: 638685
Speaker 1: Now were you, were you an honor student in high school [C.P. Coleman High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Graduated number three in my class but it was only fifty-eight of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Went to college [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and lost my scholarship, because I'd never seen that many boys before in my life (laughter), had a good time though.
Speaker 1: So, you were a cheerleader?
Speaker 2: In high school.
Speaker 1: An honor student?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Any other stories from high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, when was in the eleventh grade, you know, I would, I was always in trouble for talking, you know, not being disrespect-, just talking.  And I had to do detention and I was in this play.  And I didn't go to detention, because something happened to my father [Chester Ford], and so I went home.  And the next day I came back--well the principal had come to detention to call the names of the people who were there.  Naturally he called my name I wasn't there, so the next day when I went to school, he called me in and he suspended me.  So, my mother [Nola Jenkins Ford] brought me back to school that same day.  And, you know, he--they believe in spanking you--and then he didn't have time, he had to go somewhere else.  So, when I went back home, I'm sorry.  When I went back home I told my father said, "He's not putting his hand on you."  And, so I was suspended, but the competition was the next week, or the same week.  And so, I was very disappointed but I did not show it, I said, "I thought they said one monkey didn't stop a show, well this monkey stopped that show."  But (laughter), I, I'm sure we would have won, it was an excellent, it's was an excellent play, but, we didn't get to participate.  And I was the talk of that school.
Speaker 1: Oh gee that was a bit--yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And then when I came back to school, he said, you know the principal--I never liked him because he was too authoritative probably for me.  But, and then he had me go back to get one of my parents, so my father was very angry man and came up to the school.  And he, they wouldn't let me in on the conversation.  But, he told my father, my mother later told me that I was a leader in that they should not indulge me in being disruptive, so my father chastised me but he didn't spank me.  And say that I better not get into any more trouble nor cause the school anymore trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I think that was a defining moment, but I, for me.
Speaker 1: So, how old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was about sixteen, seventeen.
Story_ID: 638686
Speaker 1: When you were a senior what were you, what did you see yourself doing as a career--you know for, for a career (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I always knew I was gonna go--we always knew we were gonna go to college, you know.  That was never a--and my mother [Nola Jenkins Ford] this was one of the things that my mother would tell you, us as girls and I think that was an issue.  She said, "You better keep your dress down or you'll be in these cotton fields like I was.  And I want you to get an education because what can I do, I have to sit here and wait for your father [Chester Ford] to give me whatever.  Because who's gonna hire me I have no education and then I have you all."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which meant she could only do domestic and you know, she had us, how's she gonna go out and clean and doing all that and then come home and tend to all of her nine children.  So, she instilled in me to get an education and, and then you won't have to take the kinds of things I have to take off your father, meaning other women, you know.  Some of the men thought they had to have a wife and a woman.
Speaker 1: Okay all right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, what was it, was, was the social situation, conducive to I mean was it, was it more of, of a kind of a liberal, social situation there?  I mean where people had to really watch out.  I mean, it, it, I mean, I mean there, there are some social situations where everybody's real strict.  But, it's then there's other's, other's that are not, so?
Speaker 2: I don't think the social situation was where everybody had to watch out.  I don't ever remember a situation where we had to actually watch out.  I do remember a situation where we had, two stores as I said the Davises [ph.] were on the one corner and then red supermar- well, not a supermarket-store was on the other corner.  And one of the Davis' girls came over to the store or something, my brothers and some others, the Comptons [ph.] probably whistled and then her broth- her aunt--her dad came out with a gun.  And then we boycotted that store, immediately.  And because the parents were gonna give it to Horace Davis [ph.] at that time and when he did that, we boycotted his store.  And the parents had to stay in the store.  And that's when I saw what people could do I was very impressed with that community for taking that stand.  We never had any kind of animosity where there was fighting and or shooting or killing of blacks in Pine Bluff [Arkansas] proper that I knew of.  I knew the Klans [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] were out in Watson Chapel [Pine Bluff, Arkansas] 'cause I'd heard that.  But I didn't know any--
Speaker 1: So, the, the blacks really had some power in Pine Bluff (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  The, the as I said that Mason hall, the Masonic hall [Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Arkansas, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] was where we had our, if you went to the doctor you went to the Masonic hall.  And there was owned by blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Masonic hall was the doctor's office?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Were there, were there many black doctors in town?
Speaker 2: Yes, Dr. Malen [ph.], Dr. Flowers [ph.], Dr. Hammond [ph.], we had a quite, oh yeah and lawyers.
Speaker 1: What would be the black population, I guess of Pine Bluff in those days, would you think?
Speaker 2: I was probably I would say twenty thousand.  It's fifty-eight thousand there now and it's 60 percent black.  At one time Pine Bluff was the third largest city in Arkansas, it's not anymore.  But, we've lost population, but, but the college has certainly kept us with a base there.
Story_ID: 638687
Speaker 1: So was there any doubt that you were going to go to the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Actually I wanted to go to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], my mother [Nola Jenkins Ford] said, "You know your father [Chester Ford] doesn't have any money to send you to away to school, you better get out there."  And so that's where I went.  I went, I started, I graduated [from C.P. Coleman High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] in May--
Speaker 1: Okay, May of--
Speaker 2: Of '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And started summer school in May of '62 [1962], also.  Or June of '62 [1962], probably.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right started summer school right up--
Speaker 2: At the college, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: At the college okay, all right?
Speaker 2: There was no objection, you know, you go to cotton fields or you go to school.  Or you did domestic work, my father did not want me in anybody else's home.  You know, the men might have taken advantage, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was that like a, did you hear stories of that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, but so I never, ever did domestics.
Speaker 1: It's more than a notion I guess doing domestic work and being in those situations, where there's no protection?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, none.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean was, all right so you're at the University of Arkansas at Pine, Pine Bluff.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Well, who was, what was it like?  What was it like in those days?
Speaker 2: A lot of freedom, you know.  And the campus was very, it's a lovely campus.  And I had gone there as a science scholar my junior year, for a summer.  And so, I knew some of the professors, and I thought I was, you know, big time.  Because I, I went to the snack bar a lot and hung out and looked at, you know, just, just like a little country girl coming to the city.  So, that's what I thought about, I really wished that I had the opportunity to live in the dorm, but I had, you know, so I went back and forth to school, it was only about fifteen minutes away.  But, it was a great time for me.
Speaker 1: So, was it a walk or, or a bus ride?
Speaker 2: No, somebody had to, it was a ride.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ba- basically my mother would take me or I'd get a ride.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well who were some of your teachers?
Speaker 2: My freshman teacher, as I say was Dr. Marshall [ph.], I was, and, and Dr. Rufus Caine.  I'd, that's one of the reasons why I went into biology.  He's dead now, and Mrs. Fuller [ph.]. Mr. Hartfield, Dr. Hartfield [Freddie Hartfield], rather.  And we called her Betty Red [ph.], she was a gym teacher.  You know, in rural schools in the South, you, I never had gym until I went to high school, 'til I went to college.  And then I think that President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], came out with that physical fitness te- exam.  That you had to, they wanted you to do, where you had to do push-ups and all of that I remember everybody getting so, trying to do those things and then left.  Couldn't st- couldn't get up the next day because you'd over extended yourself and pulled muscles.  So, that was the, just exciting times for us.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was a, I remember, it just, just crossed my mind that.  Did you know [HistoryMaker] Samuel Massie, Dr. Samuel Massie, or of him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he was there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He, he was from--
Speaker 2: And a big Argonne [sic.] person.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Scientist, physicist.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: He was one of the scientists worked on the atomic bomb.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Oh, that was a legacy for us.
Speaker 1: So, was he a teacher at the time or was he-?
Speaker 2: No, he was not a teacher of mine, but he was, we, we knew about him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so everybody in Pine Bluff [Arkansas], knew who he was?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I said before then [HistoryMaker] Jeff Donaldson the art artist was, was there, (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  See Dr. Howard [John Howard] was our, was our art person there. He was, was a, taught me art, art literature and art appreciation and his wife was our librarian.  But, they were, in I think we named the Howard, the art center after him.
Speaker 1: And I think I mentioned earlier that George G.M. James the author of 'Stolen Legacy'.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm gonna, I'm gonna get that book and read it.
Speaker 1: He taught there, he died in 1954.
Speaker 2: Oh right.
Speaker 1: Right after the book was published.
Speaker 2: Okay, so he died before I got there.
Speaker 1: Yes, right, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: George G.M. James, right.  Okay, so well who, who was your, did you have a favorite teacher on campus, or?
Speaker 2: On campus did I have a favorite teacher?  No, because I was so trying to get out of there.  I was trying to get out of poverty, you know.  You got to remember I was going to summer school.  Dr. Caine was probably was one of my--or Mrs. Fuller, 'cause she was so, I, I was the kind that liked teacher who didn't was no nonsense then I would do my best.   But, if I had an easy teacher I would just slump by and get a C.  If I had a tough teacher I'd get an A or a B.  So, I've always, been that way, to have high expectations, even when I, when we teach and have always wanted to be up here and keep your children and then they will do better.  But, if you slosh off and you know, take whatever they give you, don't have no expectations for them that's what you'll get.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Teacher expectation, student achievement.
Story_ID: 638688
Speaker 1: So this is 1962.  You said you got kind of distracted when you went to (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, got distracted when I--see I started, I majored in biology and at that time, most of the young men were in biology premed.  And I'm looking and I, I had graduated in the class of '58 [1958], was probably thirty girls (laughter), you know.  And, and come to college [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and see all these dapper dudes.  And it, you know I'm, I'm coming fres- summer time they are not there.  In September you say wow, look at all these people.  And it was just amazing for me to see.  And we'd, my girlfriends and I would sit in the snack bar and look at the young men.  And especially time for the step shows, you know, Greeks ooh.  So, it was just a happy time for us.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did you join the Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] or anything?
Speaker 2: After I got out of school because I went three summers and at that time if you're on a loan of anything you could not.  If you had money for a, to join a sorority, why would you be on a loan, that's the way they looked at it.  So, I wouldn't, I had a choice, I made the choice to stay in school (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now I didn't know they made that distinction like that.
Speaker 2: They made that distinction.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right, well so 1962 I guess what was the most popular music, in those days, when you were in school?
Speaker 2: Who was it?
Speaker 1: I know Motown [Motown Records] stuff was out but I don't know if that was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was a lot of Motown stuff and we had to.
Speaker 1: --big influence.
Speaker 2: We liked a Bobby "Blue" Bland [Bobby Bland], who was that record by him.  And, and we liked Jackie Wilson.  Ooh and did I love to dance.  Aretha Franklin of course--and that was when I was coming here to, when I came out, 'cause we are the same age, Aretha and I.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, we would have socials on campus.  And yearbook, you know, it was a lot of clubs and things to be involved in.  I didn't get involved in a lot of clubs there on campus.  I was consumed with taking a large, a large loads of classes, so that I could graduate in three years and three summers.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't spend a lot of time on the campuses, so?
Speaker 2: I spent a lot of time on campus but not involved in activities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just on campus looking around (laughter) and misbehaving and doing all kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you had to actually go, go back home (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Back and forth, that's what I'm saying, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, back.
Story_ID: 638689
Speaker 1: Oh were you engaged in any civil rights activities as a student?
Speaker 2: We marched one time, we--Odell Thorns whose father worked for the engineering department for the school [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] had gone to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and come back and talked to us about.  And he organized the march where we took buses downtown to march to the courthouse to integrate the buses.  We were supposed to march to the courthouse and kneel and pray.  But when, and when we and when we got there they turned us right around and, and we came back to campus, but the buses were integrated the next day.  Remember this is a college town and this is money in that town.  And, and one thing in Pine Bluff [Arkansas] they understood money.  So, we never and, and, and we never had, and, and there were not any lunch counters to integrate.  We didn't have the lunch counters or they closed 'em.  One of the things I remember was when during the summer when they were integrating the pools and things.  You know, they brick the white pool to keep them from swimming in there.  And they kept our pool and that's when I said now the rich whites had their country club pool, the poor whites don't have anything now.
Speaker 1: So they bricked up the poor white pool (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They bricked up the--, uh-huh--
Speaker 1: Just to keep you all from, out of it?
Speaker 2: Just to keep us from in there, and but they kept our black pool.  And I say what a travesty for poor people.  And so we, hey.
Speaker 1: It's ironic.  Did the poor white people ever do anything about that?
Speaker 2: No.  Because you know that's always been that, there was a class system in the, everybody wants scapegoats so we were theirs, poor whites.  The scapegoats were poor blacks, was blacks period.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, well as you were moving on through college did you, you were taking the education course, (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I started taking education courses my last year, senior year in high, in college.  Because I say, I know I don't want to be a scientist, sitting up looking in microscopes all my life, so.  And I say I'm gonna take these education courses so took them my senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and that's when I took all the education courses that I needed.  I never had student teaching though.  When I came to Chicago [Illinois] I'd never had student teaching.  I took courses and they waived some of that for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated in what year?
Speaker 2: May of '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Okay, May of 1965, and your degree was?
Speaker 2: B.S. in biology.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you'd taken education courses to qualify as a teacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I took them at Chicago State [Chicago Teachers College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] later on after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I took 'em down there too, but I still needed additional courses.
Story_ID: 638690
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we leave Pine Bluff [Arkansas], tell us something about 3rd Street [sic. Avenue]? Third Street was a, I would call a, the black metropolis of downtown Main Street.  You had all kinds of black businesses, the beauty colleges were there.  Wiley Branton taxis [Branton's 98, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], their family owned the taxicab, black taxicab company.
Speaker 2: Wiley Branton [Wiley A. Branton, Sr.]?
Speaker 1: His family the Brantons owned the taxi cab company.  Then there was a hotel there, exclusively for blacks.  And everybody who would leave out of, if you wanted to go eat, where you could sit you would go to 3rd Street.  You could find everything barber shops, beauty shops, every.  And, and certainly juke joints, all that would be on 3rd Street.  Downtown was Main Street, you know, where you have the stores, Kresge [S.S. Kresge Company] and Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] all those kinds of things would be on the Main Street.  And I think that was probably 5th [Avenue] or 6th Avenue but 3rd Street was where most blacks would come up from the rural areas and would be able to get food and just have a good time.
Speaker 2: Okay, so a lot of pe- people from the smaller towns would come, come into (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Small towns came to Pine Bluff.
Speaker 2: Would they come in on the weekends and something?
Speaker 1: They'd come in on a Saturday.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Was there a lot of live music in those days?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you, I met, when I was in college [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], that's the first time I saw Ike and Tina Turner Revue and Bobby Bland.  We had what was known as the Rec- Townsend Recreational Center [sic. Townsend Park Recreation Center, Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  And that's where you would have the live acts.  Bobby "Blue" Bland's band would come in.  As I said Ike and Tina Turner Revue, that's where I first saw them.
Speaker 2: Okay, was it unusual for, for the big named acts to come through?
Speaker 1: No, not for Pine Bluff (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 638691
Speaker 1: You graduated in 1965 with a B.S. in biology.  Now, what did you, what were your prospects?
Speaker 2: I, I knew I didn't want to stay in Pine Bluff [Arkansas] because I'd been here the summer before and I said I wanna go back to Chicago [Illinois].  And, and I went down to the Chicago Public Schools and--
Speaker 1: Now, back to Chicago, now had you been to Chicago (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had come here for just a summer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --uh-huh worked at the Riverview remember?
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, because at the time people were, after summer school people with children would go away to try to get money to have clothes to come back to school with new, money for clothes to come back to school.  So, to be sharp or whatever.
Speaker 1: So, you, you accompanied your uncle back to Chicago to Riverview?
Speaker 2: No, I had aunts here then.  My Uncle Jack [Jack Jenkins] had moved back to Pine Bluff then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I--
Speaker 1: But, they had a connection with River, with Riverview Park [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, my aunt did, she would always work, in the bath houses, you know, in the bathrooms.  And I would come back and I came back and stayed with her daughter one summer and worked there and then I decided to come back and live.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And work in Chicago.  I was actually only coming back one year because I ca- you know, I came in with the class of '62 [1962] and my classmates were going to graduate in '66 [1966].  It was only a few of us who went straight through and I was just gonna come back.  Because at that time I was involved with a young man.  And he was going to be in the class of '66 [1966].  So, I was just coming here to stay until the class of, you know, until that school year was over.  And then go back those where my thoughts.
Speaker 1: Oh, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well I came here and saw the lights and met a man.  My, my mother [Nola Jenkins Ford] always told me, be careful of meeting tall men and fast cars (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I saw somebody I liked and stayed on.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were, so what did you do when you--?
Speaker 2: I came here and applied for a teaching job and my first job was at Henry Horner elementary school [Henry Horner School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 41st [Street] and Michigan [Avenue] right in front of Unity Funeral Home [Unity Funeral Parlors Inc., Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, Henry Horner elementary school that's different from Henry Horner private school [ph.].
Speaker 2: Absolutely, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We got the children from the Taylor complex [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois] right over on 41st and State [Street].
Speaker 1: What did you teach?
Speaker 2: I taught seventh and eighth, I mean seventh grade, homeroom.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did you like it?  Did you, I mean what did you think, think of the, of Chicago, well the children in the school.
Speaker 2: I was, you know, when I came to Chicago, I, I, when you see it up north, we were living for integrated, integration and was more, the same as in same as in Pine Bluff.  The schools were very segregated, the children were very respectful but they were not as ambitious as I think they should have been, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, but they were, they, they weren't a discipline problem.
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh I, no.
Story_ID: 638692
Speaker 1: I've heard people describe Robert Taylor [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois], you know, most of the buildings are knocked down now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they are.
Speaker 1: And before they were they had a horrible reputation.
Speaker 2: Oh they sure yeah they did.  But, when I first in '62 [1962] and '65 [1965], these were upwardly mobile individuals who were trying to save money to buy a home.  So, these were not your teen parents that later on what Robert Taylor became.  I went out with, these were people who had just come out of those situations.  Because they were screened when I, families were screened to get into Robert Taylor when I first came here.  And these were upwardly mobile, very clean people because I would go home with my individuals, my students and you did not have the same kind of individuals as time progressed.  Because these families would find work and save their money and buy a home.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I've heard that it was a lot (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, they were, these were upwardly mobile.
Speaker 1: A lot better when, I mean, when they were constructed.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, situation.
Speaker 1: Better.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well maintained.
Speaker 1: You had an intact family were there.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Mr. and Mrs. Poindexter I was, with Albert [Albert Poindexter], he was in my second class, my second class '66 [1966], '67 [1967] and all of his family members did well.  Mr. T went to Henry Horner [Henry Horner School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Did you know him?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, he, his fam- and he, he went to Dunbar [Dunbar Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and excelled, but he, I never taught him.  But the whole Tero group of boys, seven I think, seven of those Tero boys.  And they all did well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was always in the best of we, we had a homogeneous group and we grouped children according to ability and he was always in the top grouped class.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he wasn't like a man of few words like he is on TV or?
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: You know, just, "I pity the fool" and that's all, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no.
Speaker 1: He's a little bit different from what we see.
Speaker 2: He left there and went to Texas Southern [sic. Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] and played for Texas Southern, when he left.  See Dunbar, I think, won the city championship when Mr. T played football there.  And then he went down to Texas Southern and played.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, did, was he flamboyant in those days (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: Gold, no gold chains and?
Speaker 2: But, he was, he was a leader.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, did you have in, in the--
Speaker 2: No, he was in, Lawrence was in Mrs. McCoo's [ph.] eighth grade when I started the seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Lawrence Tero [Lawrence Tureaud; Mr. T], right?
Speaker 2: Tero T-E-R-O.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  Well so did, did you teach all the subjects in seventh grade?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then when we became departmentalized I only taught math and science.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, how long did you teach at He- Henry Horner?
Speaker 2: I taught there until '76 [1976], eleven years.  And then that school because of diminishing population was closed see when I was there we had about eleven or twelve hundred children.  And then it went down to something like four hundred and then they closed the school.  And I went to McCorkle [Helen J. McCorkle School; Helen J. McCorkle Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which was at 44th [Street] and State [Street].
Story_ID: 638693
Speaker 1: Now how did you like Chicago [Illinois] in those days, you know?
Speaker 2: I didn't think I'd ever get warm (laughter) initially.  And then because at that time women couldn't wear pants to school or anything like that.
Speaker 1: I didn't know there was any such rule as that?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Women couldn't wear pants, it was only until about the '70s [1970s] I think that we could, pants suits became real popular.  I remember that, you know women couldn't wear pants.
Speaker 1: It's hard to imagine that but I guess, you know, it's a good thing I, we talked about it because, you know, I don't think anybody would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no women couldn't wear pants.
Speaker 1: --imagine that women couldn't wear pants to, to teach in school.
Speaker 2: Not at all.  I, I loved Chicago after that.  I would go, initially my first couple, you know, naturally when I first came my first couple of years.  I would go home [to Pine Bluff, Arkansas] with a lot of regularity.  And then after a while it just be for Christmas and in the summer.  But, when I first came I was homesick, write letters all the time and then it stopped, so.  But, I, I began--that's where I met Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] I was in the movement more in Chicago than I was when I was at home.  Because there was a bit of a movement there, you know Dr. King and Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois], I had went to PUSH when it was SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Coalition] Breadbasket [Operation Breadbasket], SCLC, you know.
Speaker 1: I guess you got here the year that Dr. King came to Chicago 19--well in '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], I came, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Martin came in '66 [1966] and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he was at Tabernacle Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] and at Mount Pisgah [Mount Pisgah Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so you, you heard him speak at--?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, where a member of any of those organizations he was in?
Speaker 2: No, just attended, well, you know, a card, you know, said to have the membership for PUSH I would buy a membership.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now PUSH is later though after King is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, after King was killed.
Speaker 1: --assassinated, yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Right, so did you, did, so did you march with him here in Chicago when he came to?
Speaker 2: I marched, not in, when they were out in at--
Speaker 1: Cicero [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't at the march, I just went to listen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you participate in the big Soldiers Field [sic. Soldier Field, Chicago, Illinois] march?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then when PUSH had some, something else, we went there.  When I, and, and when I would tell my children, they say, "Are you that old," if you say you marched with Dr. King, they say, "you that old" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so well you were still teaching at I guess at Horner [Henry Horner School, Chicago, Illinois] when King was killed?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you remember what you were doing that day and when you, the day you found out?
Speaker 2: No, I can't, '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: April 4th, 1968 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) April 4th, 1968.
Speaker 1: Were you in class when you found out?
Speaker 2: I think we, I think, I think we might have been school was letting out or something.  Because the, the riots started right away on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And it was oh it was terrible.  Because and, and, I had a friend who was a police officer he said that they were saying shoot them, Daley [Richard J. Daley] was saying shoot to kill, and that was just terrible times for us.  And it was we just felt that, almost how the country felt when President Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] was assassinated, and especially after John F. [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] had been killed.  We just felt that this was bad times, an omen for black people. We would be further delayed in our search for equality. And so it was just depressing times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember teachers and everybody just crying openly.
Story_ID: 638694
Speaker 1: Who were some of the local leaders in those days?
Speaker 2: I only remember Reverend Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson].  And from my school I remember Bill Samuels [William Samuels], you know, he worked for PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] later on, he's a minister now.  I, I taught James Demus [James L. Demus III] and he later became, he worked with President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] in Little Rock [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the condition of--how did black teachers feel in those days, I guess and what, what was, you know, what was the board of education [Chicago Board of Education] like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We--there was a big, we had a big (unclear) in our school, we had big black teachers group, black creativity.  We were very pride, a lot of pride and was going on at that time.  We were very, because our children were, we thought had been so disenfranchised, you know.
Speaker 1: So you, you, you had an, org- an organization of black teachers?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was called?
Speaker 2: Chicago Area Alliance of Black School Educators at that time, CAABSE.  It was not at that, I was, I'm a member of it.  But, it was we were, we have, we still have a group here.  But that, that didn't--we just had a group from the school, who called themselves, you know.  We just banded together to do things, different things for the children in that particular school.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know, know that there was an issue of overcrowding in the public schools (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was an issues of overcrowding but it wasn't with, that's when we had Willis Wagons where I was.  They called them Willis Wagons.
Speaker 1: Right, named after Ben Willis [Benjamin C. Willis] who was the--
Speaker 2: He was very--
Speaker 1: --superintendent of schools.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: White superintendent of schools.
Speaker 2: He was leaving when I came in.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and those where is attempt to siphon off the overflow and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.	To keep from being in, in going to the white schools.
Speaker 1: To keep, yeah, to keep black students from--
Speaker 2: And it started in, in Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois] out in that area, around here 'cause that's where the projects were.  And they said that's why they built that expressway [Dan Ryan Expressway] straight through that.
Speaker 1: Now, did teachers have, have much of a role in the fight to desegregate the schools in the sense that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of the community leaders, who were fight, fighting the Willis Wagons and that sort--?
Speaker 2: He was from Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], Al Raby [Albert Raby].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Al Raby was a big, civil rights person.
Speaker 1: I know I've heard [HistoryMaker] Jorja Palmer talk about him, you know some others.
Speaker 2: Al Raby was big with that, Willis Wagon issue.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there, were there any blacks with the board of education then any capacity to?
Speaker 2: I think that during that time, that's when Dr. Byrd became, then next person deputy, Manford Byrd [HistoryMaker Manford Byrd, Jr.].  Willis left, I've forgotten, Redmond [James Redmond] who became Dr. Redmond's deputy.  And.
Speaker 1: Okay, Dr. Manford Byrd.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And later on he became superintendent of schools under Harold Washington.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, there was quite controversy about him ascending to that position they keep looking past him--
Speaker 2: They did, they did, they looked--
Speaker 1: --passed him, passed him over.
Speaker 2: Every time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ruth Love came in here and then, you know, she got it before he did.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, they've got it, was Kimbrough [Ted Kimbrough] here before him too, or was he afterwards?
Speaker 2: I think he was after Byrd.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, 'cause he was with me, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, yeah. What about--was Dr. Stephenson [HistoryMaker Richard E. Stephenson, Jr.] was a part?
Speaker 2: Dr. Stephenson was just was an interim with me also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh 'cause he came in and he was only an interim right after Almo, Charles Almo and then Dr. Stephenson became an interim.  Or was it after Dr. Kimbrough, one of those.  But, he had, he was only in there about six months.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not even that long.
Story_ID: 638695
Speaker 1: So you were at, we had you at McCorkle [Helen J. McCorkle School; Helen J. McCorkle Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: And then I went to John Hope [John Hope Community Academy; John Hope College Prep, Chicago, Illinois], I went to John Hope.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when was it, when were you at John Hope?
Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1981.  So you were at McCorkle from '76 [1976] to '81 [1981].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And then John Hope from '81 [1981].  Now, were, were you still teaching the upper grades (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I taught seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Seventh and eighth, okay, all right.  Were, were things about the same then, in, you know?
Speaker 2: I think the situation had improved tremendously in terms of schools.  John Hope was a--became a community center and then it was in a new, it was, it was, the latest methods of it was called, we were in houses.  You would have your own team, you had a team leader, it was the newest construct in educational (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so, the, the, the teachers were arranged in--
Speaker 2: The teachers were--
Speaker 1: --in teaching teams.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And the teacher, and when I came to Hope it was you were interviewed for the job.  Some fantastic people were there.  Earl Bryant was my principal, first black principal I had ever had in the city.  Even though the schools were predominant black the principal would always be white.  And that was alarming for me coming from the South, because I'm used to black principals, so.  I think when I came to Chicago [Illinois] there were only seven or seventeen black principals.
Speaker 1: Okay, in the whole and we're, we're talking about out of--
Speaker 2: We're talking about of--
Speaker 1: How many schools?
Speaker 2: At least five or six hundred elementary schools and about seventy-five high schools.
Speaker 1: I, I you know I had to have you say, 'cause it gives people the sense of the scope.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: A lot of towns don't have (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Seventy-five elementary schools.
Speaker 2: Yes, seventy-five high schools at that time and about 576 or 600 hundred elementary schools.
Speaker 1: It's a huge school system.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, 450,000 children.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  And in those days the black population in Chicago, correct me if I'm wrong was about a third of the city population (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And soon became like 80 something percent of the school population.
Speaker 2: Right, it's probably what it is now too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or a little higher.
Story_ID: 638696
Speaker 1: Now, were you seeing that kind of the movement away from the public schools on the parts of whites in those days, in the, in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Only when they brought that desegregation suit in did I see that and that was in '85 [1985].  Then we see the decline '80 [1980], I went to the board [Chicago Board of Education] '82 [1982], '83 [1983], it would gradually start to.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess, I guess in the early around '80 [1980], '81 [1981] is when they started really, seriously talking about busing.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And you had the Bogan [Bogan High School; Bogan Computer Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois] group, the Bogan Broads.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, the Bogan parents, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yep.
Speaker 2: That's what it was.
Speaker 1: Yep, and the ones that supported Jane Byrne, or was supported by Jane Byrne.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and she fired Michael Scott [HistoryMaker Michael Scott, Sr.] and all five of those I mean, those black school members.  That's what it was.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you think about that as a teacher from?
Speaker 2: Well, we said, we, we said we'll get, we'll do you just like we did Hanrahan [Edward Hanrahan].  Remember when Hanrahan killed Fred Hampton, Clark [Mark Clark] and they thought the black community was gonna let, forget that.  And that's when people started rallying said we'll get her.  That was one of her, X in her box, a nail in her coffin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the next election, remember?
Speaker 1: Right that's the one where Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Harold [Harold Washington]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, called for a black mayor and finally there were plebiscites.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, Lu and, and then the Ed Gardner [HistoryMaker Edward Gardner] financed it.  "Come alive October 5."
Speaker 1: That's right.  Financed voter registration.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause Harold said you give me, you got to get these many people registered and I need this amount of money.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, and I know coming from out of town I was impressed with the resolve of the Chicago [Illinois] community, the black community in those days too, you know.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: It seemed to never give up, you know which is.
Speaker 2: Yep.	First you don't succeed try, try again.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, well, what was it like in the public schools, I mean, in, in, in the school that you were in, how, how many black, was it, was it mostly black teachers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most, mostly black teachers, we had some whites of course, uh-huh but mostly--
Speaker 1: Yeah, all right.
Speaker 2: Race percentage was always black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were hard working individuals and really wanted a lot for our children, so.  That's what I've always been impressed with, good teaching.  And people did not slough off and had expectations for children.
Story_ID: 638697
Speaker 1: Now, when did you go back to school, to get a master's [degree]?
Speaker 2: I went back to school in 1971 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to UCenter in '71 [1971] and graduated I think in '74 [1974].  And then I went to University of Illinois in '75 [1975], I think and graduated in '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is Northeastern Illinois University Center (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Illinois University at the center for inner city studies [Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies].
Speaker 1: All right and that's where you got your master's?
Speaker 2: First master's, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to the center, I mean University of Illinois Champaign-Urbana [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and got my second master's.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, the first one was in 1971?
Speaker 2: Through '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Through '74 [1974], oh okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And the second one was?
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975] probably through '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay, now Northeastern was interesting in those days because of the, the community education stuff going on?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, were you a part of the Communiversity and all that with Bobby Wright and other people?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you were there getting in, trying to get the master's degree?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  And who, who is some of your teachers there?
Speaker 2: Dr. Caruthers [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.], Don Bailey, Dr. Carol Adams [HistoryMaker Carol L. Adams], McIntosh [ph.], he had come over from Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he later went back, and those were some impressive ones for me.
Speaker 1: So, what, what was McIntosh's first name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Andy Thompson [Anderson Thompson] was my teacher too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: McIntosh taught over there.
Speaker 1: Was that the same McIntosh from?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Related to the, okay.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think he's related to the ones you were talking about in Little Rock [Arkansas], no.  But, I, he might have been.  'Cause he's a young professor, and very talented.
Story_ID: 638698
Speaker 1: I think this is about 1980, I guess, or so.  Well, we were talking about the schools segregated, desegregation strug- struggles and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But did, and you said that the general condition of the school where you were teaching was good, in terms of that?
Speaker 2: Well, in yes, well Horner my first school know I was, I couldn't believe that was a school because that had been a warehouse.  And they just put it into a school, when after they had that big, they opened the projects, remember they had that, all those children there.  And so, they just had put some schools together and they that became, he used to call it Henry Horner [Henry Horner School, Chicago, Illinois], the children used to called Henry Horner the warehouse on the corner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that, it was never built to be a school so.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But the others were actually built to be schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, when they were built once again they were overcrowded.  So they all had Willis Wagons too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I see here that you were the ESEA [Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965] reading teacher and coordinator (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, uh-huh, that was--
Speaker 1: --liaison at in '79 [1979] and '84 [1984], is that, that at--
Speaker 2: That was at the, I worked for, when I went to Hope [John Hope Community Academy; John Hope College Prep, Chicago, Illinois], I was there two, three years, then I got promoted to well I applied for a job to be a parent ESEA parent teacher to go and work with parents to assist them in at five different schools on how to be more informed about their children education.  We knew that parents play a tremendous role with the education of their children.  So, that is when I went out and did that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you did that from '79 [1979] to '84 [1984].  And from '84 [1984] to '86 [1986], you were a parent development coordinator?
Speaker 2: That's it the parent development coordinator, and I worked at the district office.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So, this is not okay I've got 'em this note it's at John Hope, but it's at the district office?
Speaker 2: It was at the district office, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So, now you're making a sort of a transition I guess from being a classroom teacher to working for the board [Chicago Board of Education]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm actually coming out at the district level.  I did district level work until '88 [1988].  And then I became a principal in '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay, now you at one time you were coordinating black history programs?
Speaker 2: That was when I was a parent coordinator.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I would just work with the schools to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh and my parents, I wanted the parents to be involved because they didn't know a lot about black history.  I wanted them to be involved so then they could tell their children about it.  And that's how I, that's one, one I would have a program at each one of my five schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, you also organized a GED [General Education Development] program, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 638699
Speaker 1: I just wanted, before I, we move on I just want, we're in the early '80s [1980s].  But, ask you about the Harold Washington movement for mayor.  And you said you volunteered to register voters and just tell us about, about the, about the feeling that (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I, I, it was just a feeling that messianic in my opinion you know, just like you're in a church and the preacher's taking you to another level that's a we, that's the way we revered Harold.  And it was that little small people the common man would come out and when you registered them to vote and they said that, "This is going to be the first time I'm ever gonna vote, I mean that I ever voted."  And these were older people.  This was a movement that I don't see anybody would not have been a part of it.  Because Harold really we were just so proud him.  And he did what people thought he couldn't do.  And Ed Gardner [HistoryMaker Edward Gardner] just you know, "Come alive October 5," and registered the people to vote.  And I think that, the again, he, his was a, he, he wasn't assassinated but we were so crushed when he suddenly died of that heart attack, so.  And you know people were saying different things but, you know.  It was just, it was unbelievable really.
Story_ID: 638700
Speaker 1: You moved on to become the math and science coordinator for district 13 [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And, and then you, you became principal of Beethoven Elementary School [Ludwig Van Beethoven Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] in, what, what year was that?
Speaker 2: Eighty-nine [1989].
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989], okay.  Now, had you been seeking a principalship all along?
Speaker 2: Well, I had st- written a principals exam successfully in '88 [1988].  At that time you had to take a written examination and an oral examination.  So, I'd successfully written and, and, and, and, and taken an oral exam.  And in 1988 was put on a list, you had to be on a list.  And, and then in '89 [1989], when a school became available I, I was appointed principal of that school.  But, right after that '88 [1988], there was the reform movement where no, you no longer had to have a principal certificate, to become principal so.  But, they're going back to the way I became a principal.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.  So, 1992 you received the Principal of Excellence Award, right was that?
Speaker 2: Yes, '92 [1992], '93 [1993] and '94 [1994] three ex- consecutive years.
Speaker 1: Now, what were you doing to, get that, that, you know to be so recognized?
Speaker 2: I, I didn't, I didn't ever, I never accepted that the fact that poor children could not learn, having come from a poor background myself.  I didn't think that so, I did not let my teachers have that same expectation nor my children.  And when I came to Beethoven I, there were goals I set for myself and the school.  And I imm- the school had not painted in fifteen years I had the school, I had to have low hanging fruits, you have show the community that you want something.  And I brought all new furnishings for my children and then put the furnishing in the hall and told my children they could take that home with them, the desk and chairs and all of those.  And wanted it, it to be an oasis, for the children, to, to know that this was their home away from home.  And when you went into those squalid conditions of--and that's when the homes were I mean the projects deplorable, you know.  They, you walk in you because people were not going up using the elevators they'd just urinate down, you know.  Go into their home any place around there because instead of going upstairs or anything, you know, people hang around the building, they would go around that building.  So, it always smelled like urine when you would walk into that elevator.  And I would see how the conditions of some of the homes, some of 'em were really well kept and once again some of 'em were not.  And you'd go in when I would take children home for misbehaving I'd go to the door and often times there might not be a bed but a mattress and no table and no chairs and that's one of the reasons I would always give those, give 'em the chairs and the desk.  So, that they would have something.  But, I told my children and my teachers they had done a needs assessment when I got to the school.  And I said, "What is your greatest obstacle to teaching my children?"  And they said discipline so I handled discipline exclusively that first year.  And it was a task, but I wanted my teachers to, I wanted to remove all the obstacles, you know.  You told me this was an obstacle, so this is what I want done.  And would bring, let the children come in, I would do the discipline and take 'em home myself.  Well, when you go to a door and knock on the door and say you're the principal.  And the parents say well what did he do, they immediately, what did he do, the principal bringing home.  So, and that's how I got a rapport with my parents.  And then I found out how my children were living and often times they didn't want me to see their places because they were deplorable situations.  And I, I wanted them, I said I want--these children have been dogged by life I don't want you dog 'em, but I do want you to have expectations for 'em.  I don't want you sending them down here for these kinds of things.  And then I because to do discipline workshops to show them that those kinds of things that they were sending down, were really not discipline problems.  The child turned around, didn't have a pencil or all those kinds of things.  Those are, not discipline problems.  And I, I just appealed to my teachers and began to work, I'd said I want, we had never had 90 percent attendance at the school.  I wanted 90 percent attendance and I wanted, certainly I wanted my reading scores to be elevated and my math scores.  And I wanted a gymnasium.  That school was built without a gymnasium.  We had to go out to out, my children had to go outdoors to go the gym in the park district.  Well, the park district had any kind of program.  The children, they were, "Well we're not having gym today," well that angers the children.  Because you got to remember they already in this high rise and they didn't have these kinds of activities.  And then you, you cancel gym on them.  So, these are the kinds of things that I began to lobby for.
Story_ID: 638701
Speaker 1: After I, I, I added bicycles for perfect attendance all year, I got a--bought I don't know how many bicycles my first year.  And iss- gave them out for perfect attendance.  So, it improved my attendance but, because when, if you have five children in the family and monitor them and I say why is this child absent, they say, "He has chickenpox."  I knew then that if he, he has five brothers and sisters next week they are gonna be out.  So, I, then I told the board [Chicago Board of Education] I said, "You all got to give me a waiver, so I can get some perfect attendance here, because my children, there's an epic- chickenpox epidemic.  Any time you have this close of quarters and you have this many children in a family you're gonna have that."  So, I've had indicators of success always my first year.  But, then I could see my children going out of a lower quarter, quartile.  But, when I look back and saw that these children are getting ready to go to gym and taking out time away from task onto me.  I must I need to, the second year I said I need to extend my school day.  So, I brought my teachers in and I said, "I can pay you an hourly rate but I need you one hour after school.  How many people," only wanted the names of the people who cannot stay.  Only three people could not stay.  That's because they were in school.  I extended my school day from--to 3:30.  And they could only teach reading, extend my reading.  And that's when my scores began to improve.  And that's the model that Paul Vallas took when he took over the Chicago Public Schools.  He took the model that I had created at Beethoven [Ludwig Van Beethoven Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and that was extended day reading (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really okay?
Speaker 1: If you know your children are not getting enough time on task and I know that my parents were not going to be able to do some of the kinds of things that I needed them to do, then I needed my children there longer.  I also, brought another gym teacher.  And then Compton [HistoryMaker James W. Compton] was the president of the school at that time and I did get the gym.  That was one of my goals.  The gym did come the year I left.  And they named it after me the Ford Arena [ph.].  It was built but I was--
Speaker 2: Where, where is it?
Speaker 1: It's at the, it's in the school.
Speaker 2: At Beethoven?
Speaker 1: Beethoven yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Built it on the front side of the school.
Speaker 2: They call it the Ford Arena?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] adopted the school, when I was there.  I did a grant with Stedman [Stedman Graham], I have a picture of that one over there.  She adopted the school.  And she would take my top reading scorers from kindergarten through eight out for lunch.  She had, she did that two years and then she visited the school.  So, we had a lot of support.
Speaker 2: Was it easy to get a hold of Oprah?
Speaker 1: I, I met her through Edmund, I mean Stedman.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, you know, how that was, we did a grant together and then she got a lot, he got a lot of play out of that.  And then she, the children went crazy, she would send limousines for them, of course they were excited about that.  But, it was an interesting time to be in schools.  But, I think I gained most of my weight being a principal.  'Cause you would be so tired at the evenings that you would go home and Gladys [Gladys Luncheonette, Chicago, Illinois] was in the area so I would get a dinner go home and go to bed.  My daughter [Charisse Ford] was away in college and I had no husband at the time, so.  But, it was very rewarding.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, so you won, you won three awards during that period of time, you said.  And Paul Vallas took your model.  I mean did he ever officially acknowledge that was the model, he got?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And the mayor came to our school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] visited my school in 1994.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Mrs. Edgar [Brenda Edgar], Jim Edgar's wife came out and read to my kindergarten children.  I have pictures of that also over there.  But, because and, and six legislators from the state came to see how I was spending my state Chapter I [Elementary and Secondary Education Act Chapter I] money.  And that was the way I was spending it to make sure that my children got time on task.
Story_ID: 638702
Speaker 1: In 1994 you become the assistant superintendent of Chicago Public Schools?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Now, how, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) When we, there were, there were shootings going in my buildings and the mayor [Richard M. Daley] asked Vince Lane [HistoryMaker Vincent Lane] who was over CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] at the time.  And he asked us to have a press conference there.  So, we had a press conference there.  So, when, and my children introduced the mayor and all of these people were there, they were so excited about these children so when the mayor and his entourage came in my children stood up and applauded.  'Cause they respect authority.  And the fact that he was the mayor of our great city.  And then they introduced him and then they said what is going on in this school.  And Argie [Argie K. Johnson] visited the school without letting us, people come to visit you, you know, people you had been expected (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's Argie?
Speaker 2: Johnson.
Speaker 1: Yes, Johnson.
Speaker 2: And she and the mayor saw what I was doing and she wanted me to try to move that to another level.  And that's when she asked me to come and be assoc- assistant superintendent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you, did you want to go, to the board of ed [Chicago Board of Education] then?
Speaker 2: I've always wanted to be in a position to help the greatest amount of people that I possibly could.  But, my greatest love is certainly classroom teaching.  But, and so that's the reason I accepted that challenged.  'Cause I really wanted to retire from principalship.  So, I went on down with Argie and became over that the five, I had a billion dollar budget.  So, that we could begin to impact children.
Speaker 1: Okay, so well okay.  So, you, you 1995 you become the chief instruction officer?
Speaker 2: That was well Argie only stayed there a year after I got there and Paul came in and kept me on.  Some of the staff he did not, you know.  Well, you know he let go, so I had to go and interview with him again.  Another interview, I interviewed with Paul and, and he, I didn't know he had found out everything that I had done in the schools.  And looked at what I said about testing and he decided that he, I could he wanted me to stay on in this position but we just renamed it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so well, tell us, tell us about that job and what the--?
Speaker 2: That job I, under that job I had state Chapter I [Elementary and Secondary Education Act Chapter I] money and federal Chapter I money.  I also had language and culture.  I had sports, I had early childhood education.  All of those were, I had thirty direct reports really.  And that was most of the curriculum areas were in my unit.  So, it was a good time to be an assistant superintendent because there were so many things that we could do.  And that we were able to do.  So, I was pleased with that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay let's see, okay so in 1996, you became the school leadership development officer.
Speaker 2: Same position just different titles (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we--
Speaker 1: So, so this is a new admins- administration (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A new administration and they sometimes.
Speaker 1: Now, who, who's in this time.
Speaker 2: Still Paul.
Speaker 1: Okay, Paul Vallas?
Speaker 2: But, you know, we reorganize and, and, and, and leadership we did a little more with the principals.  I did a little more with the principal evaluation and a new teacher mentoring.  And we worked collaboratively with the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] to make sure that new teachers would not just be coming in, that they would have mentors.  And research tells us that when you have a new teacher you should have a master teacher, or someone to assist them.  When they would come into a new school and just instead of throwing them in a classroom and giving them the keys and, and the text and the grade, the attendance book.  So, that was the kind of things we developed.
Story_ID: 638703
Speaker 1: All the while the Chicago Public Schools is receiving national attention for you know, the schools being turned around basically you know.  Though there's been some criticism in terms of heavy testing and that sort of thing.  So, do you, do you have any?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, when Paul came in that we were, it was called the reform board.  And certainly we looked at those schools that was on, were on probation and those schools who were not.  Were, you know, were on the step before probation.  And I was a monitor for five schools, even though I was still a school leadership development officer.  I still worked with five principals to help them get off probation.  And three of them did, DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] was one of them because I, I took all the schools on State Street.  I had more schools than anyone.  And so, that is how I worked with those schools.  And I, I and I encouraged all of 'em to use my model.  Some did the ones that came off probation used the modeled that I had used successfully at Beethoven [Ludwig Van Beethoven Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  And Du Sable did very, very well the first year but it was some inter fighting and they didn't do as well the next year.  And we removed the principal, I mean, he resigned and went someplace else.  And then the next year we got another person in that didn't do well, so.  We put the school on pro- academic probation so that we could close the school and get in a new, a whole new staff.  So, that's where the school is now.  It has four small schools.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I know yeah.  Okay, now is it now Paul Vallas left in?
Speaker 2: Ninety [1990], I mean 2001?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I believe so.
Speaker 2: I left in '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, okay, so you left before Paul Vallas (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I left before Paul.
Story_ID: 638704
Speaker 1: In 1999 you, you became assistant director of Central Management Services for the State of Illinois [Illinois Department of Central Management Services].  Now, how, how did that take place (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually that was 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I, the, I, Governor Ryan [George Ryan] appointment me as assistant director of Central Management Ser- Services.  And that's the procurement arm for the State of Illinois.  We procured most of the goods for the state, you know, contractual services.  And I worked there until 2003, when Governor Blagojevich [Rod Blagojevich] came in and appointed me to the Illinois Commerce Commission.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, it seems like a jump, you know, just I mean to go from education to the?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: So, what, how was that transition made and, what, did you feel comfortable doing it?
Speaker 2: I felt comfortable because I was the assistant director and it wasn't as--I had the business enterprise program which was the minority program for investment.  And so that was the biggest piece in that assistant directorship that I was very proud of.  But, under that assistant directorship, I had the police department very few people know that there's a police department in the state.  There was in that the Thompson Center.  And I had the, the employment piece so all of that.  They had a directors but he was once again if you know how read, analysis, synthesis and evaluate information, you can, accomplish most things.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I mean how did you come to their notice, as a, you know.
Speaker 2: My mentor is Senate President Emil Jones Jr. [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so that.
Speaker 2: I met him when I was a principal and under adversarial condition.  He, when Ted, when we were principals our, our salaries were frozen and we went to a meeting.  And I ask Ted Kimbrough from the, from the floor, and he asked questions.  I said well when are we gonna get a raise.  And he said well ask that, that's left up to Senate President Emil Jones.  'Cause he, I said well, using state Chapter I [Elementary and Secondary Education Act Chapter I] money, well President Jones had always been a champion for children with the, poor children the dollar should follow them.  And so, when we came down to (unclear) to speak with President Jones, well he blasted us out.  And talked about the fact that we were trying take money from children.  And so we just developed a relationship from there and, and he always put me on committees.  And he came to my school unexpected to see exactly what I was doing.  And he was so impressed with the fact, with what was going on with the children, and that's why he, we became very good friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so you were assistant director of Central Management Services from 2000 to 2003?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I guess and you were responsible from the management of state government employees and performance of their duties.  Okay.  And we were, were you located here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes, James R. Thompson Center [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, all right, okay.  You become the Title I director for Chicago Public Schools, now was that before or after?
Speaker 2: No, that's all after (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's out of sequence, that's out of sequence, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I retired from CPS in '99 [1999], nothing happ- nothing after 2000.
Story_ID: 638705
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, 2003 you're appointed the Illinois Commerce Commissioner?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that now?
Speaker 2: Well the Illinois Commerce Commiss- Commission is its five commissioners.  We are creatures of the legislature, the public utilities acts, say that we must, make sure that our rate payer get safe, reliable and uninterrupted service at a reasonable cost.  And that the utility get a reasonable rate of return on its investment.  Which is a narrow line, but it is a quasi-judicial appointment.  So, both of my assistants are lawyers, they didn't have to be but they are because it's a, it's a governmental body and we weigh in on rate cases.  And we regulate water, gas, telecommunication, electricity and we also--the great protection fund, fund for the railroads.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well have you enjoyed doing this?
Speaker 2: I have, it's been very contentious sometimes because you know anytime you have to raise anybody's utility bill, it is always contentious.  But, people don't understand that, for instance your gas bill, 70 percent of the rates in the gas bill is fixed.  20 percent is the only piece and that's the transportation piece that's the only piece we can regulate.  And we must look at the cost of the utility and expend it and they have to recover that cost.  And then we must make sure that they have the right infrastructure and those are the kinds of things that the public don't know.  They think that we just, we can just at will give a raise to the utilities but it takes eleven months before the rate case would reach us.  After it has gone through litigation and everybody who would want to intervene in it, can.  So, it is not something that, at willy nilly.  It must be able to go to the appellate, appellate court [Illinois Appellate Court].  Any decision we make can be appealed, in the, at the appellate court level.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well what's been the most controversial decision you've had to make?
Speaker 2: The last rate case probably for Commonwealth Edison [Commonwealth Edison Company] electricity increases, increasing electricity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one of the things people fail to realize is the rates were frozen for ten years.  Frozen, which means you couldn't increase it.  And once you come out of freezing, we all, and nothing, usage has gone up.  Everybody has three or four computers and all of that has gone up.  They don't, they want the prices to still be the same.  So, naturally the price went exponentially.  But, it still wasn't more than eight dollars a month more.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  No, does the, does the commission like make pro- provisions for people who have a hard time paying and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: The utility must do that.
Speaker 1: Okay the utility must do that, okay.  I know there's several, social service agencies on the west side have different programs that people can get involved (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah the people getting, if people reach out they can really get a lot of help.  LIHEAP, Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program, that's, that's from the federal government.  They've got a lot assistance there also.
Story_ID: 638706
Speaker 1: Do you miss education?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At all, okay.
Speaker 2: But, I'm too old for it now.  I, I'm on the Renaissance 2010 board, advisory board.  But, it if you're serious about it, you must, you need a lot of energy and a lot, be willing to give up a lot of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To effect change.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what is the organization of PJM states [PJM Interconnection LLC]?
Speaker 2: That's an organization of fourteen states in the District, thirteen states in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], who work collaboratively with regional transmission organizations to procure, transfer electricity to different parts of the country.  And it's, it's a group of--[U.S.] Congress said the utilities must have a regional transmission organization to make sure that we get reliable services, through that grid.  Because you remember the black outs that we were having coming out of Ohio.  So, that's one of the organizations that I am now the president of.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay anything, anything else about, you know, I guess I don't know enough, maybe I might not know enough about, about that to ask you a good question.  But, I don't want to get past, to pass it without, you know, something.  What, what I don't know?
Speaker 2: About?
Speaker 1: Yeah, about the, the Commerce, Commerce Commission [Illinois Commerce Commission]?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, well last year as I said was very contentious year because of the, we were coming out of a freeze and the legislature got involved in it.  And it created a lot of issues, got a lot of press.  And it made it look like as if we were utility, they called us utility hacks.  As if we were pro utility, you know.  Any decision that you make if it's not, what people think you want it to be, it goes to another level.  So, that's the most contentious piece I could say about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the general public has little understanding of what you do basically?
Speaker 2: Very little.
Story_ID: 638707
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us something about your relationship to the Citizens Utility Board [Chicago, Illinois] and, otherwise known as CUB?
Speaker 2: Well, the Citizens Utility Board is an advocate group that supposedly advocate on the side of the rate payer.  But, also know that the Utility Board, CUB gets dollars from the utilities also.  And now on the settlement with Com Ed [Commonwealth Edison Company] there were dollars given to CUB and from the clean air fund there were dollars given out to CUB.  And what individuals don't know is that the attorney general have a, has a consumer office also.  At the Commerce Commission [Illinois Commerce Commission] we also have a consumer group.  So, we it is (unclear) by nature is a consumer group.  So, most of your agencies there are consumer protections involved.  But, often times people for their own advancement can fan a flame, as if they are the end all and be all to protection for consumers.  But, be very mindful of the fact that the Co- Commerce Commission has a consumer component involved in it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, do all right.  Okay, yeah I, let me pause.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Now, you came in, you, you were appointment by Governor Ryan [George Ryan], right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And our current governor is Governor Blagojevich [Rod Blagojevich]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How have things changed since?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I, I believe, believe that Governor Blagojevich is certainly trying to do the best for the citizens of this great State of Illinois.  Because remember he appointed me the first time and he just reappointed me to another five year term.  So, I am, I work closely with the, his views I know he's gotten some press that had, in my opinion detracted from some of the things he's doing and for the citizens of this great State of Illinois.  And since he certainly we know that know now that citizens will be able to ride the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] for free.  And I think that's a big plus, and not only that he has given health care to quite a number of children.  And I mean and families and he's making sure that we get universal preschools so, those are some very strong things for me as a, an educator, that we'd be apprised of.
Story_ID: 638708
Speaker 1: Now, you have a, you have some volunteer activities too.  What, what are some of the, the boards and organ- organizations that you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm a volunteer, I'm on the United Way board [United Way Worldwide], I'm also on the Great Books board [Great Books Foundation, Chicago, Illinois].  And I work in my sorority Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.].  I'm also a member of The Links [The Links, Incorporated] and we do reach out to homeless shelters and we do work with elementary and high school students on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois].  And I work with my church with the Trinity Higher Education committee Corporation [Trinity Higher Education Corporation, Chicago, Illinois], which is college placement.
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you look back on everything--now, now you've also done some volunteering for--we, we talked earlier about political volunteering?  And you, you're working with the Obama campaign now?
Speaker 2: I'm an elected delegate from the 1st congressional district [Illinois 1st congressional district].  But, when Obama first ran for state rep [state representative].  I did fundraisers for him.  And when he became, when he decided to run for Se- state senator, I'm sorry U.S. senator I gave him along with Francis Carroll [HistoryMaker Francis Graves Carroll], he gave him what is called Women For Obama his first fundraiser.  So, I'm, I'm ecstatic about some of the things that I think he can do, and if he becomes president of the United States
Speaker 1: Well, what, what is it exactly that, that excites you about his candidacy?
Speaker 2: His, his candidacy excites me because he, he is for change and I saw that what he did at the grassroots level.  And he can, he's very collaborative and, he worked with very well with my friend Senate President Emil Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.].  Because President Jones, certainly who did a lot of blocking for him, when he first wanted to run for U.S. Senate.  Because remember the Democratic Party was probably going to endorse Ryan [George Ryan], at the time.  So, then Dan Hynes [Daniel Hynes], I'm sorry, and the president jumped out and said that, that he was going, he was endorsing Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], which means the whole Democratic Party for the State of Illinois could not come out and, and make an endorsement.  And he has been there every step of the way with him.  But, I see that, I think that Barack can bring constituents who've never been together before.  We look at the influence he's having with young people.  And I was at a meeting in Washington [D.C.] last week.  And these were older people telling me how their young children and these are, are whites who said that their young college age children and, and high school children are bringing their grandparents and parents onto Barack's team.  So, I think that he's a catalyst for all of us.  He, he, it doesn't matter about gender or ethnicity.
Story_ID: 638709
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes are certainly that we revisit hip hop and I want my children to always, and I tell my parents, the two greatest things you can do for your children.  The two most important things rather is love your child and to make sure your children get the best education possible.  I, I think that we've lost that focus.  Coming out of slavery, we knew that was the only way we could be upwardly mobile.  And that was what we were always taught, get an education.  And I want that to come back to us.  And be, and respect life and property.  If, if those are the kinds of things that we teach our individuals I think that young children will be very responsible adults.
Story_ID: 638710
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now, if you could?
Speaker 2: Probably, but I, I would, my career probably would be the same.  I would not change any, any parts of my career.  I probably could have been a better person at a, I mean a better.  You always look back and say well I should have done that better.  But, I did the best that I could, I, I could at the time because that's what I knew.  But, you, you should always--and want to tell individuals too, always be lifelong learner.  Because if you're a lifelong learner you're gonna always find something new, to do and improve upon.  That's what I try to share with my daughter [Charisse Ford], is there is always room for improvement.  And it doesn't' mean that you're trying to excel at everything but you, you could improve on anything you want to do.
Speaker 1: Now, on that same line of thinking when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think my legacy would be working with children and making sure that I did the best that I could for them.  And to be, I will always be a, be an advocate for children, especially poor children.  And anything that I do, I, I want to always make sure that they're gonna get the best.  At anything you want to do, if you can't do it for children and older people, then I don't think, you know.  That's a measure of society is how, how you treat your children and your older people.
Story_ID: 638711
Speaker 1: Speaking of children, tell us something about your daughter [Charisse Ford]?
Speaker 2: Well my daughter's thirty-seven.  She was educated in Chicago Public Schools. And she went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and she got an M.B.A. from Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].  And she works in New York for Estee Lauder [The Estee Lauder Companies Inc.], she's vice president of global marketing.  Makes a lot of money and I'm very proud of her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She doesn't share any money with her mother though, but (laughter).  So, I'm very proud of her.
Speaker 1: All right, now is there anything I have not asked you that we think we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I attend Trinity United Church of Christ [Chicago, Illinois] where Reverend Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr. [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr.] is the pastor.  As you know, now he's mired in some of the controversy with Barack [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], so.  What can I say about that other than he's a dynamic preacher and March 3rd will be his last Sunday?  Because we have an new pri- pastor Reverend Otis Moss III.  You know Reverend Otis Moss II [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Otis Moss, Jr.] is from Ohio.  And he was with the Civil Rights Movement with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  So, his son is our m- our new minister.
Speaker 1: I didn't know Dr. Wright was retiring?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a very principled person with a lot of integrity and an advocate for children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 638712
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Describe this for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's my father's family, that's my father [Chester Ford] with the bald head that's my [paternal] grandmother [Lula Cook Ford] kneeling in front of him.  And I don't know the identify, unidentified man on the right.  But, that's my aunt and, and my two aunts, Annabelle [Annabelle Ford (ph.)] and Ernestine [Ernestine Ford].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Paul Vallas and myself at my birthday party, fifty-fifth birthday party.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I have to get this other camera.  Let's see okay, ready.  Go ahead?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's my retirement party, as you can see that Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], Gery Chico, myself, Senate President Emil Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.] and [HistoryMaker] Bobby Rush.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay ready.
Speaker 2: Eightieth birthday party.
Speaker 1: My first years of teaching, my class.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year was that again?
Speaker 1: That was '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: From the Urban League [National Urban League].
Speaker 1: This is, there I am right there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, your second class ever?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Nineteen sixty-six [1966], '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And you're seated?
Speaker 1: I'm right here.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Standing, okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: This is Michael Dyke [ph.], who's over the, he's a philanthropist in the City of Chicago [Illinois] he gave some awards to my children, there I am and there he is.
Speaker 1: When President Clinton [HistoryMaker President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] visited the school.
Speaker 2: Read to my preschoolers.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, once again who is she?
Speaker 2: Brenda Edgar, Governor Edgar's [Jim Edgar] wife.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yourself and do you know the third person?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's Clinton Bristow [Clinton Bristow, Jr.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Clinton Bristow was the president of the school board [Chicago Board of Education] at the time, the Chicago Public Schools.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, I need.
Speaker 2: I mean young lady.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, so you're going too fast for me.
Speaker 2: Oh I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's my mother [Nola Jenkins Ford], when she was younger.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know if that was an occasion?
Speaker 2: No. I don't.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's me and some of my student around me at a camp, we're at camp.  It's real hot (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, I'm sorry once again.  You beat me to--.  Okay, tell us about that?
Speaker 2: That's a note I got, I received a personal note, I received from Barack Obama.  I had, I just had a fundraiser for him, at, at my, at my school, I mean not at when he was running for [U.S.] Congress.
Speaker 1: That's when I, there I am, they worked with my school.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Would you mind pointing yourself out again?
Speaker 1: Right here.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, thank you.  All right.
Speaker 1: This was probably in 1948 or '49 [1949].  And that's, there I am.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, who, who else is there?
Speaker 1: That's my cousin, George [ph.], my Uncle Robert [Robert Jenkins].  My cousin, Little Anne [ph.], my Aunt Naomi [ph.], and my Uncle Horace [ph.].  And there I am, look at those feet (laughter)?
Speaker 2: That was my fifty-fifth birthday, that's my cousin, Urs [ph.], that's my mother, that's my daughter [Charisse Ford], that's me, that's my sister and that's my cousin, Bessie [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold one second.
Speaker 2: Oh I know I wanted to get (unclear), okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead and tell us about this one?
Speaker 2: Okay, this is Joe Moore and Joyce Bristow, myself and Congressman Waters [HistoryMaker Maxine Waters].  Dr. Niva Lubin [Niva Lubin-Johnson], and her mother Peggy Lubin.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: Final exit from the Chicago Public Schools, that's my brother, Tyrone [Tyrone Ford (ph.)], he works in the Chicago Public Schools, my daughter again, myself my mother, my sister, my cousin, Nola [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is Stedman Graham and I, we wrote a proposal called Athletes Against Drugs, that's what he still does.  And that was at my principalship, during my principalship at Beethoven School [Ludwig Van Beethoven Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
