Story_ID: 33021
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, and I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Alfred Kendell Flowers.  A-L-F-R-E-D, K-E-N-D-E-L-L, F-L-O-W-E-R-S, Senior.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is 29, December, 1947; Kinston, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  K-I-N-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: All right.  And sir, what is your position and occupation?
Speaker 2: My position right now is a retired Major General of the United States Air Force.  I retired in 1, January of 2012, and my occupation, upon retirement, was the Director of Air Force Budget, was the job.  The title of that position was the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Budget.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 28th of June, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at 1440 New York Avenue in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 33022
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we get into depth, we ask five lightweight questions as sort of a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.  The first one is:  Sir, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I do have a favorite food, chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall is my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I love Chateau Milan in north of Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "It's all about attitude."
Story_ID: 33023
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right now.  I'm going to ask about your family history.  And I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but I'll ask about them separately so we can get the--keep the stories from getting mixed up, and then we'll put them together.  So, first of all, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Annie Morrow Roberts Miller.  Roberts, maiden name; and the married name is Miller.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: A-N-N-I-E, M-O-R-R-O-W, Miller, M-I-L-L-E-R; and maiden, Roberts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right now.  What do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 1: I can trace my mother's side of the family back a good ways, back to her grandparents is as far back as I can go.  But my mother's side of family, her mother, my grandmother, was Lucy Rhodes Roberts; and my grandfather was Shade Lane Roberts.  My mother's father hails from a little, small town in North Carolina, little country town called, Maysville, M-A-Y-S-V-I-L-L-E, North Carolina.  And that's about 15 miles east of where I grew up, between Kinston and Trenton, North Carolina.  But, my grandfather, they were all farmers, and his mother, her parents were slaves.  They'd come from Maysville, North Carolina; and my grandfather, my mother's father, was a sharecropper.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you say your grandmother's parents were slaves?
Speaker 1: My--
Speaker 2: I mean, that your--
Speaker 1: My great-grandmother's--
Speaker 2: Great-grandmother, okay.
Speaker 1: --parents were slaves.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But that's all I know.  I can't go any further back than that.  And my mother's mother, which was my grandmother, Lucy Roberts; Lucy and Shade are the grandparents that raised me.  And I'll talk a lot about them a little later when we get to the grandparents.  But Lucy Roberts was--her family was Rhodes.  And her--my great-grandfather on my mother's side was John Wesley Rhodes; and my great-grandmother on my mother's side was Isabella, I-S-A-B-E-L-L-A, Rhodes.  And their parents were also slaves, my great-grandmother and great-grandfather's parents.  But I can't--that's all I know about them as far as going back.
Story_ID: 33024
Speaker 1: I'm sorry--I didn't--neglected to ask you your mother's [Annie Morrow Roberts Miller] birth date.
Speaker 2: My mother's birth date is 19, November--no.  21 November, 1929.
Speaker 1: Okay.  1929.  Do you know your grandmother's [Lucy Rhodes Roberts] birth date?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My grandmother was (pause), and the birth year.
Speaker 1: Well, the year is fine.
Speaker 2: 1902.
Speaker 1: Okay.  1902.  Okay.  So it would be her--her grandmother, Lucy--
Speaker 2: My mother's grandmother.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was born in slavery.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That makes sense.  Okay.  All right.  Are there any stories about those people who were born in slavery about emancipation or--
Speaker 2: No, I don't--all I know is they were born in slavery.  I don't know when they, you were, were emancipated, and who they were sold to, and after they were emancipated what happened.  I can't take it back that far.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm always amazed that we don't--those stories are not passed down.
Speaker 2: They're not, yeah.
Speaker 1: Because that seems like it would be such a big event.
Speaker 2: It does.  It does.  Certainly does.  But, and you would think that that's something that they would want to pass on.  But, believe it or not, what I found from my grandparents [Shade Lane Roberts and Lucy Rhodes Roberts] and my great-grandparents is that's something that they talked about very rarely.  They didn't want to share because it wasn't something that they wanted us to, apparently, know much about because I don't know if they were embarrassed about it or if they wanted a better life for us, and hiding that experience, keeping it from us, was a way that, I think, they thought they were doing good in helping us look to the future for a better life, as opposed to sharing the memories of that previous life of slavery which, when you look back on it now at this point in my life, I wish I knew more about it, because it's a part of my history that I'm not ashamed of.  It's a part of my history that I ought to be better aware of and know more about and I don't.
Story_ID: 33025
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your mother [Annie Morrow Roberts Miller], now she was born in--was she born in Maysville [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: No.  My mother was born in 1929, when she was born, midwife--midwifery, she was born at home in Jones County [North Carolina].  And I don't know exactly the address that my grandparents [Shade Lane Roberts and Lucy Rhodes Roberts] were living at when she was born.  But it was in Jones County out near Phillips Crossroad.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now your grandparents and the people on your mother's side, as far as you could tell, were they involved in agricultural stuff?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  That was it, all agriculture.  My grandfather and grandmother were sharecroppers.  What I remember is they were sharecroppers for the Phillips family in the--two brothers, Simon and Steve Phillips owned the property.  And my grandparents, they tended the land for housing.  They farmed their own shares.  I don't know exactly what the shares were, but they didn't get very much.  And they raised corn, raised tobacco, we raised hogs, chickens, and we kind of lived off the land.  And my grandfather would, he would borrow money during the year to buy food.  As a matter of fact, Simon and Steve Phillips, the folks that owned the land that we lived on, and the house that we lived in had a little country store right next to their house.  So it was, it was a hookup.  So the folks, the sharecroppers that worked for them and lived there on their plantation, is what it really was--you would go to them and get the food on credit, and as the harvest would come in during the year, you know, the corn, tobacco, whatever we'd sell, then you would pay them back what you owed them, and then you, if there was anything left, you would get half of it, as I remember.  I recall years we would work all year, and my grandfather would sell the tobacco, all the tobacco, all the corn.  And he'd come home and he'd say to my grandmother, "Well, I still owe Simon $300," all year.  And as I think about that now (pause), it still troubles me a lot as you can tell. But, that's the way it was.
Speaker 1: Now, did--was your grandfather good with figures?
Speaker 2: Not very good.  You know, I don't know what grade he completed, but he was not educated.  He did some schooling, grade school.  But he was not very well educated.  But, you know, he could--he could add and subtract.  He knew when he was being done right and when he was being done wrong.
Speaker 1: He--from what you say, he probably knew this was sort of a setup where--
Speaker 2: I think so, but, it was--there was no other choice.  The other choice was to have a family of homeless looking for someplace to stay.  And, when I was born they took me, brought me home from the hospital to raise because my mother and father were children themselves.  I think one was sixteen and one was seventeen.  And there they were with me.  So my grandparents brought me home.  My grandmother, I remember her telling me stories about bringing me home in a shoebox because I was premature.  And in 1947 in the country, they didn't have incubators.  They didn't have bassinets, so she made a bassinet out of a shoebox, and that's what she brought me home in.  And I also remember her, you know, we didn't have central heat and air.  What we had was an old metal heater, a stove that sat in the middle of the floor, and the house was four rooms, and it was fed with wood.  And I remember her telling me about sitting by the old tin heater all night long, from December 'til April, to keep me warm, to keep me from dying.  That was the incubator.  So, you know, the beginnings, I have a lot to be thankful for, and a lot to share with those that are more fortunate today who don't understand what it means to rise above your situation, come from nothing, and make something out of yourself.
Story_ID: 33026
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, that's--so once again, a Phillips owned the land.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Owned the store.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They loaned them money for you to purchase items at the store.
Speaker 2: At the store.
Speaker 1: And you are--
Speaker 2: And then as the crop was harvested and sold, then you pay them back what you owed them, plus they get half of any profits above that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the hope of the sharecropper is that he was going to produce so much that he would have something left for himself.
Speaker 2: To have something that you could pay your bills and have--and then give them half of the profit and then half something left.
Speaker 1: But usually there was nothing.
Speaker 2: Usually there was very little, nothing to very little.  As a matter of fact, it wasn't just the food that they provided for you that you had to pay back.  All of the fertilizer, the seeds, and the things that you used to grow the crop, you had to pay back the cost of that.  And, you know, they told my grandfather [Shade Lane Roberts] what the cost was.  I don't know if that was correct or not, but it was correct to him, because that's what it was.  So you pay that back also.  So if you had a bad year with the crops, flood or, you know, drought, and you didn't have much harvest, it just carried over until the next year.  You pay back as much as you could, you earned nothing; and what you still owed carried over into the next year, and you were still borrowing for food, still borrowing for seeds, still borrowing for fertilizer, to try to produce crop that following year.  And, hopefully, some year you would get out of debt and make a few dollars.
Speaker 1: Now, would you--would a sharecropper be considered a criminal, even liable, if he left without paying what he owed?
Speaker 2: I don't know, and I don't know of any that left, because, you know, the economic deprivation was so bad that where would you go?  You know, you were there, and at least you had a roof over your family's head and means of getting food, albeit, it was on credit at some rate, a free payment, and we didn't--I didn't know what that was, and I'm not really sure that my grandparents [Shade Lane Roberts and Lucy Rhodes Roberts]knew what it was.  It was just they determined what it cost and that's what you repaid or at some point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let me go to this.  I always ask this:  Did your mother [Annie Morrow Roberts Miller] have any stories of growing up, about how she grew up and what events took place when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My mother grew in a very similar environment.  You know, her parents, who were my grandparents that raised me, they were sharecroppers during her growing up also, as well as my father.  My grandparents, my father's parents, they were sharecroppers also, and they all lived in this same little community, Phillips Crossroad, in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: I just wondered if she had any stories about things that she saw and did that, you know, or her goals and aspirations in those days, that she wanted to do something.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My mother was, she wanted to, obviously, get off the farm.  And the life of a sharecropper's daughter was not something that she looked forward to as a way ahead for her as an adult.  But one of the things that my mother learned and my grandmother taught her, was how to cook.  And, you know, my mother was, I think she was educated through the ninth grade.  But, obviously, at 16, 17 years old when she became pregnant, and my father, and they got married.  My mother was always a good cook.  So, she started cooking, and she continued to cook all of her life until she got where she couldn't cook and then became ill before she passed.  But that was kind of her way off the farm, was to cook for a living.  And she did it, did it very well, did it--was a chef.  In those days, they wasn't called a chef; she was called a cook.  But she cooked for places like Holiday Inn and other restaurants there in Kinston [North Carolina] once she left the farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, did your mother have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: She did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  Did not.
Speaker 1: So did she go to grade school?
Speaker 2: She went to grade school.  I think she got through the--I believe she got through the ninth grade.
Story_ID: 33027
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, let me go, I'm going to go to your father's side of the family.  Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name, and I don't know if my father had a middle name.  All I knew is Monroe, M-O-N-R-O-E, Flowers, Sr.  I never heard of a middle name.  Now, let me tell you a little bit about my father, and that should kind of put things in context as you--
Speaker 1: Well, what's date of birth, first of all?
Speaker 2: (Pause)
Speaker 1: If you can't remember the year (unclear).
Speaker 2: I don't remember the year.  It's October--I think my dad was a year younger than my mother.  I know he was a year younger, I believe, and I'll have to verify this with some of my half-sisters.  I believe it's October of 1930, either '30 [1930] or '31 [1931].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a little younger than my mom.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Now, and he was born around the same area, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Same area in Jones County.  And his parents were Erma, E-R-M-A, and Columbus, C-O-L-U-M-B-U-S, Flowers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were sharecroppers also.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: I don't know of any on that side, because I have a lot less information on my father's side than I have on my mother's side.
Story_ID: 33028
Speaker 1: My father, obviously, was my father [Monroe Flowers, Sr.] But as far as support, I received nothing from my father.  All during my formative years through high school, 'til I came into the military at 17 years old, I received--I don't recall.  The only thing that I recall receiving from my father was a graduation present when I finished high school, and I believe it was 10 pairs of sox.  Don't quote me on that, but I think that's what it was.  And, you know, sometimes I would see my father, he would come around very sporadically and he'd give me five dollars here, a couple of dollars there; but the times that that occurred were few and far between.  After I was born and my grandparents brought me back to the country in Jones County [North Carolina] to raise and live with them all of my life, until I left home, my mother [Annie Morrow Roberts Miller] and father got divorced shortly after I was married--I mean after I was born.  And I don't remember what year or what month they were divorced.  But they both remarried, and my mother remarried, had one son; my father remarried and had, I believe, it was eight girls and two boys; ten children total by his second wife.  I have no whole brothers and sisters both by the same parents.  I have half brothers and sisters.  In my early years, I did not have much contact with my half brothers and sisters on my father's side, because they lived, you know, in Lenoir County, you know, away from Jones.  And, you know, in those days, we were, how the older folks, their state of mind was, "Well, you know, your father left you and married another woman and he got more children, and he's not doing anything for you, not taking care of you."  So, you're taught that, "Yeah, that's your dad, but that's another man that you don't need to be too aware of, too concerned about or know much about."  So I didn't learn much about my dad growing up until later in life when his mother, who my grandmother Erma [Flowers], who lived in the country not far from where I was growing up with my mother's parents, told me a little bit about my father and my half brothers and sisters, and introduced me to my oldest half-sister whose name was Kathy Flowers.  And as a young teenager, you know, around 10, 12 years old, I used to go visit my mother and stepfather and she would come, they would bring here there to visit with me.  And I learned a little bit about her, but not very much.  And the other half brothers and sisters, I know the names.  As I graduated and came into the military, I do visit with some of them now, but there hasn't been much contact ever with my other half sisters and brothers on my father's side.  My half-brother on my mother's side, I spent more time with.  We never lived together as a family, but I did see him more frequently and had a relationship with him growing up, and that continues today.  But, my childhood was very, I would say it was different.  But it was different in a way that's different from the way broken homes or many are raised today and came up, because at least I had two grandparents that were mom and dad as far as I was concerned.  And they had one son who lived with them.  His name was Walter Roberts.
Speaker 2: So this would be your uncle?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Uncle, all right.
Speaker 1: And to me, he's more of a brother than any of my half brothers or sisters that my mother or father had, because that's kind of who I grew up with, and that's who I was with most of my formative years and early teenage years.
Story_ID: 33029
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you think about--now, we have to think about this in a different way, because I always ask the people what they think about their parents' abilities, and dispositions, and mentalities and, you know, appearance, and habits; you know, who they think they take after the most. But in your case, you might take more after your grandparents [Shade Lane Roberts and Lucy Rhodes Roberts] than either one.
Speaker 2: I do.  Absolutely.  Unequivocally.  I take more after my grandparents.  And my mother [Annie Morrow Roberts Miller] was a loving person, but because she was--had a child very young and was divorced very young, remarried very young, and remarried into a family that was more affluent than her parents, there was some--I wouldn't say "envy."  It wasn't mistreatment, but it was kind of shunning, if you will, on the family that she married into.  They owned property, they had resources, they were educated.  And what I felt and the treatment that I recall receiving was: I was kind of the child that she had before she married into a family that was better off.  And I can recall stories and times of going to visit my mother and my stepfather.  And my brother, half-brother who lived with them, I'd go visit, he'd have full run of the house, and I would kind of be confined to one room and the kitchen.  And, you know, her sister-in-law and brother-in-law, they had separate homes on the same area, same grounds there.  And my brother would run between the houses, and, you know, everything was great.  I would sit in a room and I could go on the porch or go out in the yard and play with him, but I didn't have the same freedom.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's a different--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Big difference here.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, now--so you grew up out on the farm with your grandparents.
Speaker 2: Grandparents.
Story_ID: 33030
Speaker 1: And we always ask this question.  Oh, I should ask this first.  Do you have an earliest childhood memory?  First memory.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My first memory, and I don't know why I remember this so vividly, but I remember there were some folks that--some Lowreys, L-O-W-R-E-Y-S; and it was a Caucasian family that lived in the same community; the Lowreys and the Phillips were the ones that owned most of the property, most of the land and the homes in the area where I was raised.  And the Lowerys, you know, they had sharecroppers that worked for them, but they were very good to us.  And I remember sitting on the lawn at the Lowreys's house.  You know, they had a big, nice house, and we kind of lived on the corner across the road from them, where the sharecroppers were on one side, and the folks that owned the property lived on the other side of the road.  But I remember them having me sitting on the lawn to take a picture, and I must have been, I don't know, two years old or maybe--as a matter of fact, I've got that picture and I'll provide it to you.  I don't know why I recall that.  But it has always stuck in my mind why I was sitting on that lawn out there to take a picture of the folks that my grandparents were working for and working very hard for little or nothing.  But the Lowreys would give us things, give my parents things, you know.  And maybe that's why I remember it because they were good to us.  And anybody that gave you something during those days when you're economically and environmentally and socially deprived, you remember it.
Story_ID: 33031
Speaker 1: I had a question.  Did you ever see the photo that they shot?
Speaker 2: I do.  I did see the photo and, as a matter of fact, I have a copy of that photo, and I'd like to make it available to you.  I don't have it with me today but I'll certainly get it to you.  I don't know--my mother [Annie Morrow Roberts Miller].  Roberts had that photo or my grandmother [Lucy Rhodes Roberts] and, somehow, my wife got a copy of it, and they used that during the photographic biographical video of my life at my retirement last November.  And I still don't know how it was acquired, but we have that photo, and I will certainly make it available to you.
Speaker 1: Was your assessment that the Lowreys treated the people that worked for them a little bit better than the Phillips?
Speaker 2: That's the way I understood it and assessed.  And I think part of that is because we were not sharecroppers for the Lowreys, so I don't know if the sharecroppers for the Lowreys were treated better or if that was just my perception, because I didn't know any better.  But I had my grandmother's [Lucy Rhodes Roberts] sister and her husband, McBydom (ph. splg.); Ethel and William McBydom were sharecroppers for the Lowreys.  And I have some cousins who were part of that experience, and they tell stories about their perception of not being treated so well too, but I don't know the specifics of it.  But that sharecropping life there in the early fifties, late fifties, it was--.  As I think about it today and look back over that experience, it was a way of survival, but it certainly--there were some things that went on out there that were not on the up-and-up I believe.
Story_ID: 33032
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, here's another question we always ask:  Now, what were some--can you describe where you grew up visually to us, and what were some of the sights--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and sounds--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: I can.  The vivid--the description of where I grew up.  Picture a country road, two-lane highway with houses on the right, houses on the left.  But we lived on the corner of a little dirt road that later was--put gravel and asphalt, and now it's paved--called Pine Street and Trenton Highway, Highway 58, but at Phillips Crossroad.  And it was called Phillips Crossroad because about a tenth of a mile from where we lived is where the Phillips, the owners of the Phillips's property lived, and where the little store was where we got what we didn't grow ourselves, it's where we bought groceries.  But a little wooden house, four rooms as I recall; a living room, a bedroom, a second bedroom, and a kitchen.  It was kind of--it was almost square, and the house was divided in--almost in four quadrants of the square.  And in the living room, we had an old black and white television, a heater, a tin heater, and a couple of chairs.  And that heater, no air-conditioning, no bathroom; and it had a tin roof, the house did.  And in one room, one bedroom, was my uncle and myself, is where we slept.  And I recall lying in bed, being able to look through the roof, because it had holes in it, and look at the stars.  In the second bedroom, my grandmother and grandfather [Shade Lane Roberts and Lucy Rhodes Roberts] and my grandfather's mother, which was my great-grandmother, slept in that bedroom.  That was then, quite different from today.  No place would we--a man have his mother sleeping in the room with he and his wife today.  But that's the way it was then, my grandfather's mother slept in the same room.  And then the other fourth was the kitchen, and the kitchen I recall it had an iron stove that was fueled with wood, also.  And it had a reservoir.  The old stove had a reservoir on the side that we filled with water, and that's how we heated the water for taking baths and whatever else.  We didn't have a bathroom indoor, didn't have an indoor toilet, didn't have indoor running water.  So our version of a bath back then was a number ten foot--washtub.  We would heat water in that old stove, dip it up, put it in the tub, and put some cold water with it to get the temperature right, and that's how you would--that's how you would cleanse yourself.  And that old stove is what my grandmother cooked on.  So we cooked with wood, we heated water with wood.
Story_ID: 33033
Speaker 1: And then we had, you know, a dinette set in the kitchen.  You know, we called them dinette sets then.  It was metal, I guess aluminum metal table with six chairs, I believe, that kind of sit in the middle of--it wasn't much room, so you could barely get around the table and the stove.  And we had a refrigerator.  Back then they had old freezers, and that took up part of the kitchen.  The table took up part of it, the stove took up the rest, and you could barely pull out a chair to sit it was so small.  I don't what the square footage of the house was if I had to estimate today from what I recall.  It was probably six or 700 hundred square feet, maybe 800 square feet, the total, not very large because--
Speaker 2: Would it bigger than the room we're in right now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It was about, I would say about twice the size of this room, and then you would divide it into four quadrants and you would have the whole house.  The bathroom was a wooden outhouse that was out in the stable.  We had two old gray mules that the Phillips owned that we worked, my grandfather [Shade Lane Roberts] and my uncle [Walter Roberts], and my grandmother [Lucy Rhodes Roberts] and I.  But about, I would say, maybe a hundred yards from the house, was a stable.  That's where the two old mules lived out there in the stable, and I recall them--named Mabel and Macy.  Two old gray mules.  And in the stable out there in the yard where the mules lived, there was a house that--where we, they called it a pack house back there in those days.  When you harvest tobacco and corn, that's where you stored the corn; and then the tobacco, that's where you prepared it to take to Kinston and sell it to the warehouse for sale.  But in the far left corner, looking from the house at the packing house and the stable where the mules lived, was an outhouse.  And that was the bathroom. So, be it night or day, hot or cold, when you had to go use the bathroom, that's where you went, out to the stable to the old outhouse.  And you know what those things are.  It's nothing more than a little wooden shed with a hole dug in the ground.  And I recall years where we couldn't afford to buy toilet tissue, didn't have toilet tissue, and we would take newspaper or a magazine, books or whatever, and that's what you would use to cleanse yourself.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember from my family, they would crumble it up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, crumble it up to try to soften it a little bit, and--yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 33034
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--so, you never got a bathroom when you living there?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  No, no.  Never got a bathroom.  Gosh (pause).  The first bathroom was when I came into the military, because we lived--well, wait a minute.  We moved from the country.  My grandmother [Lucy Rhodes Roberts] moved from the country when I was about--about to graduate at seventeen, because I remember we still lived in the country, and I started school bus at sixteen years old to try to earn money to help myself.  They paid us $30 a month.  It's equated to a dollar and a half a day.  And I'll talk some more about that later, but my grandfather [Shade Lane Roberts] passed in 1963.  I was just turning--had just turned sixteen.  We were off-loading corn at the pack house, and I remember we were on the wagon and he was off-loading corn and I was helping.  At that time I was--just turned sixteen years old.  And he thought he had--he complained about having chest pains and indigestion.  And he kept working, kept working, and we got it off-loaded and he went inside, and he got worse.  And finally, my grandmother and my uncle [Walter Roberts] got him to Trenton [North Carolina] to a little old country doctor who gave him something for indigestion and sent him back home.  And then he kept getting worse, and they finally took him to Kinston to a doctor and they hospitalized him in [Parable?] Memorial Hospital [Location?], and he passed a few days later at fifty-five years old.   So, at that point, you know, my grandmother said, "Well, you know, you're going to finish high school.  You have to finish high school, and this is too hard for us to try to do this farming."  So we moved to Kinston [North Carolina] into an apartment with my uncle and his family.  And at seventeen years old, a year later or so, I finished high school and asked her if she would sign for me to come into the Air Force and she did.
Story_ID: 33035
Speaker 1: So out there on the farm, I suppose you had a lot of farm duties and stuff?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I started working at 10 years old like an adult, cropping tobacco; and we'd get the tobacco harvested, I was working with the men.  We called it cropping tobacco.  Today they call it picking tobacco.  Depends upon where you are what you call it.  But what it really meant is, you walk between the rows and you bend over and you crop that stuff, and I remember you put it under your arms, you carry it under your arm until you get an armful, and then the old mule would pull a wooden truck along, and then you would put the tobacco in the truck.  And when the thing got filled, this is all done with mules, you'd take it to a barn where you'd have folks that would put it on a stick.  They called that looping tobacco.  They would loop the tobacco, put it on a stick, and when we would hang it in barns.  And I remember at a very young age, these barns had--it was a barn probably not as long as this room, but probably eight feet or so shorter than this room, and about maybe half this size, again, in width; but it would have rafters that--poles that would run across, and you would hang these sticks on the poles.  And they would be three tiers high, about six feet apart.  And as a young kid, as soon as my legs got long enough to straddle those things, I started straddling those things, and they would stick it up to me and I'd hang it.  Then we'd go up one more and you hang it, you go up one more and you hang.  They call that hanging tobacco.  And once you get a barn full of that stuff, they had old oil burners, and you would light those burners and you'd cure that stuff.  You'd--over about, I don't know, a two- or three-week period.  You start it off, you light maybe six or seven of them until the green tobacco would start to turn yellow, and it was a drying process is what it was.  They call it curing.  And then for about the first week you'd light one or two more every day, and what you were doing was gradually increasing the heat to dry it out, but you didn't want to do it too hot right away, because it would ruin it.  So in about two weeks, you'd light them all, and then the tobacco that was green would cure.  It would be brown, yellow, whatever.  It cured at different colors based upon the quality of the leaves that were picked at the time.  When you first crop it and you're getting it off the ground, they call that sand lugs.  That's when you're getting the leaves off the ground, out of the dirt initially.  And then you, each week or so as they become riper, you pick more; over about six weeks, you get it all.  And that's how that farming tobacco went.  And then you would cure that stuff, you take it to the house, that pack house that I call it, out back; and then we would take it off the sticks and sort it out based on the grade of tobacco.  And then it would be taken to Kinston to a tobacco warehouse where auctioneers, they would come through and they would buy it based upon the quality of the tobacco.  And then they would take it off to various processing tobacco cigarette factories and stuff and turn it into snuff and cigarettes or whatever they were going to produce from it.
Story_ID: 33036
Speaker 1: Now, that's--at one time, that was the number industry in North Carolina, is tobacco.
Speaker 2: It still is, but I don't know if it's number one anymore.  I think cotton might have overtaken that now.  They're growing a lot of cotton there.  But I think it's between tobacco and cotton now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because the names of the towns remind people of tobacco products, in Durham, and Winston-Salem, all those.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  That's where the large processing plants were, in Richmond, Petersburg [North Carolina], a lot of tobacco was shipped up there to be processed; R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and several others.  Yeah, but that was the harvesting of tobacco.  And once you got the tobacco harvested, then the corn.  It would be time to harvest the corn.  Well, the corn, today, you know, they have mechanical pickers.  They have mechanical tobacco pickers also, so.  But in those days, nothing was mechanical.  It was all done manually.  The corn would dry out and be ready to pick in the early fall; late summer, early fall.  And we would go out and break that corn off the stalk with our hands.  You break it off with your hands, put it in a pile, and then you get enough of it broken, you come along with a truck pulled by a mule again; an old wooden truck pulled by mule, and you manually pick this corn up by hand, and you throw it up in the truck from the piles.  And you take that stuff and bring it to the pack house, and that's where you kept your corn.  And as we sold the corn, the same rules applied; you sell corn and the landlord gets 50-50, is the way it was.  But, the landlord takes his 50 off the top.  You pay all your bills out of your 50, and everything it cost to produce it.   So if the bills and the cost of--to produce the goods that were sold were greater than your 50 percent, then you still owed him.
Speaker 1: It seemed like a formula that always works in the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The formula always worked for us to produce the formula (laughs).  It didn't work for the sharecropper that was providing the labor.
Story_ID: 33037
Speaker 1: So, now, did you have--when you were a kid, did you have any carefree time to roam the woods or to do, you know--
Speaker 2: Not very much.  You know, I started working like an adult at 10 years old on the farm and going to school.  One of the things that my grandparents impressed upon me was that, "You were going to finish high school.  We couldn't afford to send you to college, but you were going to finish high school."  And I recall, you know, we, my grandparents, when they would get a few dollars, we--I told you, we raised chickens and hogs, and the hogs we used were primarily for the meat.  We would kill hogs every year usually in December or January when it got cold.  You kill the hogs, and then we had an old smokehouse and, you know, we fry out the fat and made our own grease.  It was called lard, and that's what we cooked with and, you know, that's why we all have hypertension.  We cook with the lard, and then we would take the meat, and my granddad will cut it up and hang it in the smokehouse, and they would smoke it.  So we'd make our own bacon, our own ham, our own sausage, everything.  Smoke that stuff, and that's what we would eat on during the year.  The chickens that we raised, they would lay eggs, the chickens would.  And my grandmother would sell the eggs for fish.  That old fish man would come buy twice a week, and she'd sell a dozen of eggs for a dollar and 25 cents, and buy five pounds of fish.  It was really bartering; it was trading one good for another.  And that's how we got the fish most of the time, except during the summer when my grandfather was selling corn, tobacco, and he'd have a few dollars.  Then sometimes he would stop by the fish market on the way back home after a sale and buy five pounds of fish for a dollar and a half or whatever the type of fish cost.  But most of the things that we ate we grew ourselves in the garden or our hogs or chickens.  Occasionally, we go hunting or somebody would kill rabbits or catch rabbits and we'd have rabbit.  You'd go fishing with a net called "shadding" during the spring, and we'd catch shad, and that would be a delicacy because shad, the eggs in the female shad were called roes.  They called them roses (sic).  Actually, it was caviar and we didn't know it (laughs).  So, we had caviar early in life and weren't smart enough to know that we were eating fish eggs.  I thought it was great.  But that was another means of survival with fish.  When we couldn't afford to buy it, we'd try to catch it.  But, it's--.
Story_ID: 33038
Speaker 1: Were there restrictions on the land in terms of--now, you're on the Phillips's land.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: But were you restricted in terms of where you could roam in terms of hunting and things like that on that land?
Speaker 2: On the land, no.  They pretty much let you hunt.  The Lowreys owned a lot of the woodland, and they were friends and you could hunt out there and they didn't care.  And so, we did a lot of hunting.  We also did a lot of chopping wood, cutting down trees to provide fire to cook with and to heat during the winter.  They'd let us go out there and cut trees.  Which, I remember going out with my grandfather, we would cut down trees, and cut them up, and split them, and haul them back, and during the spring and summer, in early fall when we had the time to prepare for cooking and heating in the winter.  So, you want to get that wood in the spring so it would dry and be ready for the winter for the heating and cooking.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So being a farmer you had to really regulate your--you knew at a certain time after you planted a crop, you had time to go cut trees?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Time to go do something else to crops--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and then time, you know--
Speaker 2: Late winter, early spring is when you would plant your tobacco seeds.  And when you plant those things in a bed, cover them with plastic until they start to germinate.  And once they start to germinate, you take the plastic off and put a cloth over them, a web, until they got large enough that you could open them up to the elements, because you still get a little freezing early late spring.  But after the frost and freezing period was over, you'd take the covers off and let the seeds grow.  Then about April, May timeframe, we would go out and we'd pull those plants that we planted in beds in the spring.  And then we would plant those plants, set them out just like you set out flowers today, in the fields.  And that would start the tobacco to growing.  And then later in the spring, you would plant the corn in seeds.  And once you planted all this stuff and set it out, then comes the cultivation period.  You know, as it grows, you'd go out and we'd weed it by hand with hoes.  And then we'd use the mules and the old plow to cultivate, and that's the way you tended to it after you planted it until it grew up to be ready for harvest.  And then you'd use the same old mules to pull the trucks that you collected the tobacco in, that you collected the corn in as you prepared it for market.  So I've spent a lot of time in my life walking behind two gray mules called Macy and Mabel.  And, I promised the good Lord and several other respectable people at seventeen years old that, when I left those mules, they would be gone when I came back.  And they were (laughs).
Story_ID: 33039
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, you start--where did you--what is the name of your school that you started in?
Speaker 2: Interesting.  The first school that I went to was a little old country school called Phillips Crossroad.  It was in an old house about a mile from where we lived on the farm out there.  And that old house, I recall it vividly, it had two rooms.  And that old house probably wasn't much larger than this room.  It had two rooms, and we had six grades in those two rooms, a little country school.  And I remember at five years old, my cousin that lived with us part time, also, was going to school there, and she used to allow me to go to school with her, and I was five years old.  And I'd go to school with her.  And they allowed me to start school just a little bit before I was six years old.  And I remember the first year the teacher, you know, it wasn't very structured--they'd give you books and it's kind of self-paced--and let you go as fast as you wanted to go or as slow as you wanted to go.  But I remember the teacher giving me the books, the first-grade books and I did okay with the first-grade books.  And they gave me the second-grade books, and I kind of did okay with them.  The next year, my grandmother, said, "Now, you're going to go with the rest of the students.  You're not going to do this.  Take the books and go (do your own stuff?).  So my first six years--first four years, was at that old, two-room house called Phillips Crossroad School [North Carolina].  I remember you were going to ask me what kind of experiences you had other than going to school there.  We've already set the scene for how poverty-stricken we were.  But I recall many days my experience with going to school was a molasses biscuit and a ham biscuit that my grandmother would make for me, and that would be my lunch.  And some days I'd have five cents and buy a cup of milk.  And at lunchtime, there was an old oak tree sitting in the front of that old house for Phillips Crossroad School.  I would sit under that tree and eat my molasses biscuit and my ham biscuit, and have a cup of milk.  That was lunch. And then after that, the fifth grade, I started--we went to Trenton, North Carolina--to Trenton Elementary School.  And that was--all these, you know, were segregated schools.  I had no experience with integrated schools in my elementary school and high school years.  All segregated.  Fifth grade, the Trenton Elementary School, and a different experience because it was an old wooden school that was organized, it was formal.  You know, it wasn't self-paced, and I don't have a whole lot of vivid recollections of anything out of the ordinary, except it was--(been?) just an elementary school that, you know, we attended, were bused there, and finished the fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth grades there, and then transitioned to Jones High School.
Story_ID: 33040
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this.  Were there any particular--did you gravitate towards any subject matter in particular or was there a teacher there that you really liked?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There were--a Ms. Franks was one of the teachers at Phillips Crossroad School that I really took a liking to, because she expressed a sincere interest in me as a student and as a person.  And, you know, in those days in those country schools, the village raised the children in the country.  And I would do something dastardly and get myself in trouble or do something that she didn't approve of, and knew that my grandparents [Lucy Rhodes Roberts and Shade Lane Roberts] didn't approve of.  And before I would get back home, my grandparents would already know about it.  They didn't have telephones.  I don't know how they got the word back, but they would know about it.  And I'd walk through the door and my grandmother would say, "Well, Ms. Franks said that you had a little problem today."  And she would tell me what I did or didn't do.  And she was very, very caring, and she wanted all of us children that grew up in that environment, out there in that country that were socially, economically, and environmentally deprived, to have a better life. And she took a sincere interest in all of us. And I have always loved arithmetic and numbers.  And I always have and continue to today. But I tended to do pretty well with arithmetic and mathematics.  And once I left Phillips Crossroad and went Trenton Elementary School, continued to love mathematics and arithmetic, and that kind of transcended into high school.  And I remember vividly once I got into the ninth grade, there was a teacher there named Mr. Mills.
Story_ID: 33041
Speaker 1: Tell us about high school now.
Speaker 2: High school--
Speaker 1: It's Jones High School?
Speaker 2: Jones High School in Trenton, T-R-E-N-T-O-N, North Carolina, which is not far from Phillips Crossroad Elementary School, where I went to Trenton Elementary School from there.  But Jones High School, ninth grade, the teachers that I remember most, there was a Mr. Mills, Clement Mills there, who was my ninth grade science teacher.  And I remember Mr. Mills taking an interest in me in the ninth grade.  I loved science, and I tended to do very well in science and really liked being in Mr. Mills's class.  And then, because of my background and living on a farm and growing up on a farm, I thought that agriculture was the way that I--you know, I was gravitated more to agriculture, industrial arts, shop, along with science and business math; were kind of my favorite subjects.  And the agricultural teacher there was Mr. Jordan, Cornelius A. Jordan.  And I remember Mr. Jordan allowing me to be part of a judging team, a livestock judging team in 4-H.  And we would go out to various fairs and livestock shows, and we did--we'd have judging contests.  And we'd go out and judge the cattle and the hogs, and assign grades, and give a red ribbon, the yellow ribbons, blue ribbons; first, second, through fourth place, and judge--we'd go to various judging contests.  And I became very good at judging livestock.  And I loved agriculture. Along with those--along those same lines, I thought that I wanted to learn industrial arts as well.  So I enrolled in industrial arts as one of my--because, you know, I was more of an agriculture, industrial arts, farming-kind of mindset, if you will, from my experiences.  So I got in industrial arts, which is another one of my classes.  We learned how to lay brick, we learned how to lay stone, brick masonry, was one of the things that I learned; and then shop; various woodworking in shop, kind of things that we learned also.  But at the same time, I still had this love and this interest in mathematics and business math.  And there was a teacher there named Ms. Nixon.  I forget her first name, but she taught business math.  And I loved business math, did very well in business math.  And then I thought that, "Man, this is the way I want to go."  Along with agriculture, industrial arts, business math, that curriculum, I also took a lot of the hard math and sciences as well.  Chemistry, biology, geometry, physics, and the sciences and English; I took all that stuff.  But that was something that I thought I had to do.  But what I really loved was the business math and the arts.
Story_ID: 33042
Speaker 1: Now, did--so, you had to travel by bus to school.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Did you have--I know that you had a lot of duties at home, but did you play sports or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I played a little bit of basketball, intramural, but I was never very good at it in high school.  I loved the game and I played a lot of basketball in the front yard and backyard at home.  But at school, I didn't have the time to learn the sport and to be competitive and play at the high school level.  But what I did do as an additional responsibility associated with school, when I turned sixteen years old I got my driver's license.  And then I got my bus license.  So at sixteen years old I started transporting other students to school every day.  And I remember I drove a bus, number 41, and it was a 42-passenger bus.  And every morning I would leave home in time, depending on your route, to pick up all the students on my route, deliver them to school in time for school, park my bus, go to class myself, spend all day in class.  And then in the afternoon, I reversed the same thing I did in the morning.  I delivered those forty-two students back to their homes, brought the bus back to my home, and then I would then go work in the fields or in the pack house or whatever year--whatever we were doing during the year as it related to farming.
Speaker 1: Now, whose vehicle did you practice on to get your license?
Speaker 2: My grandfather [Shade Lane Roberts] had an old car and I practiced on that car.  And just before he passed, they bought--he bought a 1958 Ford Fairlane 500.  And after he passed, that was kind of my car.  And that's what I drove until I came into the military.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, he bought this 1958 Ford--
Speaker 2: 1958 Ford Fairlane.  I think this was in 1963, I believe, the summer that he passed is when he bought that car.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is 1963.
Speaker 2: Three, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you had like one more year of high school?
Speaker 2: I had one more of--well, I graduated in '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: '65 [1965].  So two more--
Speaker 2: Two more years.
Speaker 1: And you were saying earlier you all had to move into town.
Speaker 2: We moved after he passed.  But I remember we--before we moved to Kinston [North Carolina], we moved in the country from the farm into another house in the country, because I really didn't leave Jones County [North Carolina] until--my grandmother [Lucy Rhodes Roberts] didn't leave until after I entered the military.  I--when I entered the military, I recall it vividly, we were still living in the country, but not on the farm as working as sharecroppers.  We were just living in another old house in the country that folks were letting us live in.
Story_ID: 33043
Speaker 1: So in terms of high school graduation, did you--about how many people graduated with your graduation class from high school?
Speaker 2: I think my class, and I don't remember exactly, but it must have been, maybe, 80 or 90.  It was less than a hundred folks in my graduating class.  Not a very big--a little country school, not a very big class.  But--
Speaker 1: Now, you didn't have--you were saying you didn't-- you knew you didn't have enough money to go to college, but did anyone advise you about United Negro College Fund or anything like that?
Speaker 2: One of--the guidance counselor mentioned to me that they thought that they could get me a $300 scholarship in agriculture.  And I knew that a $300 scholarship in agriculture with no other resources wouldn't do much for me.  So I had a cousin, two cousins; one that had graduated and enlisted in the Air Force, and I had another cousin that had graduated and enlisted in the Army.  And I used to see both of them come back home after they went into the respective services, and they would have money, and had cars, and nice clothes; and I said, "Man, there must be something about that military stuff that's pretty good.  These guys seem to be doing very well."  So that's kind of what interested me in the military, having grown up like I'd grown up.  And I didn't do--we didn't talk any about the social welfare, and clothing, and how it's provided for me, what they were able to provide for me as I went to school, but I'd like to share a couple of things with you.  It was poverty.  I remember during the school year before school started, my grandparents [Shade Lane Roberts and Lucy Rhodes Roberts] would, usually they go take me shopping to buy school clothes.  And school clothes would consist of two or three pairs of blue jeans, and two or three shirts, and a pair of brogan shoes.  And that's what I wore all year to school.  Now, I was, you know, the typical kid.  I liked to shoot marbles and play kids' games.  And we get into the school year two or three months, and the knees of those blue jeans would start to get a little, a little gray.  They would not be blue any longer.  And we get about halfway through the school year and holes would start to show.  And my grandmother's solution to that was, you remember the iron-on blue jean patches?  She would get those iron-on blue jean patches, and she'd iron them on the knees; and I would go shoot marbles, get them dirty, and wash them, and she'd put them back on.  And those old brogan shoes, when it got to wintertime and you've been wearing those things to school and it's been raining and cold, the toes of them would start to turn up and they get hard.  I remember my grandfather would take some motor oil and put on those things and sit them by that old wooden heater at night so they'd soften up, then you put them back on and wear them to school.  So I used to tell the stories about it, and this was a little bit of exaggeration but not a whole lot; that when I entered the military, I got my first three pairs of shoes and suit.  But I'd had some suits before, but it was one suit and a couple pair of jeans and one pair of shoes.
Story_ID: 33044
Speaker 1: Now, I forgot to ask you this:  Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was church.  My grandfather [Shade Lane Roberts] was a deacon and my grandmother [Lucy Rhodes Roberts] was a mother in the church.  And my weekends consisted of, you would go to Sunday school on Sunday morning, you'd go to church at 11:00 o'clock, they would break for lunch, and you go back at 3:00 o'clock or at 6:00 o'clock.  So, the weekends were about church.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: It was Haughton Chapel.  H-A-U-G-H-T-O-N.  Haughton Chapel Free Will Baptist Church [Trenton, North Carolina].   And I joined church there at a very young age.  I don't know.  I must have been 10 or so.  And I grew up in the church.  I was a junior deacon, myself, and singing in the junior choir while I was there.  But church has always been a major part of my life growing up and continues to be as an adult.
Speaker 1: Haughton Chapel Free Will Baptist Church.
Speaker 2: Church.
Speaker 1: Now, was that in Trenton?
Speaker 2: Trenton, T-R-E-N-T-O-N.  Trenton, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who was your pastor?
Speaker 2: I remember the pastor that I recall most was Rev. Bryant, C.L. Bryant.  And I remember Rev. Bryant passed in church.  That's what I remember vividly one Sunday at church.  But there were several pastors after that that I don't recall.  Rev. Harris was one of them, and there's been many after that.  I don't recall all the names.
Speaker 1: Now, what is a "Free Will Baptist"?
Speaker 2: (Laughs).  I don't know the difference between a free will, a Southern, and any other kind of Baptist.  A Baptist is a Baptist in my mind (that serves us?).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I thought I'd ask.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).  It's called Free Will Baptist.  I don't know what.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33045
Speaker 1: So, when you graduated from high school, was there any kind of distinction that you achieved or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No. No.  I was just an average student.
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering if you were a part of any clubs or anything where you displayed like leadership abilities or--?
Speaker 2: Just in the 4H Agriculture Club, I was a leader in there.  I believe I was the treasurer or secretary of that club.  But that's the only thing.  You know, let me just talk about this about a little bit.  You didn't ask, but I'm going to provide it anyway.  Having been as impoverished as we were, and growing up the way we grew up, a lot of my friends in school came from families that some of them owned their own property, many of them had a little more.  So they associated with me, but I was kind of the poor, poverty-stricken kid that was not going to make it; whose mother and father had given me to grandparents to raise and, you know, "Yeah, he's out here, but all you're ever going to be is on this farm or in the country," and you know, "You'll live and your teeth will fall out," and, you know, "You'll be on welfare," and "Yeah, you're a good guy but, you know, you're not smart enough, you're not bright enough, you come from a background that doesn't lend itself to you being a success."  And that was kind of communicated to me in actions more than words.  And one of the things that I remember telling my grandmother [Lucy Rhodes Roberts], we were sitting on the back porch peeling some peaches one day, and I told her that I wanted to save the core of those peaches, because I was going to plant them and grow peaches and sell them and buy me a house someday (pause) (silently crying).  I never earned the money from the peaches (laughs), but we did manage to buy a house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  How old were you when you made that promise?
Speaker 2: Must have been 10 or 12.
Story_ID: 33046
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so the military seemed like a good option when you were--
Speaker 2: It was the only way out for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you knew about the Vietnam War and all that going on.  You all had a T.V. you said, right, a little T.V.?
Speaker 2: I did.  I did.  I knew about the Vietnam War, but I've always had a mind of service, and I shared with you that, you know, the story, driving a school bus at 16 years old.  I thought that was a responsible thing to do and it helped children, it helped society, and it certainly helped me because it gave me $30 a month that I wouldn't have otherwise had.  So when I joined the military, I knew from Day 1 that, the good Lord willing, I was going to stay in the military until I retired.  And my goal when I entered was to retire as an E9 I wanted to be a chief master sergeant.  I was going to be an E9 when I retired.  Well, it worked out a little better than that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'd say.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You exceeded that (mark?), right?
Speaker 2: I exceeded that, but I loved the military.  You know, I had never been on an airplane until I went to Basic Training.  And I was bused from North Carolina to Raleigh; from Jones County to Raleigh to the Induction Station in August of '65 [1965].  And I remember walking through the line in the Induction Station getting my physical and doing other things thinking that, I am going to leave that farm, leave that mule, leave that environment, and help provide a better life for my grandmother [Lucy Rhodes Roberts].  My grandfather [Shade Lane Roberts] had recently passed.  And I went to Basic Training at Lackland Air Force Base, where I later commanded all of Lackland Air Force Bases, that I'll talk about later on, a few years ago.
Story_ID: 33047
Speaker 1: Let me ask you.  I didn't--before this gets out of my mind; was your grandfather [Shade Lane Roberts] a veteran?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  No.  My grandfather was not a veteran, but neither was my father [Monroe Flowers, Sr.].  I don't recall any relatives that had served in the military other than the cousins, the two cousins that I mentioned; one Army; one Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I kind of was following them, because I thought that it was a better life in the military.  Couldn't afford to go to college, and I wanted something that would give me the--provide me the--an opportunity where I could get an education, earn an income, help take care of my grandmother at the time, and maybe later on in life help me with my own family as I progressed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were stationed first out at Lackland in San Antonio?
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Basic Training at Lackland--
Speaker 1: Basic Training.
Speaker 2: --Air Force Base in 1965, finished there in--it was six weeks.  So I must have started on the sixth of August, 1965.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm just guessing that Basic Training was not difficult for you.
Speaker 2: Basic Training was not difficult for me.  The thing that I remember mostly about Basic Training, the first night that, when we arrived at Lackland Air Force Base, I was sitting on the bus with the other folk that had, that were coming in, and I remember a redhead Tech Sergeant getting on the bus.  His name was Rainey (ph. splg.).  And Rainey looked us all in the eye and he says, "I'm going to be your everything.  I'm your mother, your father, your sister, your brother; I'm your everything for the next six weeks."  And I thought, "(Hmmf?), that's interesting.  But if he say so, he's in charge.  I will obey, I will do my best every day, and this too will pass, and I will get the opportunity to learn something new and see something different, and you get paid for it."  So Basic Training was not really difficult for me, and I had no problems at all in Basic Training.
Story_ID: 33048
Speaker 1: When I graduated from Basic Training, you know, today, just about everybody that finished the basic course in the military, we send them off to Technical Training where they learn a technical skill.  But, during those times, I didn't go to Technical Training.  I left Basic Training and went straight to Grand Forks, North Dakota.  Road a bus from San Antonio, Texas, to North Dakota, and it was a ride, a long ride.  But I remember getting to Grand Forks and, man, was it cold.  I had never been any further than right here in Washington, D.C., before I went to Basic Training.  So I showed up at Grand Forks, North Dakota, and my military occupational skill or we call them "The Air Force Specialty" in the Air Force; the Army call them "Military Occupational Specialty," was a supply warehouseman, and I didn't know what that was.  But I got there and I remember my first supervisor was a Staff Sergeant Carver, the military; and my civilian boss was a Mr. J. P. Sauloway (ph. splg.).  And I had already made up my mind, and I went in with the attitude that I'm going to do my best every day at everything I attempt.  So when they started teaching me warehousing, after a few months they realized that I was serious about learning, and I was serious about maintaining a good positive attitude, and that I wanted to do my best.  So Mr. Sauloway took a special interest in me and said, "Well, I'm going to you train you, Airman Flowers."  And as I became more and more experience and learned more, they put me in charge of the war-readiness storage stuff.  You know, that was an area where it had to be stored in the right place every time.  When somebody needed something for an aircraft or a missile or whatever, you had to get it, get it expeditiously, get it to the folks that delivered it to the airplane or to where it was going, and it was all timing, in a certain amount of time.  So I became very good at supply warehousing, and did very well while at Grand Forks, North Dakota.  I remember, you know, that one of my goals were to a better life and to earn a little more money.  I remember how much I was earning when I first came in.  It was $94 a month; $47 every two weeks.  And out of that $47 every two weeks, I was managing to save 30 of it.  I put it in the Credit Union.  I did that for two years and lived in the dormitory, ate in the dining hall.  So somebody was providing my food, my clothing, $47 every two weeks, life was good (laughs).
Speaker 2: Now, putting that in perspective of someone working, say, for a General Motors plant in those days, would have been making about $100 a week or thereabouts; maybe a $100, $120, if they don't work overtime (unclear).
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: So, they'd be getting what you got in a month in a week.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Or more.
Speaker 1: Or more.  Yeah.  But, you know, that was more than, you know, in three months, I'd made more than my grandfather [Shade Lane Roberts] made all year, most years.  So, you know, my perspective of my world was where I had lived for seventeen years out there on that farm, and where I was then and put it in context of the past, I thought it was very good.  So I served at Grand Forks for two years.
Story_ID: 33049
Speaker 1: In 1967, late summer of '67 [1967], a lot of us that were in supply warehousing got involuntarily selected to involuntarily retrain into air transportation.  I was one of those that got selected to retrain in air transportation.  And then we went off to Sheppard Air Force Base [Wichita Falls, Texas] to Technical Training, which was our first tech school, and learned the air transportation and how to load, unload, palletize, load airplanes with cargo, and we were all sent off to Vietnam.  I ended up going to Da Nang Air Base [Vietnam] in January of 1968.  In January of 1968, all of 1968 were interesting years at Da Nang Air Base.  I was there for all of the Tet Offensives during 1968.  And I remember the first six months or so working as a cargo--air cargo specialist, transporter.  I was assigned to an Aerial Mobility Team, and often in the evenings at night, we would go out on the aircraft into the jungles and various strips around Vietnam and take cargo and pick up cargo.  Part of the cargo that we would pick up sometimes would be pallets of body bags.  We'd bring them back to the Da Nang Air Base where they would get processed at the mortuary.  And then we would see those remains that would come to us on the flight line as transfer cases on pallets that we would load onto aircraft to send back to the United States, at that time, Dover and Travis in California and Delaware, where we were sending them back, the bodies back to.  But I did that for the first six months, and then I developed a bleeding ulcer.  I went down to Cam Ranh Bay [Vietnam] to the hospital where--and stayed for a month, where they worked on my belly and got me patched up.  And came back and I didn't do the mobility stuff anymore, going out in the jungles and picking up bodies and cargo and taking stuff out.  I just worked there at Da Nang, continuing to do the cargo handling until I came back to the States in January of '69 [1969].
Story_ID: 33050
Speaker 1: Now, let me just ask for those--have you--I want you to explain for people who don't know, what was a Tet Offensive?
Speaker 2: Tet Offensives were the major attacks in various places around Vietnam during 1968 in the height of the war, of the Vietnam War.  And a lot of the offensives at Da Nang Air Base [Vietnam] were one of those areas that we had a lot of bombing, a lot of rocket attacks.  I remember the first night that we arrived at Da Nang Air Base, we had a rocket attack, like, an hour after I got there.  And being 19 years old, never been in combat before, never been in--didn't know much about combat, never even read about it, didn't watch it on television; didn't have a clue except for what I had been taught for the two years that I'd been in the military.  And I remember the first night we had that rocket attack and I just got there, the siren went off, and rockets were coming in, and everybody had their helmets and their flight jackets and their weapons, and they went to running.  And they were going to a bunker, but I didn't know where the bunker was (laughs).  So I figured, well, I'll just run where everybody else ran.  And I followed them and found the bunker.  But that was probably one of the most interesting nights in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 33051
Speaker 1: So after a year in Vietnam, I came back to the United States.  And, although I enjoyed learning the new skill of air transportation and handling cargo, in the back of my mind was this love for business math, still.  And I knew that the Air Force had all kinds of opportunities.  I had--I took an examination to see if I could qualify to retrain into some other field.
Speaker 2: Let me ask this.  I didn't ask this before, and I should have, because I remember the talk in those days about the branches of the service.  And I know people would, you know, those I guess who read a lot or saw a lot of movies want to go to the Marines.  You know, they want to be a hero and go to the Marines.  Then other people would say, if you want to learn something and get an opportunity, go to the Air Force or the Navy, you know.  And the Army was kind of, like, you know, well, if you get drafted, you're going to be in the Army.  So, but how did you make your decision about going to the Air Force?
Speaker 1: My decision of going to the Air Force was mostly made on the fact that my cousin that had been--that was in the Air Force talked to me about the opportunities.  And he, too, had grown up in the country, a little more affluent community, a little affluence than economically than I grew up with, because his mother and father owned their own home.  But, albeit, in the country.  And he said, "Hey, you know," he was very good in math also, and science, and he was an aircraft mechanic, and he said, "Man, you go to the Air Force because you can learn a lot of stuff and get a lot of skills.  And you like that business math stuff, maybe you can do something in that area in the Air Force."  And my other cousin who was in the Army, he was stationed at Fort Bragg [North Carolina] at the time and it was always in the woods.  And I said, "Mmmm."  He was a medic, but he was spending a lot of time in the woods and on maneuvers and stuff.  And I said, "Well, I think I'm going to try the Air Force."  This cousin, my cousin James, they never told me anything about being in the woods, and I know my other cousin named William, I see him, and he's telling me about being in the field.  So I just chose the Air Force because I thought it might offer me the best opportunity of what I wanted to do.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So it's 1969 when you come back from (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 1969 I come back from Da Nang [Vietnam].
Speaker 2: From Da Nang.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And I took a test to see if I could qualify to retrain into something else.
Speaker 2: Now this is at Norton Air Force Base in California.
Speaker 1: I came back to Norton Air Force Base in California.  And I had taken a test there that scored well enough in the business area, the administrative area, to retrain into finance.  I retrained into finance.  But before I retrained into finance, I had another event in my life that was life changing and continues to be.
Story_ID: 33052
Speaker 1: I was still in transportation when I came back to Norton, and I was working in the warehouse, and in the offices in the warehouse I, you know, I'd walk around to the front offices where people worked in the offices, and I kept peeping in this office that had these ladies there.  You know, I was just back from Vietnam (laughs).  And I saw this cute looking lady that--named Ida Hill at the time, and she had two stripes.  And one of my friends that was in Vietnam with me came back to Norton, and I said to him, I said, "Man, you know," I was shy and didn't have the courage to introduce myself to meet her, so I brokered a deal through my friend, who was outgoing and gregarious and, you know, kind of the Vietnam clown, if you would.  And I said, "Hey, man, you know, I sure would like to meet that lady."  I say, "Why don't you set something up at the bowling alley for us, and we'll get two of them and two of us and we'll go to the bowling alley to meet them, but make sure one of them is that one."  (laughs).  And he did.  His name was Piedre (ph. splg.).  He set up a bowling event for us, and I didn't know how to bowl and had no interest in bowling.  But my wife today of forty-three years showed up there with her friend.  She was in the military.  Her friend was in the military.  And that's where I met her, at the bowling alley at Norton Air Force Base.  And we kind of hit if off from there and decided that we ought to think about maybe getting married.  And we had only been dating from January until June.  But in two weeks after we got married, she got an assignment to Clark Air Base in the Philippines.  I had been approved for retraining into finance, into accounting.  And I went off to Sheppard Air Force Base [Wichita, Texas] to a three-month school to retrain into accounting; she went off to Clark Air Force Base to serve the country in the Air Force as a Passenger Service Specialist.
Story_ID: 33053
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask this.  Now, does the Air Force, if the servicemen and women marry, do they make an effort to keep them together?
Speaker 2: At that--they do.  And it worked for us very well, just because I was going off to retrain and she was going--had an assignment.  It took from June when she [Ida Hill Flowers] departed; we finally got together at Clark in December.  So as soon as I finished my retraining into accounting, came back to Norton, I applied for a joint spouse assignment, and I got the joint spouse and went off to Clark Air Base.  Got to Clark Air Base and guess what?  They didn't put me in accounting.  They put me back into transportation (laughs).  Because the war was still going on, they needed transportation folks, so they put me back into air transportation again.  And I did that for about six months, I guess, six to nine months before I finally got out of transportation and got back into the finance office where I had retrained, originally retained into.
Speaker 1: Now, so when did you get your first accounting assignment?  Was that at--
Speaker 2: I got the first one--I was assigned while I was at Clark Air Base [Philippines].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Into the finance office and served there about a year in the finance there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, and you were married in 1969?
Speaker 2: Got married in 1969, the 22nd of June.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And two weeks after we were married, my wife [Ida Hill Flowers] shipped out to the Philippines and I went to Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we were reunited in December of '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now you served in--served in Charleston, South Carolina (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I did.  I served in Charleston.  When we left Clark Air Base, we went to Lackland in San Antonio where my wife had been selected to be a military training instructor for women at that time.  And we went to Lackland, and then I was--I served in the finance office there for, from '71 [1971], June of '71 [1971] until May of '72 [1972] I believe.  Because during those days, my wife was expecting--she got pregnant when we were on our way to Lackland, I think.  In those days, women in the military, even if they were married, they had to abort the child or get out.  And she decided that she was going to get out.  So she separated from the service shortly after we got there, and then our son was born in December of '71 [1971].  And in 1972, spring of '72 [1972], they changed the policy.  And if a lady was married, they could serve on active duty and have a child.  And she came back in.  And then we went off to Charleston Air Force Base.  (That's where we?) Yep.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting story.  I did not realize that.  But you know.
Speaker 2: No, you couldn't have a child.
Speaker 1: They have changed so much, I can hardly imagine that now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You couldn't have a child in the early '70s' [1970s] and be on active duty.
Story_ID: 33054
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Charleston Air Force Base [South Carolina].  And, did you now--are you thinking about how to go to college at this point?
Speaker 2: I am.  I am.  And I had done a little bit of evening studies in San Antonio at St. Philips College while we were there.  But then when we got to Charleston, I had committed to myself and to my wife [Ida Hill Flowers] that I needed to complete my education.  I did a little bit in the Philippines also, part time, the University of Maryland.  But at Charleston Air Force Base, they had a program from Southern Illinois University, and it was a full-time program.  They brought the instructors from the campus out to the bases, and you did it on weekends, weekends and sometimes during the day if, you know, your bosses had to agree to give you the time off.  But it was an occupational education degree.  And I enrolled in that full time, and in 1970, late '72 [1972], early '70 [1970], late '72 [1972], and graduated in 1975 with my bachelor's degree from Southern Illinois University out of that program.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, was the--the degree was from Southern Illinois, but did you have to be there to get--?
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They did--the program was physically on Charleston Air Force Base.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So, now, shortly after that, your wife [Ida Hill Flowers] was transferred to Crete [Greece], right?
Speaker 2: She was.  Once I graduated--even before I finished the undergraduate from SIU [Southern Illinois University], I applied for Officer Training School and got accepted, right as a brand-new college graduate with a bachelor's degree in 1975.  And my wife had an assignment to Crete at that time.  And we had a four-year-old son, three-and-a-half, almost four.  And the options were, couldn't do a joint spouse as a brand-new Second Lieutenant, so the options were, you go on to OTS [Officer Training School], you will go wherever the Air Force need you after you are commissioned.  Your wife and son is going to (sic) Crete or you can turn down the OTS and go to Crete with your family and try again at some point.  That was an easy option for me.  I chose to go to Crete with my family.  Family is very important to me, and I thought that, given the opportunity to serve and be together, that's what--that was the choice that I wanted to exercise, and I did.
Story_ID: 33055
Speaker 1: Was it special to you to have a son and to, you know, be a father to your son after what happened to you when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: It was.  And, you know, I have always, always impressed upon our son, my wife [Ida Hill Flowers] and I both, and she grew up in a very horrible background also that we haven't talked about.  But we always impressed upon our son, "I don't care how good you are in sports, how good you are in anything, one of the things that you're going to be good at, given the mental and physical ability, is to be good at being educated, and life will offer you a lot of challenges, but we want you to be better equipped and have more opportunities to accept those challenges that we had."  And he knew from Day 1.  He didn't know where he was going to college when he was going through high school and grade school, but he knew he was going somewhere.  And for him, you can talk with him today and he'll tell you, he didn't even consider not going to college.  That wasn't even an option for him because he knew that that's what he wanted to do, because we had impressed upon him the important of an education.  And life is hard with an education, and it's harder without one.
Story_ID: 33056
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what were your impressions of Crete?  I mean, this is in the Mediterranean.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Crete was a beautiful place.  We, when we first got there, we lived in the city of Hersonissos, which was east of downtown Heraklion.  But we lived right on the Mediterranean.  I mean, I could throw a stone in the Mediterranean.  The beautiful, beautiful blue waters, great people; treated us extremely nice.  We lived off base for about the first year or so.  But we knew that, given the opportunity, we wanted to move onto the base because, even though there were a lot of Americans in the community, in the Greek community, we wanted to be on base because we thought that, being on base in a secure government community with a small child who was just starting kindergarten, was probably the best place to be, even though we didn't have an problems whatsoever when we lived off base, folks were very nice.  We took son on base with us every morning as both of us went to work, and a friend that we had met there when we first got there, kept him until we moved on base.  And once we moved on base, we had a housemaid that would come in and take care of our son while we went to work, take him to school, provide for him and feed him while we were at work.  But the off-base environment was very good.  We lived in a nice, nice apartment right on the Mediterranean.  When we got the opportunity to move on base, we moved into a trailer, an old house trailer.  And I remember it was 660 square feet, the whole thing.  And they added a little lean-on to it that made a living room, and it was an experience.  I had never lived in anything that small, even--it was smaller than the house I grew up in.  But it was on base and we had a lot of friends there, and co-workers, and we accepted it and we were happy.  That's where we lived until we left.
Speaker 1: Now, did you start working on your master's degree when you were (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: I did.  I started working on my master's degree at Crete with Ball State University European Division, and started that in 1970--I think I started in early '76 [1976].  Might have been late '75 [1975] or early '76 [1976], but completed that while we were there.  When we came back to the States in '77 [1977], I came back with a master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's 1976 then?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Story_ID: 33057
Speaker 1: Now, so, and you came back to Travis Air Force Base [Solano County, California].
Speaker 2: Came back to Travis Air Force Base into the finance office there.  I applied for OTS [Officer Training School] the second time and was rejected.  I applied for the Medical Services Corps, was rejected.  The explanation from the Medical Services Corps' folks, the explanation was, I had over ten years service time and they were looking for people with less than--10 years or less, because the experience that the Air Force has had at that time with folks with over ten years prior service was, they would serve 10 ten years, which was required as an Officer and get out.  So you would lose the experience ten years later.  And they were looking for folks that were willing to serve longer because of the experience factor.  So I waited after I applied for both of those and got rejected.  I had to wait six months to reapply for OTS and Medical Services Corps.  I reapplied for both of them again six months later, rejected from both, same reason on the Medical Services Corps.  OTS, they don't give you a reason, at least at that time they didn't give a reason.  So I waited six more months, and I applied for OTS again with a strong endorsement from my Wing Commander, and I was selected.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what is it by this time, is it 1979?
Speaker 2: 1970; late 1978.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I entered the Officer Training School in August of 1978, and was commissioned the 11th of December.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this was at Lackland?
Speaker 2: At Lackland Air Force Base [San Antonio, Texas] again.  This was my third trip to Lackland (laughs).
Speaker 1: So you're trained there, and you become an officer there.
Speaker 2: I was trained there.  I was--served there as an enlisted person in the finance office after I was trained, and then I went back to Officer Training School there in 1978 and became an officer there.
Speaker 1: Now you--we have a note here that you said the biggest challenge there was, "mentally adjusting to life in the Officer Corps."  You said the expectations are different.
Speaker 2: The expectations were different.  And, you know that the challenge some of the former enlisted people have or enlisted people that go to Officer Training School is, they want to bring the experience from the enlisted into the Officer Training Program.  And folks would tell you--folks--enlisted folks would say, "Well, you know, I know about the military.  I've been in 10, 12--"; in my case, 13-and-half years.  Well, I did know about the military, but I knew about the military as an enlisted person.  I had never spent a day in my life as an officer in the military.  The purpose of Officer Training School is to train you to be an officer, not to train you to be an enlisted person.  So even though a lot of the things that you learn as an enlisted person, you can take over to the officer side, like, customs and courtesies, drills and ceremonies, management leadership.  A lot of that is whether you're an officer or an enlisted person.  But to be an officer, you need to be trained to be an officer.  The expectations of an officer are--some are the same as an enlisted, but you are trained to lead as an officer; whereas, as an enlisted person, you can be--you may be a leader, but you're trained as a semi-skilled, skilled, apprentice, and specially, as an enlisted person.  So, you have to have the right attitude.  You're got to have the right objectives and state of mind to make that conversion.  I had friends that were listed and went to Officer Training School that were eliminated.  They just could not make the adjustment mentally, and the adjustment socially, which there adjustments that you must make.  But when I got selected to be an officer and showed up at Lackland Air Force Base, I knew that I wanted to be an officer, and I knew that I was there to learn to be an officer, not to learn how to continue to be an enlisted person and a senior enlisted person, for which I'm very proud of the fact that I was enlisted; very proud of the fact that I was selected for Master Sergeant, an E7, before I was commissioned.  But once I went to Officer Training School and obtained the commission, I knew that my goal then and my objectives were to be the best officer that I could be, the best leader that I could be, mentor for those that I were leading.  And, as an officer, I always felt that my number one objective was to help others that I was responsible for reach their fullest potential.  It wasn't about me, never was, never will be.  It was about others and about service and my goals to help them to reach to reach their fullest potential.  And that's the way I approached every day, and that's the way I feel about it today after forty-six and a half years later.
Story_ID: 33058
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was--was there a difference in perspective?  I guess it had to be a difference in the overall perspective of what you're doing when you moved from being an enlisted to officer.  So you get, like, a bigger picture (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And your leadership scope is a lot larger.  You know, as an enlisted person, the Master Sergeant-select, when I left Travis Air Force Base [Solano County, California], I was working quality assurance and checking behind folks's work to make sure that they were doing the finance and the account, and all that stuff; that everything that they were doing was correct according to rules, regulations and laws.  When I became a Second Lieutenant and was shipped to Moody Air Force Base, Georgia, and became a finance officer, they gave me my own account very early on after about three months having been there.  Normally, the progression for a finance officer, you go in as a deputy, you work various areas as you learn the career field (and the grade?).  And then in about two years you might get your own account and be responsible to the U.S. Treasury for your own account.  Well, in my case, they gave me my own account very early on within three to six months after I was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant.  My responsibility there was, you know, I had--on Moody Air Force base there were about 3,000 people.  We were responsible for the pay allowances, all the stuff associated with the pay for the 3,000; and cash.  I had a responsibility there of several hundred thousands and millions of dollars.  And, here when most days we'd have 8, $900,000 in a vault that I was responsible for.  So the scope of the responsibility was significantly greater.  As a finance officer, not only are you responsible to your local leadership, to your higher headquarters; you're responsible to the U.S. Treasury and to the American people for the caretaking and the fiduciary responsibility of those resources that you're entrusted with.  I could not have held that kind of responsibility as an enlisted person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got--you earned a master's degree from Ball State.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: And, you know, and then later on you went after another master's degree.
Speaker 2: I earned another master's degree.
Speaker 1: And that's kind of later on, but--
Speaker 2: It was in 1994.  My first master's was in 1976, I believe, '76 [1976], '77 [1977], from Ball State.  But in '94 [1994], I had the opportunity to attend the National Defense University here in town, the Industrial College of the Armed Forces, which is a college within the university, and earned a master's degree in National Resource Strategy from the National Defense University.
Story_ID: 33059
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, you served in a lot of places, so I guess it, you know, what, was it--I supposed it would be an advantage to be married to, you know, and to, because you were traveling as much.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Especially, you know, married with a child.  My wife was on the--she came back on active duty in'72 [1972], that I related to earlier, and stayed in until '79 [1979]; 'til January of '79 [1979].  So she served about 11 years of active duty herself.  And then, when I got commissioned in December of '78 [1978] and went off to my first assignment as an officer, she separated because she was enlisted also.  So she separated from active duty, went into the Reserves, which she later retired from the Reserves as a Master Sergeant herself.  But doing the things that I was required to do, and the level of responsibilities and various assignments, I think, totally, we had about 27 assignments and 25 or 26 moves.  There's no way that I could have done it by myself.  She has been with me all the way since 1969 until we retired six months ago.  And I'm forever grateful for her partnership, for her leadership and her support as we did all those different jobs in all those different places, and was reasonable successful in all of them.
Speaker 1: Just to run down some of the few--in 1980, you were at Maxwell Air Force Base in Alabama.  There's probably stories associated with all these, '82 [1982] Langley, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: After that, National Headquarters [Washington, D.C.] in '85 [1985].  You served a stint in--there's even one in Mississippi here somewhere, I remember that I saw it.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: All these are, you know, all these different venues.
Speaker 2: All those are assignments.
Speaker 1: So, what are some of the stories from these assignments?
Speaker 2: I remember--let's go back to Maxwell Air Force Base.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In 1980, I was at Squadron Officer School.  It was a 12-week school.  It was the first level of professional military education for an officer called Squadron Officer School.  You know, I've always wanted to do my best at everything I attempted, and to perform my best every day.  But I recall one of my feedback sessions when I was at the school.  I had done a speaking--a speech, and the feedback that I got from one of my commanders, one of my bosses there was one of the instructors.  They told me that, Flowers, you know, you've got, you've a black accent."  And my response to that was, "Yeah, you think.  Look at me.  I've been black all my life.  And I don't know what a black accent is, but what you heard is--was me.  And I hope it was grammatically correct, and I did my best on the speech.  And if it was considered a black accent, I'm sorry, but that's all I have."  I remember that one and I keep that one in my memoir, and when I talk about the past and some of the places I've been, I share that with people. The important thing is, you can't change your accent.  You are who you are.  You do your best to education yourself so that you are grammatically correct in your speech, your diction delivery is effective as a speaker.  But if it sounds like a black accent to some, then that's the way it sounds to them.  To others it sounds effective; to others it may sound even something else.  But, I thought that was interesting, that someone would comment that I had a black accent (laughs).
Speaker 1: Did you ever hear that again?
Speaker 2: I never heard it again.  No.  Never heard it again (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were--now this was when you were in Alabama.
Speaker 2: That was in Alabama in 1980 [1980].  Yep.  Yeah.  But, you know, the instructor that commented on that was not African-American.  He was Caucasian, and to him, I don't know where he was from, he may have thought that my accent was a little bit different.  But, you know, apparently, he hadn't been outside around Montgomery [Alabama], because most of the folks there sounded somewhat like I did (laughs).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Even the white people.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, anytime someone would make a comment like that, that was a little bit disparaging to me that sounded a little bit like they expected less of me.  I've always those opportunities in those kinds and those kinds of comments as a means to do better.  And every time someone tells me that, "Yeah, you know, you didn't quite measure up," or "We didn't think that that was quite what we expected," I always try harder.
Story_ID: 33060
Speaker 1: So you go to--after Alabama you go to Langley and Virginia.
Speaker 2: Went to Langley in--my tour at Langley and what I remember most about that, I was a First Lieutenant there.  And that was at Headquarters, Tactical Air Command.  And I remember being a prior service First Lieutenant.  This was in 1982, I guess, when I showed up at Langley the first time.  At that point, I had, I had about 17 years of service, you know, and I was a First Lieutenant.  And there had been some discussion at my previous base at Moody Air Force Base [Valdosta, Georgia] when I was a brand-new Second Lieutenant, our--my son was out playing with one of the other officer's kids one day, and he was a Captain, and he come in and told my son, because he knew that I was prior service and I had 13 and a half years, he come in and told my son that, "Well, your dad won't ever be more than a Captain because of all his prior service.  He'll retire as a Captain."  And my son came back home and he shared that with my wife and I.  And I always had that in the back of my mind on my assignments also (there?).  In addition to me internally wanting to do my best and perform my best, I wanted to retire at more than a Captain just to prove that, you know, every prior service person that had a significant amount of years of prior service didn't have to retire as a Captain.  If they performed well and did very well, perhaps they would go past the grade of Captain.  So this was an opportunity for me at Langley at the headquarters, my first headquarters assignment to do my best and make a difference.
Story_ID: 33061
Speaker 1: And I remember my boss that brought me up there was a fellow named--he was a Lieutenant Colonel at the time-named Doug Bunger (ph. splg.).  And for some reason, he kind of took a liking to me.  I had attended a conference as the budget officer (for Moody?) [Air Force Base], and he kind of took a liking to me and said, "Hey, you interested in coming to the Headquarters?"  And I said, "Yeah.  I'd love to come to the Headquarters."  So they brought me up, and he put me on a budget account.  I was in budget at this time, had retrained out of finance.  He put me on an account called the Southwest Asia Account.  The Southwest Asia Account at that time was about $3 million, and I was doing all the budgeting for the troops in Tactical Air Command that were doing work in Southwest Asia and (do some of the build-up?) in Southwest Asia, $3 million.  And we worked that, got to go to Germany working that account, spent a lot of time up here in the Pentagon working that account.  And after about three years there, he left; he came here to the Pentagon.  And it wasn't long afterwards, a few months afterwards, he called me one day, he said, "Hey, Al, how would you like to come to the Pentagon?"  And I said, "Sir, I'd love to work for you, with you, wherever.  The Pentagon is just another place for me to perform and do my best.
Speaker 2: So this is 18--1985?
Speaker 1: 1985.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First time in the Pentagon.  So I came to the Pentagon and worked for then-Colonel Allen D. "Doug" Bunger and spent four years, two years working as a budget analyst in the Pentagon, and then I spent two years as an executive officer to the Director of Budget Operations, who is a One-Star General.  And that all worked out for me, worked very well.
Story_ID: 33062
Speaker 1: In 1988, late '88 [1988], I got notified that I'd been selected for major (below the zone?) early.  So I pinned on major, and I got selected to go to the Armed Forces College, which was an intermediate service school and residence down in Norfolk.  And went down there from about July of '89 [1989] until January of '90 (1990), and then went to--back to Langley Air Force Base as the Director for Budget Operations.  Spent--I spent '90 [1990] through part of '93 [1993] there doing that job.  I got selected for Lieutenant Colonel two years early in that job.  And in 1993, I left there and came back up here to the National Defense University to the Industrial College of the Armed Forces and ten months of schooling.  After that, I got assigned to the Joint Staff as a resource management officer.  Spent a little over about two and a half years on the Joint Staff where, at that time, I worked for a lot of Navy admirals; worked for a Marine Corps general officer, worked for an Air Force general officer in the Joint Staff; and then, got selected to be the Director of Budget at--to Air Combat Command in 19--late 1996; went back to Langley and spent two years as the Director of Budget for Air Combat Command.  I left there in 2000--1999, came back up here [Washington, D.C] as the Director of Budget Programs in the Pentagon, working directly for the Director of Budget and did that for two years.  Did a lot of briefing, preparations for the Chief, the Secretary, a lot of briefings; all of the briefings for the budget director; a lot of work for congressional testimony and presentation on the Hill.  And then in 2001, I left that job, went to Education and Training Command as the Chief Financial Officer.  I served there for two years, Education and Training Command then and now, responsible for all of the pilot training, all of the technical training, all of the basic training.  If you--if it's training in the United States Air Force, Education and Training Command is responsible for it, and I was the Chief Financial Officer for that organization.  I believe the budget, at that time, was somewhere around $8 billion dollars.
Speaker 2: And in late 2002, I got notified by the Four Star that I was working for there that I'd been selected for brigadier general.  And then early 2003, I think it was about June, May-June timeframe, I went off to U.S. Special Operations Command to be the Chief Executive--Chief Financial Executive for U.S. Special Operations Command, and served in that position until May-June timeframe of 2003, and then I was moved up to be the J8 or the Director for Force Structure, Resources and Assessments for the U.S. Special Operations Command.   And what that equated to was, the Budget Finance Manpower Strategic Assessments and Inspections.  All of those things, those different areas, fell within the--that Force Structure--Director for Force Structure, Resources and Assessments or the J8.  I was in charge of all of that for all U.S. Special Operations Forces.  They include the Green Beret, Seals, Combat Controllers, all the Air Force, Army and Navy; and before I left, Marine Special Operation Forces.  A very, very exciting job.  I did that for about three-and-a-half years at U.S. Special Operations Command.
Story_ID: 33063
Speaker 1: Then I got an opportunity unlike any financial guy could ever expect.  I got the opportunity to go to Maxwell in Command, the Accession Command, Air Force Officer Accession and Training Schools, which I had the Officer Training School, which I had been a member of in 1978.  It was now moved to Maxwell Air Force Base, though I had the Officer Training School, had all of Air Force R.O.T.C. across the country, 144 colleges and universities where we had R.O.T.C. and 980 or so crosstown schools that fed into those 144 primary schools for R.O.T.C., and 869 high schools where we had Junior R.O.T.C. in the U.S. and 14 overseas, with a total of student population of about 115,000 high school students in Junior R.O.T.C.  The opportunity to command that and impact the officer force that we were bringing into the Air Force, about 530 a year out of O.T.S., and about 1100 from R.O.T.C. that we were bringing in officers each year; and then that 115,000 students that we were teaching how to be citizens in a great citizenship program in Junior R.O.T.C.  It was just awesome.  I don't--I think that's probably one of the jobs that I've had, one of the opportunities to impact the most lives across the country of young adults and young folks in high school, that our objective was to make them better citizens as they grew up to become adults.  It was just an awesome responsibility, and one that I will cherish all my life.
Speaker 2: Did that for about a year and a half, and then I got the opportunity to go command the Second Air Force.  And I am the first financial person in the history of our finance community to command a numbered Air Force.  No one else in the controller community has ever commanded a numbered Air Force. To go command Second Air Force, Second Air Force was all of the training, technical, nontechnical, all that; the R.O.T.C. and all that stuff.  If it was training other than Pilot Training, it fell under Second Air Force to include Basic Training where I started.  So I had the opportunity to back to Lackland Air Force Base frequently and observe and to tweak as we needed to; Basic Training, all of the Technical Training other than Pilot Training, to include Space and Missile Training for the Air Force.  We ran about 40,000 a day on Lackland Air Force Base, and some 2,500 courses a year that we taught Technical Training around the world as the Second Air Force Commander, another awesome responsibility.
Speaker 1: That's when you were in Mississippi, right?
Speaker 2: That's when I was in Mississippi, the Headquarters of the Second Air Force.
Speaker 1: This was in 2008--starts with 2008?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.  From 2008.  May of 2008 to September of 2009.
Story_ID: 33064
Speaker 1: And then in 2009 I got a call from the General Officer Group, and my boss had some discussion with the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, and they said, "Hey, we want you to come be the Air Force Budget Director."  So I showed back up in this town in the Pentagon, and in October of 2009 I became the Air Force Budget Director, responsible for all Air Force budget and resources.
Speaker 2: And this is $119 billion, right?
Speaker 1: Actually, it 170 billion that we budgeted for; 119 billion of that was the Blue Air Force part that came directly to the Air Force that we were responsible for.  But the rest of it included some--entailed Intelligence Special Operations in Health Budget that we budgeted for, but it got parceled off and sent to other organizations once it was appropriated.  So 170 billion, we budgeted for; 119 billion of it, we were directly responsible for distribution, execution, analysis, and defending on the Hill for the two years that I was in that job.  So another great opportunity.  About 10,000 in the financial community, as the senior military person that we had around the world that I was directly responsible to as the senior military person, as well as the 160 people that worked directly for me in the Pentagon as budget analysts and leaders in the budget community that helped me formulate, justify, defend our budget here on Capitol Hill for the Air Force as the Budget Director.
Speaker 2: So, you're there until--
Speaker 1: I was there until--I left there in November of last year, of November 2011.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So that's where you retired.
Speaker 1: That's where I retired from.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Or January.
Story_ID: 33065
Speaker 1: This is-there are several milestones.  I mean, there are a lot of awards along the way, and we're not going to try the events on all of those.  But when you retired, actually, you retired as the longest serving--I think the longest serving person in the U.S.--?
Speaker 2: I was the longest serving active duty in the history of the Air Force, and the longest serving at the time I retired in the Department of Defense, across all the services.
Speaker 1: Now, that's quite a--quite an accomplishment.  And--now, during the period of time that you were in the Air Force, did anyone ever try to get you to retire before you wanted to?
Speaker 2: My wife [Ida Hill Flowers], after I got to about the thirty-year point, there were several times she would say to me when it was time to move, and the moves sometimes were very frequent, I tell you.  We had about twenty-seven moves, I think, in since 2001 we moved--between 2001 and 2012 when we retired, January of this year, we had moved 10 times; 10 times in 10 years.  When the moves started coming about every two years or less, there were several times my wife would say to me, "Sweetheart, you know, these moves are getting harder and harder.  They don't get any easier, and at some point we need to think about when we are going to give it up."  And I would always say to her, I'd say, "You know, if we get to the end of your rope, you need to tie a knot and hang on because we're going to--we're going to go a while longer."  Because my thinking was, I thought and I knew for a fact that I was making a difference.  And my mentality and attitude of service, I was devoted to it.  I was committed to it.  I never neglected family, and they were always by my side and they're with me every time a new assignment would come along.  But I believed, and I was foolish to believe in my mind, that every assignment that I went to, that I could make a difference; and that every office I went into, my goal was to leave it better than I found it.  And that was the objective.  And I believe I accomplished every one of those objectives every time.
Speaker 1: Now, you were not the--were you the oldest person to retire from the Air Force?  I don't think that's true.
Speaker 2: No.  No.  There are folks that are serving--that were serving, and I believe--I don't know if there's anyone now serving that was--is old as I was, but I know--but when I was serving last year, there were several people older than me, General Officers.  But I was the longest serving active duty in the history of the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Because you started when you were seventeen.
Speaker 2: I started at seventeen.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I actually retired--I had turned six--I had turned 64 the 29th of December of last year, and I retired 1 January.  So.
Speaker 1: Now, and you're certainly the longest serving African-American now, if you're the longest serving of all--
Speaker 2: In the history of the Defense, yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Right.  In the history of Defense.
Story_ID: 33066
Speaker 1: So, when you look back on all those years and all your service, what today are the milestones--what's your legacy?
Speaker 2: The legacy is, first of all, I believe that I was an outstanding mentor.  My legacy was to leave folks behind me that I had helped lead, train, mentor and educate, that can perform equal to or better than, than I did.  And that because I was instrumental in identifying folks, training them, trying to put them in the position, in the right jobs at the right time in order to enhance their success, that when I leave there will be hundreds of people whose lives I've touched over those forty-six and a half years, that will carry on and do great things as American citizens.  And I know that I've left that behind me.  I always thought that no matter how well I performed, what position I had or wherever I was, that my legacy was what I left behind, not what I took with me.  When I'm done and they've buried me someplace, I don't want someone to, on my obituary and at my funeral say, "Well, he served honorably, he did a great job, and he did some wonderful things, but all that is now gone because he's gone."  I want someone to say, "He served honorably, he did well, he did his best every day, and there are hundreds of folks that are still living that are carrying on doing exactly what he did, outstanding performance, doing great jobs either are being extremely successful, and he was instrumental and touched the lives of those folks.  They were instrumental in their success in various ways."
Speaker 1: I just wonder if there are any, you know, every now and then you hear, like, a story on the "60 Minutes" or something about defense spending going crazy almost, you know, with coffee pots costing, like, $10,000 and things like that.  Did you ever have an incident where you catch something that was a little bit out of the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any of those bizarre kinds of situations, and I'm glad I didn't because usually when you're on the front page of a newspaper, the Washington Post or the 'Air Force Times' or 'New York Times' or any of those things, usually the front page is not a good place to be (laughs).  All the opportunities that I've had to be on the front page so far has been positive and associated with my long service and having been the longest serving and all that good stuff.  But, you know, there were opportunities in all of my assignments as Budget Director, Budget Operations Chief, the Director of the Air Force Budget too safe where savings could be achieved.  One of the things that we monitored very closely is bizarre spending and folks doing the wrong thing.  Now, everybody that I served with and everyone that I worked with, though I've run across a few that had other objectives, and some of them weren't honorable and the things that we wanted them to be focused on.  So when we had those kinds of things occur, we identify those folks, and eliminated them from among those that were doing the right things.  But we had a few of those, but, you know, it wasn't something that was happening every day and we had people doing the wrong things, and we had to find them and fire them or put them away.
Story_ID: 33067
Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about any time like that when you actually saw something really weird or sort of strange in the budget?
Speaker 2: When I was the finance officer at one location, we had a case where a cashier was--had their fingers in the till, but we identified that person and got rid of them and eliminated them from the Air Force.  You hear of the stories of people spending money excessively, buying the wrong things, disobeying the laws and the rules.  And sometimes that would happen and folks would spend more than they were supposed to, and it's called "anti-deficiency violations," and when you have those you identify them.  You usually admit to getting rid of the folks that created it, retraining those in some cases where it wasn't willful neglect and intentional, just a mistake; you have to do some retraining and get them on the right track.  But, you know, there are--everything that's done isn't a hundred percent correct all the time in the way that we expect it to be.  But I did not have any of these $600 toilet seats or any of those bizarre kinds of things that happened on my watch, and I'm thankful it didn't.
Speaker 1: Now, is there any--is there or do you have budget item that you wished, when you were--that, you know, was larger or a priority that you think that (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The thing that--my most recent memory, the (thing that were made more than?) anything was of all the years and all the responsibility and budget, was in 2011 when we had seven short-term spending bills.  That caused us to do some things and to delay some programs that will cost more in the future because of the delays.  When you have those kinds of things happen, it causes--it makes folks in the field make bad decisions because they will not spend for a long time, because the money isn't there, and then you'll get to the end of the year or you get a spending bill, and resources will flow; and sometimes they will buy things that they wouldn't have bought otherwise at the end of the year because the money just showed up.  And the things that they needed most, sometimes the opportunity is lost because the dollars are so late coming.  And we had seven of those short-term spending bills in 2011.  And the thing that I thought about most on the last one of those before we finally got the bill passed in June was, if we worked, it would have had a death gratuity.  How would we had paid it when we didn't have a budget on that last day, but it all worked out?  And, you know, that's one of the things that we identify to the Congress when they would ask what were the impacts, and we would tell them.  I remember that last few days telling O.S.D [Office of the Secretary of Defense] and them communication to the Hill that, you know, if we have a death gratuity and there is no Appropriation Bill, we'll have to figure out how we will pay it, but fortunately, we didn't get there.  We got close, but not there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That troubled me.  I was sitting over there in the Pentagon as Air Force Budget Director, thinking about all those young folks that were in harm's way at that time in Iraq and in Afghanistan.  And if we had something that required a payment and didn't have a budget, how would we do that.
Story_ID: 33068
Speaker 1: I know the Air Force trains all of its officers to a standard, but do you have a command philosophy of your own?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The command philosophy is: First of all, you do what's right.  Always do what's right.  Take care of your troops and they'll take care of your mission, and subsequently, everyone will succeed.  I believe that you will be taken care of one way or the other.  If you take care of the people, they'll take care of you.  If you don't take care of the people, they'll take care of you.  But your success will be a different story than if you had taken care of them.  People are our most value asset, and you have to take care of them, every one of them.  I always espoused to the folks that, there is no one in any organization that was more important than anyone else.  They were all important.  Even Little Johnnie that can't seem to quite figure it out and makes a lot of mistakes.  They are worth training, they are worth mentoring, [and] they're worth teaching.  And above all, they're somebody's child that has been entrusted to us in the military [for us] to lead, train and help defend and do the business of this great nation.  And for every officer, every leader, our number one responsibility was to take care of those troops and to help them reach their fullest potential.  It never was about us, it never will be about us.  And that's kind of the philosophy that I adhered to all the time.
Speaker 1: I guess I should probably ask this too.  How did 9/11 effect, I guess, the communication between the various branches of the government?
Speaker 2: I think--I think as a result of 9/11, the communications, the working together, and the camaraderie increased among the military.  Because, you know, we're separate services.  Army, Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps, and then the Coast Guard out there that part of the Department of Transportation.  Every service has its own uniquenesses (sic) about them.  Every service has a core, have core missions, and core functions, and core roles.  But as we-9/11 occurring and we got into Desert Shield, Desert--well, we're already in Desert Shield, Desert Storm.  But then 9/11 occurred, and then we got into this global war on terrorism more than we were into it prior to 9/11.  The need for the services to work together, communicate, not only the services are cross agencies in the federal government, in other agencies.  That need grew as a result to try to run down more of these terrorist activities and take actions to hold it in abeyance as much as can and eliminate it eventually.  Prior to 9/11, a lot of it was going on, but I think that that brought the services closer together.  And today, you see more joint; joint bases, more joint activities, more joint everything.  And I believe that that's--is the way to go.  I believe that as resources become more constrained and budgets become smaller, that's the way that we must operate, the way that we must fight as a fighting force for this nation.
Story_ID: 33069
Speaker 1: Sir, have you--now, after this long tenure in the Air Force as an enlisted man and as an officer, are race relations improved now?  We have a black president now, and all that, but have race relations improved?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  In the military, you know, the military has focused on relations intentionally for a lot of years.  Then, we just didn't tolerate the racism.  When we learn of any kind of racial kind of intent or actions in the military, we take care of that right away because you cannot tolerate it because of what we do in the mission of the military.  And if you can't work together, can't live together, it'll be tough to fight together.  And that's what we were about in supporting this nation and our friends and allies around the world.  So we focus on it.  When it raises its head, we deal with it right then, and deal with it aggressively.  Now, I do not think for a minute that there aren't people that come into the military that have racial issues, because the military is a microcosm of society.  Some of everything is, as well as we try to screen with various instruments to try to detect the kind of folks that we want to bring in, and to make sure that they are of the type and of the mindset and the behavior types that we would want to serve in the military.  Sometimes we miss one or two.  Sometimes, you know, it's like asking the person "have you done drugs or do you have a felony?"  Sometimes they'll say no.  And you get them into Basic Training, and you're getting ready to just before the security clearance you ask them one more time and they say, "Well, there's something I forgot to tell you."  They'll come clean.  Sometimes, you know, we bring our personalities, we bring aspects of our environment, we bring our thoughts, attitudes; some have been adjusted and modified; some may not.  Sometimes there may be someone comes that disguise it pretty well, but when we miss it and it raises its head, we deal with it.  And that's one of the things that I really like about the military.  And we have been pro-integration.  And I think we continue today along those lines.  I know we do.  And I believe, I know that there have been several commissions, and there are lot of studies, and a lot of folks saying that in the senior ranks we need more minorities.  I believe that there are programs in effect today, and I believe that we will see in the future more senior ranks of minorities in the military, in all the branches.
Story_ID: 33070
Speaker 1: Now, did you get a chance to meet General [Daniel] "Chappie" James or any of the other black heroes of the Air Force?
Speaker 2: General Chappie James, I never met.  But General Chappie James's son, Daniel Chappie James, Jr., I know well.  He is one of my mentors, one of my senior leaders that I admire immensely.  He lives right here in the area [Washington, D.C.], doing well.  I've had several lunches and several opportunities to chat with him and spend time with him.  I've never had the opportunity to sit down one-on-one with General Powell, but I've had the opportunity to meet him at several speaking venues.  But the current vice chief of staff of the Army is a personal friend, I know him.  The vice chief of staff of the Air Force that's been confirmed now is a personal friend.  He was the Air Force budget director before me.  I replaced him.  And we grew up in the finance community from babes up to this point.  So several of our current senior leaders and several of our retired senior leaders I know very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's okay to name them if you want to.
Speaker 2: The current Chief of Staff--Vice Chief of Staff of the Army is General Lloyd Austin.  He was the chief of staff at U.S. Central Command when I was the J8 U.S. Special Operations.  We were stationed together at MacDill.  And Lieutenant General Larry Spencer, who is--will become the next vice chief of staff of the Air Force, is a very good friend of mine, and we--we're professionals in those finance backgrounds, and I replaced him as Air Force budget director.  And our families are very good friends also.  We go back twenty-five years.
Story_ID: 33071
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, speaking of family, tell us something about your family today--well, before I ask you that, did your grandmother get a chance to see you achieve Officer status in the Air Force?
Speaker 2: She did.  She did.  My grandmother passed in 2000, and I was commissioned in 1978.  So she got to see me all the way, I believe, I was a Lieutenant Colonel when she passed.  So she did get to see me get promoted, get commissioned and promoted, you know, through the ranks to Lieutenant Colonel.  My mother just passed in 2006.  So she was at my pinning to One Star.  So she got to do witness that.  So they were both very proud as I was very grateful and thankful to them for their mentoring and their leadership and nurturing.  My grandfather passed before I even came on active duty, so he never, never saw it.
Speaker 1: Did some of the people that you grew up with in Trenton, North Carolina in that area, do they ever comment about you attaining the rank of--
Speaker 2: They do and they do it all the time.  There are several of my former classmates who, when we were growing up and graduating from high school, that believe that the best I would ever do is be in the military and knew I'll never be a lawyer or doctor or judge like some of them are, who now are retired judges and lawyers, and we're in contact with them frequently.  As a matter of fact, in Trenton, North Carolina, this year, there is a Jones High School reunion of all the classes, and they've asked me to come back as the guest speaker this Labor Day weekend and talk to all of them.  And some of them are in their eighties now.  They're going back--several classes back to the '50s (1950s), and Mr. Mills, that ninth-grade science teacher, who is one of the prominent morticians there in Kinston, North Carolina, is still alive, and he is the Committee Chairman that's heading this thing up.  And he's asked me to please come and speak to--agree to do that.  Several of my--one of my classmates is a retired state attorney in Austin, Texas, we're in contact with since we live in San Antonio [Texas] and he's sixty miles away.  Another one of my good high school friends is a retired judge in Newburg, North Carolina, who I talk to several times a month.  His son was actually in ROTC [Reserve Officer's Training Corps] at A and T [North Carolina A&T State University] Greensboro [North Carolina] when I commanded the Officer Accession Program.  So we have had some very close family ties in recent years.  And the son did not get commissioned, but he's serving on active duty in the Air Force now at Grand Forks Air Force Base, which was my first assignment as an enlisted person on active duty.  So we do a lot of mentoring with him as he expressed his quest to leave North Dakota and how bad things are.  I share with him, "But, it could be worse."  And you don't ever look how bad today is.  You think about what you can do to make tomorrow better for you and for society.
Story_ID: 33072
Speaker 1: Now, was Jones School named for a black educator?
Speaker 2: I don't know who that school was named after.  I got a phone call a couple of months ago from one of my classmates, and they had asked me, "Hey, if we could work renaming the school and renaming it after you, would you be opposed to it?"  And my answer was no.  But I haven't heard anything else about that, and I don't suspect that that will happen.
Speaker 1: I always ask that question, and I neglected to ask it earlier, but usually the black schools are named for someone who really sacrificed to found a school; I mean, usually, but then sometimes they're named for white benefactors, too, you know.  That's one thing about it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't know who--that's something that's part of research for me, though.  I'm going to find out.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about that--you have one son, correct?
Speaker 2: I have one son who is in the Air Force also.  He's on active duty.  He's a Lieutenant Colonel.  He attended Rider University and graduated with an undergraduate degree in Finance, played Division One Basketball for four years for Rider, and stayed on after undergraduate school and obtained his master's degree in Hospital Administration at Rider.  And I commissioned him with a direct appointment in the Medical Services Corps in 1989--yeah.  Let me see.  He's been in 16 years, yeah, about '89 [1989], I think it was I commissioned him in the Medical Services Corps.  So he is enjoying life.  He plans to stay on and retire.  He married a nurse who was in the Air Force at Lackland Air Force Base where our son was born (laughs).  His wife was serving as a nurse there in the hospital that he was born, as a matter of fact, in the same ward that he was born on.  And she is now on active duty out of the Reserves, and she works as a Nurse Management Professional for one of the medical companies here in town [Washington, D.C.].  But, she holds a degree in Nursing from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles], and she specialized in Neonatal Pediatric and Cancer Research Nursing, and also holds an MBA from the University of Phoenix in Business.  So they're both medical people; two grand boys, one eleven years old and one nine years old; both go to--attend school in Fairfax County [Virginia], Cherry Run Elementary School.  And our 11-year-old grandson is going to the sixth grade, and he was just elected as the Student School President of the student body of about 500 kids.  And I asked him, "What prompted you to do that?"  And he said, "Well, I want to be a leader like you and my dad and my mom, and I thought this would be a good way for me to learn leadership early on."  So he--we didn't even know that he was interested. So he decided to run for the Student President, did his own campaign, his own posters, ran his own little election campaign (laughs); and we asked his brother, "What did you think about that?"  And he said, "I told everybody in the third grade to vote for him."  So he was his little third-grade campaign manager.  But we're very proud of both of them.  And our son and daughter-in-law, and wish the best for them.  Our son loves the military.  When he finished grad school, he had a job offer from the hospital in West Jersey [New Jersey], and I asked him why he want to come in the military, and he says, "Because that's what I want to do as a profession."  I had no idea that he was even interested in the military.  As a matter of fact, I encouraged him to go civilian with a master's degree in Hospital Administration, because early on the income was a lot better as--in the private industry, civilian sector than it was as a Lieutenant and a Captain in military; but this is what he chose, and this is what he loves, and he's doing well.
Story_ID: 33073
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we always ask this question, and I don't want to let it slip pass.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: My hope for the African-American community is that we do a better of taking care of each other.  And when I say that, I mean mentoring each other; going back to raising the child as a village instead of allowing indications where the--both parents are in the home allowing the streets to educate children.  A child will become educated somehow.  It'll either happen through the schools, through the church, through the village, through the community, or it will happen in the home, or in the streets; they will get some education.  It may not be what we desire them to have, but they'll get educated.  And in those cases where they get the wrong education and they get mixed up with the wrong group, the wrong crowd, my hope and desire is that we will continue striving to do a better job as educating as a village and going back to some of those old values that were instilled in me, being raised and growing up in the country, and bring some of those to today, into some of our modern communities of today and tomorrow.  It isn't all bad.  It is not all bought out and sold out and bought out by the man or anyone else.  It's just they're good, wholesome values that will carry a long way.  My grandmother used to tell me, she would say, "Son, mother wit and honesty will carry you a long way.  Always do what's right, treat people the way you want to be treated, and don't take advantage of anyone because if you do the wrong thing, you will never succeed.  At some point in your life, somewhere along the way, it will come back to bite you.  So do what's right, be honest, play fare; and above all, integrity, integrity, integrity.  And most importantly, maintain a good, positive attitude," 'cause personally, I don't know of anyone that I want to be around with a bad attitude.  I know a lot of people with good, positive attitudes that I love being around.  I tell my grandsons and others that I--as I travel around and speak to different venues, that a bad altitude will equate to low attitude.  Bad attitude, bad luck.  Bad attitude, low altitude.  And, you know, and attitude is a personal choice that we all make.  No one makes us have a good or bad attitude.  We make ourselves have whatever we have and be whatever we be from an attitude perspective.  And if we elect to have a bad one, we ought to understand that we are negatively influencing those around us, and fewer people will want to be around us.  Folks don't want to be around you.  They don't want to mentor, they don't want to guide, they don't want to share experiences.  It's just not much good that come out of a bad attitude.
Story_ID: 33074
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No.  I can't think of anything.  We've talked a lot (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sure there's something, but I can't think of it right now.  Well, yeah.  There's one thing, one other thing that I just want to comment on.  As I look around us today, and look at some of our communities, I see young folks that tend to have less respect for the elderly.  That troubles me.  I believe that the elderly have a lot of wisdom.  They may not be formerly educated in some instances.  They not be the best than others who have some education.  But I believe that there are experiences and there are things that they have learned.  There's wisdom that they will be willing to share if we would only make ourselves available to learn from them.  A lot of folks don't want to pay attention to the elderly.  They see them as somebody that's old and out of touch and don't know and can't do much for them.  I don't share that view.  I don't share that view at all.  And I impress upon our grandsons, both my wife and I, and our son and daughter-in-law, that don't ever forget your roots and those that brought you here, and the ones that brought me here that brought you here.  There's a lot that we can learn from the elderly, and we ought to, first of all, be willing to help where we can; secondly, to be willing to learn from the wisdom that they have.  We can use it as we go into the future, and as we live the rest of our lives.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as someone that didn't have the best of social, economic, and educational environments growing up; but worked hard, played fair, and tried to better myself.  And as a result, tried to mentor and lead, train those as I became more successful, and bring them along.  And I want to be remembered as someone who rose above my situation and became relatively successful.  The way I explain it to my son and others, I say, "Look, don't ever feel good about yourself.  We're all (and we're ordinaries?), you know.  We're ordinary people that did extraordinary things that helped us become successful.  So that's kind of the way I want to be remembered.  As I related to you earlier, my legacy is what I leave behind, not what I take with me, and not what I've achieve personally, but what I've done as I've mentored and led others who are achieving extraordinary things today.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: It was great.  I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 33075
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Ready.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's Major General Mitchell and I, and that was in the Pentagon in November of last year just as I was informed that I was going to be inducted into the Educational and Training Command Order of the Sword, and Mitch is congratulating me on that upcoming induction.  This is a picture as I was about to retire in Senator Ed Cochran's office on Capitol Hill, congratulations (sic) on my many years of service.  And this is a picture of my wife, my oldest grandson and our daughter-in-law as she received her master's degree from the University of Phoenix.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  We need dates to the best of your knowledge on these.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was in 2011.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  And the previous?
Speaker 1: The previous was November--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  With the senator.
Speaker 1: November of 2011.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was December of 2011, and that's a dinner of the former Tactical Air Command Controller and leaders, folks that led--that mentored, and leaders that I worked over the years.  And this was December 2011.  This was early--I believe that was around Easter Sunday, 2011; and that's the Mitchells, General and Mrs. Mitchell, and my wife [Ida M. Flowers] and I.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was my two grandsons, and I believe that was--gosh, the youngest grandson looks like was about a year old there; so that must have been about eight years ago.  So it would have been the 2004 time frame.  And that's a picture of my mother, my wife, and a friend at my son's [Alfred K. Flowers, Jr.] graduation from Rider University, receiving his bachelor degree.  That's the oldest grandson.  That must have been about 2003 or two time frame.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  What's his name?
Speaker 1: His name is Alfred Kendell the Third, and he was about two years old there, so it would have been 2003.  This is--that's a picture of my son, Captain, as the Aide to the Commander of Kelly Air Force Base Air Logistics Center just before his wedding in 1998.
Speaker 2: You got it.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Mm-mm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a Christmas picture of my wife and I, and this must have been about ten years ago, so it would have been 2000-2002 time frame.  That's a picture of my uncle [Walter Roberts] that I grew up with, that I talked about.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Which one is he?
Speaker 1: He's the one right here to the left.  This is my grandmother [Lucy Rhodes Roberts] that raised me, and my mother [Annie Morrow Roberts Miller], and my wife and I.  So this is about twelve years old.  This was '98 (1998) time frame.  I'm swearing our son into the Air Force fifteen years ago, 1998.  That's a picture of me and all of my half-sisters on my father's side that I talked a little bit about those eight girls there.  I think that's seven of them there and a daughter-in-law; the oldest half-sister is deceased.
Speaker 2: This was 1985 in the Pentagon, myself and a coworker.  And that's the youngest--the oldest grandson in 2001 when he was born, just a baby.  This is a picture--this is Lieutenant General Larry Spenson (ph.) in the green shirt up front who was going to become the new Chief of--not Chief of Staff of the Air Force.  This was a going away dinner at their home in December of 2011.  And that's the uncle [Walter Roberts] that I grew up with.  We're at church at Harden (ph.) Chapel, and this was in April of this year, of 2012.  This was a year ago at Chateau Elan (ph.); Colonel Bruce Brown and General Harrison, both Retired Colonels.  One was a Judge Advocate General at AETC with me, and the other was a Deputy Director of Logistics.  That's a golfing trip at Chateau Elan.  This is a family photo with the Mitchells.  That was 2011 also.  This was a--this was in 2011.  It was a dining out, just before going to dining out. OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  That's you and your wife?
Speaker 1: My wife and I.  This is the Chief Master Sergeant AETC Command Chief.  This was November 2011.  He was informing me that I would be inducted into the Order of the Sword.  And this is the one that I mentioned earlier where Senator Cochran did a tribute to me on the floor of the Senate in November of '11 [2011].  This is a going away picture, November of '11 [2011], with Congress Bill Young, C. W. Bill Young from Florida.  Met him when I was serving at U.S. Special Operations Command in Tampa.  This is a going away from Education and Training Command from my boss, General Don Cook.  Now he had originally informed me that I had been selected for Brigadier General.  This was in 2003, in San Antonio, Texas.  Ken Hokovic (ph.), my first boss as an Officer at Moody Air Force Base, Georgia, and his wife, Carol.  This is my boss from the U.S. Special Command, General Doug Brown and his wife, Penny, and my wife and I at a Christmas Party in 2005.  And this is a picture of the Corporate Board or the Board of Directors for the Air Force Aide Society, for which I served as a member in my job as the Budget Director.  I'm right there.  This is a picture of Airman Flowers in 1966 at Grand Fork Air Force Base as a supply warehouseman.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  You don't have a picture of Mabel and Macy? (laughs).
Speaker 1: I don't have a picture of Mabel and Macy.  I didn't get pictures when they were alive (laughs).
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  That's it.  Thank you.
