Story_ID: 666067
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Cyrus Bernard Fulp [HistoryMaker C. Bernard Fulp], Cyrus, C-Y-R-U-S, Bernard, B-E-R-N-A-R-D, Fulp, F-U-L-P.
Speaker 1: Now is there a name behind the--I mean, a story behind the name, Fulp?  I--the first time I've ever heard of Fulp.
Speaker 2: It's a name that is found, I am told, in two parts of the country only.  Its origin comes from Moravia [Czech Republic], which is a very small company--country situated near Czechoslovakia [Czech Republic and Slovakia] and Germany.  Winston-Salem and, in fact, parts of North Carolina have large Moravian contingents.  So somewhere in the history, we acquired the name, Fulp, but its origins come from Moravia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, thank you.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 9, 1935, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Today, I am head of a software company.  We produce and distribute front office automation software.  The company is GoBiz Solutions [GoBiz Solutions Inc., Brighton, Massachusetts].  However, the majority of my professional career has been in commercial banking.  I started at Wachovia [Wachovia Bank and Trust Company; Wells Fargo and Company] and moved through a number of organizations, eventually founding a bank, Middlesex Bank and Trust Company in Newton, Mass [Newton, Massachusetts], which still operates today as a part of Eastern Bank.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is October 21--
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: --twenty sixteen [2016].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Boston, Massachusetts.  We're filming this at 54 Commonwealth Avenue in the Back Bay.
Story_ID: 666068
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands].
Speaker 1: All right.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Nothing significant.  I can't--I wouldn't say that I have one.
Story_ID: 666069
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Cyrus Fulp] side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Amanda Belle Murray Fulp [Amanda Murray Williams], A-M-A-N-D-A, Belle, B-E-L-L-E, Murray, M-U-R-R-A-Y, Fulp, F-U-L-P.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was born May [sic. April] 1900.  I'm not sure of the exact or can't recall at this sitting, the exact day of the month.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Gastonia, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them or what are the stories on that side?
Speaker 2: I can go back to her parents.  Her parents were Wesley Murray [Calvin Murray] and Mary Murray [Mary Davis Murray].  Wesley was, as it--well, it was the case with many people in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], worked in the tobacco factories.  As far as I remember, Mary did not work outside the home.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So they lived in town, in Winston-Salem (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They lived in town in Winston-Salem.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.  And, so did your mother talk about what it was like to grow up in Winston-Salem when she came along?
Speaker 2: Of course.  Winston-Salem, at that time, was a segregated city.  And she talked probably to some extent about some other things that were owned and operated separately by people of color, black people.  Safe Bus Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], for example, Safe Bus Company, I believe at that time, was the largest owned black bus company in the United States.
Speaker 1: And it's called the what now, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Safe Bus Company.
Speaker 1: Safe, okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: S-A-F-E Bus Company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It had companion transportation companies Twin City Cab [Twin City Cab Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and Camel City Cab company [Camel City Cab Incorporated, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  They operated exclusively in the black community but it--there was ownership.  And there was--the employees were all black, and it was a source of quick transportation and great pride.  There were other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's remarkable.  I don't think of another city that has, that can claim that.  That's the first time--well, the first time I heard it was from Togo West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.].  'Cause I guess, everybody from Winston-Salem pro- probably knows, but it's really remarkable for a bus company.  That's--
Speaker 2: It was a remarkable achievement at the time.  It has now been purchased, and is owned by others.  But it was, you know, something that Winstonians were really proud of, black Winstonians were really proud of.
Speaker 1: Well, since we're talking about it--maybe we should talk about it later.  But was it--did white people ride on the, on the Safe Bus Company buses?
Speaker 2: I can't remember seeing any white people riding on the bus.  As I said, a couple of seconds ago, the town was divided almost by Main Street with whites on one side, blacks on the other side.  For those blacks that worked in the majority white community, they would sometimes ride the white transportation company, white bus company.  But a direct answer to your question is I don't recall seeing white people on the black bus company.
Story_ID: 666070
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Amanda Murray Williams] have a chance to go to--fi- finish high school in--
Speaker 2: I am told she did.  I don't have documents, but I don't--she did not go beyond high school.  That was a family discussion, so I don't have records around that.  My father [Cyrus Fulp] did finish high school and had some college.  Again he didn't graduate, but he went further in his education than I believe my mother did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother talk about what her aspirations were when she was growing up?  Did she have a career in mind or did she, you know, you know, imagine herself just being a hou- a housewife or what?
Speaker 2: She talked more aspirations for children, she did not seek a professional career of her own.  Although her younger sister was, I think, the first person in the family--my aunt Ella [Ella Murray Whitworth] was the first person to get a college degree.  She was the youngest in the family and got more support and did complete her degree and taught for many years.  This type of support was not necessarily available to older members of my mother's family.  She worked, she did work in the tobacco factory.  And the aspirations that we talked about most were for her children.  Education was the way up and out for all of us, and all of the children in the family did go to college.  I think that she saw her aspirations more in that fashion than for herself.
Story_ID: 666071
Speaker 1: Well, let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give your--us--your father's full name and spell it, please?
Speaker 2: Cyrus Orren Fulp [Cyrus Fulp], C-Y-R-U-S, Orren, O-R-R-E-N, Fulp, F-U-L-P.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so you're almost a junior, except for the middle name, yeah.
Speaker 2: Almost.  I actually have a son, also named Cyrus [Cyrus Fulp, Jr.], so I'm sort of Cyrus [HistoryMaker C. Bernard Fulp] in the middle in my household with the original Cyrus.  My father said there wasn't going to be a big Cyrus or a little Cyrus in the family, so I was relegated to my middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  And what's your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 2, 1997 [sic.].  He was born in the Township of Belews Creek, B-E-L-E-W-S, Creek, C-R-E-E-K, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, all right.  So, all right.  So what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: And his parents--I know his father was Orren Churchman Fulp [Orren Fulp].  His mother was Latha Martin Fulp [sic. Amanda Lash Fulp].  Orren, you've heard me spell earlier.  Churchman is as it sounds, C-R-U-S-H-M-A-N [sic.].  Orren was an interesting personality.  He ran a fairly sizeable farm.  The money crop on the farm was tobacco.  At the time of his death, the total acreage of the farm was in the neighborhood of three hundred acres, which he distributed to his nine children.  The farm also produced for his family and other relatives a large portion of the things that they ate.  It produced, he produced corn and there were fruit trees all over.  He also at--toward the end of his life, contributed a portion of his land to build a church, Shiloh Church [Forsyth County, North Carolina], and a graveyard [Mount Sinai Cemetery, Belews Creek, North Carolina].  It is where he and his wife [sic. wives], my mother [Amanda Murphy Williams] and father, and two sisters [Olivia Fulp Hairston and Jean Fulp] are now buried.
Speaker 1: Is, so is Shiloh Church in--
Speaker 2: It's in Belews Creek, the Township of Belews Creek, which is a few miles outside of Winston-Salem [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that same for Gastonia [North Carolina]?  Is Gastonia near Winston-Salem?
Speaker 2: Gastonia is closer to Charlotte [North Carolina].  Gastonia is maybe seventy miles away.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they were a little but fur- further away?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, yeah, your grandfather sounds like quite a man.  He--three hundred acres of land, and I think I said when I came in, there must be a story about how he acquired three hundred acres of--'cause that's a high accomplishment.
Speaker 2: I wish I knew the story.  I truly don't.  I mean, it is an accomplishment.  We also--younger members of the family sold timber off the land for a while.  Timber and lumber is the industry that my father eventually spent most of his working life on.  There were huge oak and pine trees on the land, so in addition to the things I mentioned earlier, among tobacco there, there was some timber farming that occurred there also.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did your father--I guess he grew up on the farm?  Is that right?
Speaker 2: He grew up on the farm.  Like most of his brothers and sisters, they left for the city when they got the chance (laughter).  And, you know, he settled in Winston-Salem, which wasn't that far away, but we would go back to visit fairly regular only, but after high school, he went to the city and made his life there.
Story_ID: 666072
Speaker 1: Now did, did your father [Cyrus Fulp] serve in World War I [WWI] or--
Speaker 2: He--he did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was sort of at an age in between wars.  I should note at this point that my mother [Amanda Murray Williams] and father had four male children.  All four of us served in the [U.S.] military.  My oldest brother, William Leon Fulp [William Fulp, Sr.], served in the [U.S.] Army in Europe.  Theodore Calvin Fulp [Theodore Fulp] served in Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] in the Pacific Theatre.  My youngest brother, Jarvis [Jarvis Fulp], was a helicopter crew chief in Vietnam.  And I served in the [U.S.] Air Force with the service stations aircraft control and warning station 717 [717th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron], Tatalina [Tatalina Air Force Station, Alaska], Elmendorf, Alaska [Elmendorf Air Force Base, Anchorage, Alaska] and Joint Base Andrews [Andrews Air Force Base; Joint Base Andrews, Maryland].   I was discharged from Andrews, which is where Air Force One is kept.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know, I know World War I--your father would have been about, about twenty, I guess, when the war started?  Which was a draftable age but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It started what '15 [1915], '16 [1916], 1915, '16 [1916]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1915 [sic. 1914].
Speaker 2: So he would have been nineteen or twenty.
Speaker 1: Yeah, nineteen or twenty so, but we do know that World War II [WWII] was the (unclear) for U.S. government 'cause they didn't want black soldiers in the [U.S.] Army, but they didn't know how (laughter) do it without, you know.  They had po- political interests so they, I think they had assigned the black soldiers to the French Army when they got to Europe, you know, and it was another--
Speaker 2: Well, my oldest brother tells stories about, you know, comments made about black soldiers in Europe when, what--he was in, I think he was in an all-black unit.
Speaker 1: Now he would have been in World War II, right, your brother (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He would have been in World War II.
Speaker 1: Yeah.   Well, World War I was when they actually just assigned the black soldiers to the French Army, you know, until after the war was over.  It was--yeah.  But anyway it was, yeah, it wasn't the same kind of--
Speaker 2: It wasn't a pretty thing.
Speaker 1: No, no.  So anyway, so your father, so when--did he get a chance to--well, you said he did finish high school and had a little college, too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did not finish college (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: But he did finish high school.
Speaker 1: Now did he go to school in Winston-Salem [North Carolina], yeah?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So is that how he ended up moving to Winston-Salem?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 666073
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Amanda Murray Williams and Cyrus Fulp] met?
Speaker 2: I haven't heard it.  I'm (laughter)--I didn't think to pursue it at the time.  My older sister, who is sort of the family historian, Olivia [Olivia Fulp Hairston], unfortunately, is no longer with us, but I'm sure she would have.  I don't know the story of how they met.  I just don't--sorry.
Speaker 1: Did they sort of lived in the same neighborhood or did they go to the same church or--
Speaker 2: I'm making assumptions when I say that, but I would think it's living in the same neighborhood that was more the case than anything else.
Story_ID: 666074
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' looks, the way they walked, talked, their personalities, their sense of humor, their interests and talents, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My father [Cyrus Fulp] definitely.  He was more the sort of forward pushing of the two.  My mother [Amanda Murray Williams] had social skills.  My father was more industrious and had more of a sense of, I believe, of urgency about seeing things get done and (unclear) the children for it, so I don't think there's any question.  My re- physical resemblance, my behavior, I think, is much closer to my father than to my mother.
Story_ID: 666075
Speaker 1: You say you have like brothers.  How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: There were seven children altogether.  One [Jean Fulp] died at the age of sixteen.  Unfortunately, she had a brain tumor, but there were six other surviving children.
Speaker 1: Now can you name everybody from, I guess, the oldest to the youngest?
Speaker 2: William Leon Fulp [William Fulp, Sr.], oldest, Theodore Calvin Fulp [Theodore Fulp], Olivia Amanda Fulp [Olivia Fulp Hairston], me, Cyrus Bernard Fulp [HistoryMaker C. Bernard Fulp], Elma Delores Fulp [Elma Fulp Weaver], Jarvis Reginald Fulp [Jarvis Fulp].
Story_ID: 666076
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory was at a family reunion at my grandmother's [Fulp's maternal grandmother, Mary Davis Murray] house.  I think that's probably a photo of myself and a cousin [Gladys Whitworth] from that here, but it would--sort of the, you know, the noise and the celebration that went around family reunions would be my earliest memory.
Story_ID: 666077
Speaker 1: Now did you grow up in east Winston-Salem [East Winston, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was the neighborhood like and what was your house like and, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: My--the longest stay--we lived on Jackson Avenue, and I went to 14th Street elementary school [14th Street School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] that was one through eight at that time.  What I remember about that--and it truly was influential in forming what I believe is some habits and beliefs today.  Jackson Avenue between 12th [Street] and 14th Streets was an interesting mix of people.  At the 14th Street end of the street lived several college professors, Dr. Lewis [ph.] and her husband, John Lewis [ph.].  The O'Kelly family for whom a building [C.G. O'Kelly Library] is named on the campus of Winston-Salem State University [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  The head of the black YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] lived on that street, as did several teachers.  There were a large number of children a year or two older than me and a year or two younger than me living on Jackson Avenue.  And several of them have remained friends today and have gone on to some pretty significant careers.  Marie Solomon Williamson, for example, Marie went on to obtain a doctorate and was on the faculty at UNC Greensboro [University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina] and at Winston-Salem State at one point.  Alvin Little, Alvin lived directly across the street, the street from me.  Alvin and I played baseball together from the time we were seven until we were probably seventeen.  And he's somebody I see whenever I go back to Winston-Salem.  We reminisce about baseball games.  Alvin thinks that we could have gone higher in the baseball world than I believe we could.  I think we went as far as (laughter) we could go, but we have a lot of fun replaying ball games and enjoying Alvin.  Coleman Rader lives, R-A-D-E-R, lived a couple houses from me.  Coleman is remarkable for saying, when he was about twelve years old that he was going to be a pilot.  And that was not something that a lot of us said or thought about that during those times.  That would have been in the '40s [1940s].  As it turned out, Coleman spent twenty-six years in the [U.S.] Air Force, flew nineteen different kinds of planes and retired as a lieutenant colonel.  So I have very vivid memories of, you know, people on Jackson Avenue and I still reach for some of the things that, that we talked about and did during those days.
Story_ID: 666078
Speaker 1: The community in east Winston-Salem [East Winston, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was a very tight black community in terms of business and of the, I mean, the relationships of the people there.  From what I understand from--we interviewed Togo West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.] years ago, and I forgot what town he grew up in, but he spoke really, he spoke a lot about growing up and the kind of bonds that people had in Winston-Salem.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, again, the professional community there cooperated and worked together in a very unique way at that time.  I mean, there was a community of teachers.  There were several physicians and dentists who--most of us knew who the players were.  Togo's mother [Evelyn Carter West] was the music director in my elementary school, at 14th Street elementary school [14th Street School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  Togo's father [Togo D. West, Sr.] was a math teacher and assistant principal at Atkins High School [Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  He, in fact, was my geometry teacher.  In addition to Safe Bus Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] that we talked about earlier, there was Winston Mutual Life Insurance Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] run by the Hills brothers.  The--there were several funeral homes that--where the owners did pretty well and got involved in real estate matters.  Also of significance around Winston-Salem was the fact that in 1947, Winston-Salem elected its first black alderman, Kenneth R. Williams.  Williams went on to become, in addition to an alderman, to become president of Winston-Salem State University [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] at a longer time.  But as far back as 1947, Winston-Salem elected black people to the board of aldermen.  A few years ago, I, as I recall, four out of eight aldermen were African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, and Winston-Salem--now, you know, when you, when I hear stories about the South, you know, we--I grew up, you know, watching te- television and hearing about the voting right struggles in the South.  But they seem to be mo- mostly in the smaller communities, not in the larger ci- cities, like black people could vote in Memphis [Tennessee], they could vote in Atlanta [Georgia] and they could vote in Winston-Salem.  Right?
Speaker 2: That's true.  And as I said earlier, they actually voted in a black person.  The stories around the South or life around the South--in the larger cities, at the time I grew up, Winston-Salem was a city of around 120, 125,000 people.  And I believe the percentage of people, of African Americans was around 38 percent, so it was a fairly high representation there.  As we understood it, life in the rural areas, life in the mountains could be quite different.  But within the cities, R.J. Reynolds didn't want disturbances.  He wanted his tobacco factories to run smooth.  The (unclear) wanted their tobacco factories to run on time.  Piedmont Airlines [Piedmont Airlines, Inc.] didn't look for disruptions.  And Western Electric [Western Electric Company] was mak- wanted people that make telephones and spend money.  So the city was segregated, but the kinds of stories you hear about some parts of the rural South, Mississippi and other places, you know, were not part of the daily life around Winston-Salem.  It was a manufacturing driven town with the, some of the companies I named earlier, several very large banks, so the corporate community wanted things to remains stable.
Story_ID: 666079
Speaker 1: Now was Jackson Street [sic.] the--was that like the main street in--on the east side [East Winston, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I would say no.  I think that there were two streets that were more prominent on our side of town--14th Street which also had a number of professionals.  There were a few doctors, Dr. Malloy [Rembert Malloy] and others were there, the Catholic church, who wanted to expand its participation in the black community, actually built a church, St. Benedict's [St. Benedict's Catholic Church, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], a block from Jackson Avenue.  They ended up buying an entire two blocks, full city blocks, between 12th [Street] and 14th Street one block over.  And in time, they built an elementary school, St. Benedict's [St. Benedict the Moor School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and bought a couple old large mansions on 14th Street and opened St. Ann's Academy [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], which was a Catholic school for black girls at that time.  So 14th Street was a more prominent street in size, so was Cameron Avenue.  Cameron Avenue was actually where Atkins High School [Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was.  It was a street where several of the people who had done, black people who had done well financially bought or built houses.  So all, you know, Winston was sort of middle of the road.
Speaker 1: So was there a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean (unclear)--Jackson Avenue, sort of middle of the road.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there a black movie theatre in town when you--
Speaker 2: There were two black theatres that were predominantly African American.  I don't believe either one was owned by blacks, but it was--they catered to blacks--the Lincoln Theatre and the Lafayette Theatre.  They were located in downtown Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  The Lincoln Theatre was on Church Street between 3rd [Street] and 4th Streets.  The Lafayette was on 4th Street just off Church, and this was an area that blacks called the block.  It was, this was the 125th Street of Winston-Salem.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's on 14th, you said?  Is that--
Speaker 2: No, no, this would be downtown (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's on--
Speaker 2: The 14th was residential.
Speaker 1: This would be downtown, okay.
Speaker 2: Church Street is commercial.  Church Street is downtown, where the theatre--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this would be on Church Street?
Speaker 2: This is on Church Street.
Speaker 1: All right.  This is the block.
Speaker 2: This is the block.  The block had the two theatres.  It had a bunch of greasy spoons, a pool room.  And it is where Safe Bus Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] turned around to go back to its roots back into the, like it will go from the African American communities downtown and then turn around and go back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The block was where, on Saturdays and Sundays, blacks went to see and be seen (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now that's a common--in every town, that seems to be, you know, the custom in those days, you know, to dress in your best on the weekend and go to the barbershop and get that fresh haircut and your shoes shined and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And all--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And all of it was right there on the block, along with the theatres and, you know, ice cream shop and a pawn shop.  But no question about it, you wanted to clean up and go to the block on the weekends.
Story_ID: 666080
Speaker 1: Now where'd you start school?  You said it was 14th Street School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] or was it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 14th Street School.  I started just before I was six.  I started in October of the year that I would turn six.  I was five years old when I started school at 14th Street School.
Speaker 1: Now when you started school, did you, had you had any preschool or anything, or could you read already or any of that?
Speaker 2: There were books around the house, but there was no--I had had no preschool.  Actually, the first grade was one of the things that I remember best in my life.  I had a very pretty teacher, got upset when she got married (laughter).  But, no, we started right into the first grade.  There was no preschool.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So this is--the 14th Street School was an all-black school, right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --supported by the local, I mean, tax dollars but--
Speaker 2: Su- supported by the local tax dollars.
Speaker 1: But segregated--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --black teachers, black students.
Speaker 2: Black, black teachers, black administrators, black janitors.  It was an all-black school.  There were probably four schools, elementary schools like that in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] at that time, but 14th Street was all black teachers, all black administrators, all black students.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, well, I guess your first grade teacher was your favorite tea- teacher, I guess, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Well, I--she was one of my fav- I had a couple along the lines, a couple teachers that I remember being in grade school.  I also remember my eighth grade teacher, Doris Jenkins [ph.], we called her, she could teach, she was kind of--but in the--although this was one through eight in the seventh and eighth grades, we rotated in order to get those people who were going into academic programs accustomed to the high school.  And Doris Jenkins introduced us to literature above the levels that we had previously experienced.  She was also a disciplinarian and one who focused, as you might have heard in some other cases, on certain--of matters of manners and protocol.  Doris was, she was, she was a power, she was an influence.
Story_ID: 666081
Speaker 1: Now what were you interested in, in school [14th Street School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and what was your personality like when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: In grade school, this was the time when--a few years after Jackie Robinson came along.  And as I mentioned earlier, we played a lot of baseball.  I wanted to be Jackie Robinson (laughter).  So we spent a lot of time when not in the academic part of the school around the 14th Street recreation center [14th Street Community Center, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and playground [14th Street Park, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  It was a large area.  It was, it was for many of us, the place that we spent summer vacations and where we learned our sports skills.  It had, in addition to the usual baseball, basketball, there were tennis courts.  There was a swim- swimming pool.  And it was again a place where particularly, you know, it was a good deal of male bonding.  We formed teams there fairly early in life, and I played with some of those guys for as long as ten years.  And, so fond memories.  We had some good coaches and, you know, we won games and felt pretty good about, you know, how things were going.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were like eleven when Jackie Robinson broke into the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball] I believe?
Speaker 2: Eleven, twelve, somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1947--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and okay.  So, now was--I know in those days Joe Louis was also a major influence.
Speaker 2: We listened to Joe Louis on the radio (laughter) and cheered for him, for him to win, yes.  My father [Cyrus Fulp] and I would listen to him together on the radio, yeah.
Story_ID: 666082
Speaker 1: So your father [Cyrus Fulp] worked for the--R.J. Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was it?
Speaker 2: No, he actually was--he worked in the lumber busi- --
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) of the Snyder Lumber Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  My mother [Amanda Murray Williams] worked for the tobacco industry.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So they both worked when you were growing up then?
Speaker 2: For a while, yes, my mother didn't work, didn't--I mean, there were a number of children.  She didn't work all the time, but when she could--did--yes, so both of them did work.  There was an interesting thing about Winston.  There were a number of two income families which is on how some of East Winston [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] changed and came about.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So did you work when you were, when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I got a paper route when I was thirteen, so I delivered the Winston-Salem Journalist [sic. Winston-Salem Journal] and, oh, I did that for about three years.  I also worked summers.  I actually had a job as a dishwasher for Western Electric [Western Electric Company] for a little while so, yes, I did work growing up.
Story_ID: 666083
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or anything like that in--?
Speaker 2: I, yeah, I--not over an extended period.  I was in Boy Scouts for a couple of years.  I guess I concentrated more on sports once I got to be around twelve or thirteen.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I had a clue that they might have a good scouting program because of Togo West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.].  He talked about it at length.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a number of scouting programs.  I just--my crew gravitated more toward the sports, to the playground for baseball, football, basketball.
Speaker 1: So you played--what position did you play in baseball?
Speaker 2: I played more third, I played third base and catcher.  I played a little outfield.  In high school and college [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], I--actually in college, I played more catchers than any other position.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  You played football, too, right?
Speaker 2: I played football in high school.  I made the team originally as a defensive back.  In the second year, I played more.  I played offense and defense in the second, didn't play a lot of offense the first year but played a little of both the second year.  Big moment in the--when I was fifteen, we had a crosstown rival, Carver High School [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  Carver was actually in the county [Forsyth County, North Carolina] just outside of Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  But we played our homecoming game in Bowman Gray Stadium [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  And we would have, you know, twelve, fif- twelve, fourteen thousand people in the stands, and at the age of fifteen, standing on the goal line, we'd kick off and it was pretty, pretty big day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So wait a minute now.  I missed this.  Now what did you do within that game?  Did you--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) We won the game, the first game.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't score any (unclear).  In this particular team, I played more defensive halfback--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --than anything else, but I did run back kickoffs, so I just, you know, I didn't score a touchdown but had to do when a kickoff.
Speaker 1: And you were pretty fast, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, in those days, I could run well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you didn't play any basketball.  Is that true or did you?
Speaker 2: I--recreational basketball, I played for the Atkins High School Camels [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and there were a few trophies on the wall.  Most of the players were five, six inches taller than me (laughter), so I can remember Coach Cary, Coach Sam Cary [Samuel E. Cary] saying, you know, if you're shorter than me, don't come out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Actually, he told the students that?
Speaker 2: He actually told the students that.
Speaker 1: And, of course, well, Atkins High School went--didn't they win a state championship one year?
Speaker 2: They did.
Speaker 1: When you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They did.  Maybe two championships.  There certainly was at least one.  I'm not quite sure I remember all of them, but they won the state basketball championship--
Speaker 1: Now how was that done because I know in some states--I know in Ohio and Indiana, at a certain period of time, the black schools weren't allowed to play the white schools--
Speaker 2: We didn't play--this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) until the early '50s [1950s], I think they started playing.
Speaker 2: Well, late '50s [1950s] maybe--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because this would have been '56 [1956] maybe or so.  We played all-black schools.  We did play, again, I said a pretty high level.  We played a couple of schools out of state.  Even in football, we played--I traveled to Martinsville, Virginia as a member of the football team.  We played against Maggie Walker [Maggie L. Walker High School; Maggie L. Walker Governor's School for Government and International Studies] in Richmond [Virginia].  And in basketball, we played against at least one team from D.C. [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, we--they played at a high level but was--these were all-black teams.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So your championship was like--did they have like, a state college championship or something like that or what?  What was it--
Speaker 2: It was just a state championship.  We knew it was all-black players.  Again, it was, it was segre- it was a segregated world, and there were black everything and white everything.  It was just separate.  You've heard the phrase separate and equal but, you know, how with the equality, the lack of equality it was.  It was, it was separate.  There were--let me be clear about that.  We played all-black schools, and there was a separate black championship each year.
Story_ID: 666084
Speaker 1: Now what was your family's relationship to the church?  Did you have a, was there a family church or was that, or was that important?
Speaker 2: Mount Zion [Mount Zion Baptist Church, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was the family church.  My mother [Amanda Murray Williams] and sisters were much more prominent in it, than the male families.  They did--there were (unclear).  But even until very recently, Mount Zion was the family church.
Speaker 1: Is this a Baptist--
Speaker 2: It is a Baptist church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  If I had a dollar for every Mount Zion Baptist church (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, Mount Zion was a powerhouse and a community with a--at that time, a minister, Reverend Dr. Kelly O.P. Goodwin [Kelly Oliver Perry Goodwin], who was a man with a voice that didn't need a micro- megaphone.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, yeah.  And, you know, they--Kenneth Williams [Kenneth R. Williams] was a minister, too.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I'm not--I don't recall him having a church [sic.].  He was chaplain at the college [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] before moving into other areas of administration.  Yes, he was a minister.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it says here, he was a minister at First Institutional Baptist Church [United Metropolitan Missionary Baptist Church, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  Does that ring a bell?
Speaker 2: No, no, it doesn't ring a bell.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, he was the one we mentioned earlier as the first--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --black alderman in the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --city councilman in--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Winston-Salem [North Carolina].
Story_ID: 666085
Speaker 1: So when you were coming along then, did you, did you--were you considering a career in business or was--were you attracted to that as you were, you know, in high school?
Speaker 2: The answer is yes.  We weren't encouraged to do a lot in business because the administration didn't see that as being an open pathway to futures for many--a number of us.  I mean, this is again in the early '50s [1950s] in high school.  I can recall the conversation along those lines.  Many of the professionals at that time were teachers, nurses, social workers.  There weren't a lot of blacks in sales or marketing or operations in the businesses around Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  And the black businesses that existed employed family members to a large extent and some clericals, others.  We were encouraged to look at careers either in academia or government.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you, were you a good student in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was a good student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did very well in, in some of the courses that were designed for the academic track for people in my school.  And Latin, geometry, physics, I did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you were on the college track.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I know a lot of high schools in those days and even, maybe today, too, they have a, they had a business track, you know, but you weren't involved in that in high school?
Speaker 2: No, Atkins [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] had three designated tracks at that time.  They're--the--it was very direct, maybe somewhat more direct than we would be today in terms of how it designated students for assignments, 9-1, 10-1, 11-1, 12-1; 9-1 and 9-2 were designated as being on the college track.  And you were, in that case, required to take Latin and then three or four courses in sciences and three years of math.  There was a trade course and a general course that probably would be closer to what you referred to, but there was an academic track.  And some of the (unclear) is that, you know, upon examination, Atkins thought it had--its academic track was competitive with some of the white schools.  I mean, you know, you can make your own judgments about that.  But they did have, without question, an academic track and they did require that if you're in that track, I mean, you did, you, you were required--not French--but you studied Latin for the first two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's when--yeah, at one time, Latin was one of the major languages in high school--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --if not the major one, you know.  Everybody took Latin.
Speaker 2: And everybody talked about that as being, you know, other languages being derivative from that but Latin--
Speaker 1: And it's strange today that, you know, nobody takes Latin in school anymore.
Speaker 2: I don't--is it spoken anywhere (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) In ancient history classes I guess, maybe.
Speaker 2: I guess it's valuable if you're an attorney or a physician.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: But in those days, there were, there was a Latin, Latin teachers in every high school.
Story_ID: 666086
Speaker 1: Who were some of your favorite teachers in high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and what's--what are some of the stories?
Speaker 2: Well, you and I mentioned and talked earlier about Big House Gaines [Clarence E. Gaines].  The woman who was not then but who later became his wife, Clara Berry Gaines--Latin, and she was one of my favorite teachers.  I liked her.  There were a couple English teachers that I remember, Edna Gamble Scales [Edna Chavis].  We were required, being in the academic track, to read an essay or short story, something during the weekend and write an es- an essay on Friday.  And I remember she was one of the people who could sort of make some of the stuff come alive and, you know, be of interest to me at that age.  Togo West, Sr. [Togo D. West, Sr.], Togo West, Sr. was my geometry teacher.  And, so, you know, he--well, it was geometry and a little bit of trig [trigonometry].  I remember, you know, that class very well and, you know, it's one of those things.  I guess, what, if you do fairly well, you remember them better than (laughter) if you don't do so well (unclear).  So I remember Togo as being one of my stronger teachers in alge- in geometry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you, so you int- you intended to go to college and it was expected that you would go, right?
Speaker 2: Well, my oldest brother, William Leon [William Fulp, Sr.], who I mentioned earlier, had actually finished high school at sixteen.  He had gone away to--call it the A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  And he was, at that time, on the faculty at A and T, so all of the--my other brother [Theodore Fulp] was coming back from Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].  He was going to school on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  So at that point, there was, there were indications that, yes, I would go on to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So in terms of where you went, did you get cou- what kind of counseling did you get?  Was it primarily from your older brother or--
Speaker 2: It was primarily from my family, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your family, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 666087
Speaker 1: I have to ask you this.  Did--what role did Winston-Salem College [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University] play in the life of the black community in Winston-Salem [North Carolina]?  Was there a lot of--did they hold like public events there?  Did nationally known speakers come there and talk to the community, or was it, was it a real, you know, vibrant part of the community or was it just like, this is the college and this is the town, you know?
Speaker 2: It was, I believe, closer to the latter description.  It did not hold major big time events at that time.  It was not the size then that it is today.  It's five times as large today as it was when I went there.  It did always have a strong basketball and track program.  And, so there was some noto- not notoriety, some good publicity and exchange along those lines.  But insofar as national speakers in those days, not much of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know some of the, even the smaller black colleges [HBCUs] would bring in, I mean, noted black people from, you know, Marian Anderson might come and sing there or someone--
Speaker 2: This was a state--
Speaker 1: --one of the political people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) this was a state supported school that it (laughter), it--
Speaker 1: So, okay.  So, and tell--flesh that out for us. What does that mean in terms of--what happens there?
Speaker 2: Well, it meant that in that time, it was almost entirely reliant on revenues from the state.  It did not have an endowment.  It didn't have wealthy graduates that would send money in, so programs were limited because of the limitations on funds from the state.
Speaker 1: And I suppose the political tone of what goes on, went on there was under the control of the state to an extent, right?  I mean--
Speaker 2: How do you mean that?
Speaker 1: Well, like, I guess in the 1960s, Felton Clark [Felton Grandison Clark] got in trouble at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] because the students, you know, boycotted some of the businesses in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  And, you know, and the state clamped down on him 'cause they made, they gave him an ultimatum to get that under control, or we're going to close the place down.  I mean, and there are other stories like that where the state, wherever, it's Alabama or Georgia or wherever, you know, exercises its control on not just the colleges--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but on the high schools.  And it's a white inspector that comes and walks around and looks in, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, the student activism came a few years after I left.  What you're referring to was probably more implicit, implicit than explicit.  I don't know of instances where there were, there was open and overt actions along those lines.  And that may be because the school had a fairly limited number of courses that it offered at that time, and it stayed pretty well within that.  The student activism came in the middle '60s [1960s], a few years later, after I left.
Story_ID: 666088
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What I'm suggesting you could--tell me, what your take is that they might--the state might be concerned about who spoke, you know, at--on the campus if--'cause campuses are always, are always--like the convocations at Atlanta U [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and other places are--would all be platforms for somebody like Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] to speak or somebody that had, you know, a person like J. Weldon Johnson [James Weldon Johnson], or I mean, back that, way back in the old days that's where prominent black spokespeople would speak to the community about issues.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know how controversial--I mean, I actually was (unclear) speaking at the most recent convocation at Winston-Salem [Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  So, and we talked about adventures in banking which is fairly stable.  I don't remember again that being overt, it probably may have been discussed at a different level behind doors.  It didn't become sort of open discussion around campus.  What was interesting, though, is that when I was in college [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], veterans were returning from Korea.  And several of my college classmates had concerns around the types of things that you're not raising.  One of them, specifically, (unclear) complained.  He said, "You know, I spent eight years in the [U.S.] Navy or went around the world six times fighting for this country.  And I still can't go to UNC [University of North Carolina; University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina]."  So it was in the early and middle '50s [1950s], where you did have returning veterans from Korea who were going to school on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], and a number of them were pretty bitter about having put their lives on the line for the country and having restrictions on them when they got back here.
Story_ID: 666089
Speaker 1: I got kind of jumped ahead but when, so when--you chose to go to Winston-Salem [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  Now when you graduated, did you, did you graduate with any kind of honors or anything from Atkins [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: From Atkins?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: With honors, nothing--not with distinction.  I wasn't the top person in the class.
Speaker 1: You weren't the valedictorian or anything like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did, what did you see yourself doing, you know, with a college degree?  What did you see yourself be- becoming at that point?
Speaker 2: I guess at--in my high school yearbook, I listed philosopher, which we dis- sort of discussed.  That was what I was going to be, which in our street corner discussions, a philosopher would be the highest form of teaching.  I believed that I would have gone on to become a college teacher is--or some early thoughts around there.  If I'm allowed to jump ahead, that's a, that's a real big transition point for me because what did happen was that I performed pretty well academically in college.  And I was elected to Who's Who Among American Students in American Universities, Colleges and Universities [sic. Who's Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges].  So I also participated in student government there.  And as I said, played on the baseball teams, I was reasonably well known around the campus and had gotten to know and be known by some professionals in the community.  In 1964, I got a phone call, this was after graduate school [University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut], from Roy Phillips and Roland Hayes, who were manager and assistant manager, respectively, of Wacho- of a branch of Wachovia Bank and Trust Company [Wells Fargo and Company].
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute.  We don't want to go that far yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) We don't want to skip completely over college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: So, but, all right.  I didn't know that's what you were getting ready to do.
Story_ID: 666090
Speaker 1: You have to tell us something about college now 'cause this is Winston-Salem State University [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  And this is--you're in college in the early '60s [1960s] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifties [1950s].
Speaker 1: --fifties [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Fifty-three [1953] to '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Fifty-three [1953] to '57 [1957], okay, all right.  Now you're at Winston-Salem, pre-Earl "Pearl" Monroe [Earl Monroe], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's when he still--he's behind you.  He's young (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's a few years after me but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we were--Winston-Salem was still dominant in basketball.  We had, we won a few championships in the '50s [1950s].  We had several NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] players on there.  In fact, one of the co-captains, (unclear) played for the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters] after he left Winston-Salem State.  So also in school at that time, there were two other well known athletes, Elias Gilbert.  Gilbert competed for the Olympics in the hurdles.  He was finally beat out by--I can't remember his name from NC- NC Central [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], but he was a nationally known athlete.  The other one was Eugene Walcott [Louis Walcott], now known by the name Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan].  Farrakhan was only there one year while I was there, but in addition to being on the shovel relay team, which I believe won--held a record in the Penn Relays for a while.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's significant, yeah.
Speaker 2: That is significant.  Gene, at that time, also recorded calypso music.  I have heard recordings of Hold Him, Joe, My Donkey Wants Some Water ['My Donkey Want Water (Hold Him Joe)'] by him.  I, you know, he was--on campus, he was a studious person, ran track, played music, and he didn't come back one year.  And, now we know, you know, that he has a different life.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he joined the Nation of Islam at some point and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he's from Boston [Massachusetts] and--where we currently are, right?  That's where he grew up, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When he, yeah.
Speaker 2: He grew up in Boston where we're currently filming this.  And he came down with, with--I mean, at Winston-Salem at the time, there were a number of students from Boston.  Jeep Jones [Clarence "Jeep" Jones], Griffith [ph.], who was also on the same track team with Gene, also came down from Boston.  So a number of people attended school at Winston-Salem from Boston at that time.
Story_ID: 666091
Speaker 1: At the time that Eugene Walker [sic. Eugene Walcott], who became [HistoryMaker] Minister Louis Farrakhan was in school [at Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], had--would you have guessed that he would have had become like a proud national spokesman, you know, for a Muslim org- organization?  Now that's probably a stretch, rea- really a stretch, but did--would you guess that he would become a national leader?
Speaker 2: Absolutely not.  I mean, there were a lot of other people that I would have thought would have been activists.  I mean, as I knew Gene, and we would see each other on the athletic fields, he was a quiet, studious person.  He was a very accomplished track man.  And the rest of his time, he spent on his music.  I mean, as mentioned earlier, he recorded calypso songs, but he was also an accomplished classical violinist.  So I never, it would never have occurred to me that he would become a leader in a national movement like that.  It just--to me, it wasn't obvious at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, who else is in school with you at the time that you remember?  Any- anybody else that kind of stands out that we might know now?
Speaker 2: Well, locally, Jeep Jones, Clarence "Jeep" Jones, who became deputy mayor here in Boston [Massachusetts].  And Jeep was a senior when I was a freshman.
Speaker 1: And how did get his name, Jeep?
Speaker 2: He was fairly short for a basketball player, and they said he drove like a jeep (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), that'll work.
Speaker 2: That'll work.
Story_ID: 666092
Speaker 1: So what was your major in college [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I actually did--and my undergrad major was in education.  My second degree from the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Connecticut] was also in education.  I really didn't get into the business world until I went to the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] later--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, all right.  Now let's get you to graduation in college here first--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --before we get you there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, okay, so you're majoring in education?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was your intent to become a school teacher?
Speaker 2: I don't know that that ever really excited me that much.  My thoughts were to go on to graduate school and to work at the college level if I was going to stay in education.
Story_ID: 666093
Speaker 1: Now did you have any, any role models at Winston-Salem [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] in that regard in terms of some- someone who's an administrator that you admired?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a teacher that, not only did--mentored me, but we became friends later, the Reverend Dr. Joseph Patterson, our professor of English and philosophy.  He actually christened my three children [Deanna Fulp, Rachael Fulp Cooke and Cyrus Fulp, Jr.], but he was someone who took an interest in me, always talked about hare running with the hounds while hanging with the hare--no, running with the hare while hanging with the hounds.  But he was a major influence in terms of my interest in continuing education and just in life in general.  He was a very strong influence, powerful influence in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Any other teachers that really stand out when you were in college?
Speaker 2: Interestingly enough, the other teachers that would have been sort of close to the top was--and also an English teacher.  English literature had some attraction with it.  Daisy Balsley, she had a flair for making literature come alive and, so she got me interested in reading Camus [Albert Camus] and Richard Wright and a few people like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Richard Wright was taught in school 'cause I was just getting ready to ask you if there were any black authors taught in college.
Speaker 2: While the only prominent black author that, you know, if--stepping back here, we sort of skipped over this.  One of the things about my high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] is that in the academic program, there is that I did take a semester of black history in high school.  But moving back to the question that you raised, the only prominent black author that I remember in college was Richard Wright.  Ellison [Ralph Ellison] came later.
Story_ID: 666094
Speaker 1: Now did, did you join a fraternity in--
Speaker 2: Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Dog number one, 1955.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, so, you know, you're on a baseball team.  Did you play, did you play some football in college [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], too, or did you--
Speaker 2: No, no, didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: No football in college.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But baseball and you were active in a fraternity.  Any other clubs or organizations--
Speaker 2: Only other thing, I was treasurer of my class for three years--not much in the way of clubs beyond that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Class trea- treasurer is significant considering you become a banker (laughter), so I guess it's a step towards it.
Speaker 2: Being class treasurer was not heavy lifting (laughter).  We didn't have--the class dues were not significant.
Story_ID: 666095
Speaker 1: So you graduated in '57 [1957], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, oh, you didn't tell us much about Big House Gaines [Clarence E. Gaines] now.  Was he a major figure when you were there?
Speaker 2: Big House was a major figure.  I mean, he was basketball coach.  And Winston-Salem [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] was then, as now, a powerhouse in basketball, so House was like today, like coaches, they probably--House was probably better known than any of the college presidents for a while outside the--he was, he was a well known and highly regarded figure.
Story_ID: 666096
Speaker 1: I have a note here that Doc- Dr. Atkins was an influence too--is that--
Speaker 2: Dr--Dr. Atkins--there are, there are a couple of Dr. Atkins affiliated with the school.  The father and the son, you know, founding of a college at that time and to build it from a one room building with twenty-five students to a university today with many, many majors, international programs and more than five thousand students is a hell of an accomplishment.  So, yes, and his son followed him who, (cough) excuse me, he was president when I was there.  Again a man (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is--the president when you were there was Francis--
Speaker 2: Francis, that, that's, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Loguen Atkins, and his father was Simon Green [Simon Green Atkins].
Speaker 2: Simon Green, Simon was founder.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was your high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] named for Simon Atkins?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So they have like a long, strong history as educators and that.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some people compared Simon with Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, and his son is Francis Loguen Atkins who was the president of Winston-Salem [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] when you were there.
Story_ID: 666097
Speaker 1: Now '57 [sic.] is when the Montgomery Bus Boycott is making national news, you know, and some students, I think, in--are not too many students are involved at this point.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah, mostly--
Speaker 2: They were trying to get graduating.  Now (unclear) the students, that came somewhat later.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause three years after you graduated, the students at North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University] made national history with the sit in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Greensboro [North Carolina] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the Winston-Salem [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] people came a couple of days later.
Story_ID: 666098
Speaker 1: So when you graduated in '57 [1957], had you already picked a graduate school?  I mean, were you on the way to graduate school or were you--
Speaker 2: Well, I had thought about it but--[U.S.] Air Force, I spent some time in the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you joined the Air Force in 1974 [sic.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  And did you stay in the states or did you have to leave or what?
Speaker 2: I spent some time in Alaska.  I was assigned to, at one point to an aircraft control and warning unit [717th Aircraft Control and Warning Squadron].  It's basically a tunnel carved into the side of a mountain [Tatalina Air Force Station, Alaska].  I spent some time at El- Elmendorf Air Force Base [Anchorage, Alaska] which is the northernmost base close to Russia.  So the time outside the country I spent was in Alaska.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what were you doing in the Air Force in those days?
Speaker 2: I was assigned to Air Weather Service [Air Force Weather Agency], which supports mainly air operations.  So it was weather observations, radar observations with weather support for aircraft operations.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you were in the Air Force for, what '57 [1957] to '59 [1959] or was it longer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I--actually, '58 [1958] to '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were in the Air Force when--were you in the Air Force when Gary Powers was shot down over Russia (laughter).
Speaker 2: I was in Alaska when he went down.  I--yes.  If you want to know what a real alert, a heart stopping alert--yes.  We went on full red alert when Gary (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is Francis Gary Powers, a U.S. pilot flying a U-2 spy plane [Lockheed U-2], which achieved tremendous altitude and supposedly flow- flew above the radar, right, on the Russian radar system, actually crashed in Russia, you know, for some reason, and it made an international incident and everything.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So I'm just letting anybody that's watching this know.
Speaker 2: Anybody that's watching it, and he was captured.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Long discussion about what he should have done, might have done here, but it became a huge international incident.  And even in later years, when he was swapped for someone else [Rudolf Abel] to come back and forth but, yeah, that--at the time he was shot down, I mean, we were put on full alert which, at that point, you know, missiles were pointed at each other.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  In those days, like Alaska, as it is now, a common destination for Air Force personnel to ban--man those places in in Alaska.
Speaker 2: It's--Alaska is, as Sarah Palin said, yeah, it's not too far from Russia (laughter).
Speaker 1: She might not be able to see it but--
Speaker 2: She might not be able to see it, but with radar, you certainly can see it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right.  So this is, yeah, this is serious business.
Speaker 2: This is serious business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, now, were you, did you take ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] when you--
Speaker 2: No, no, I was an enlisted man.
Speaker 1: So you were an airman, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did--you must have risen to the rank of, what the top, the equivalent of a top sergeant or something, right?
Speaker 2: I was again, I was a specialist on that.  I declined.  I had an opportunity to go to Officer Training School.  At that point, I wanted to get back into the ed- my education regiment.  And I would have had to commit to more years than I was willing to commit to, so I chose to pull the zipper and get out.
Story_ID: 666099
Speaker 1: Now were you married or anything by this time?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was a single person.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So when you came out, what did, what did you do?  Did you come back to Winston-Salem [North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: I, no, I had earlier applied to several schools.  And I had admission to several programs--into a graduate program--doctoral programs going in so I was discharged at Andrews [Andrews Air Force Base; Joint Base Andrews, Maryland] in August of '62 [1962].  I entered the University of Connecticut, Storrs [Connecticut] in September.
Speaker 1: Storrs, okay.  All right, and what was your--it's to get a degree in education, a master's (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was go- I was going for a doctorate in education and administration.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what they call an Ed.D. or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so what happened?  Did you like it or--
Speaker 2: I don't think my expectations were any different than what I found.  There were some changes in family situation, so that coupled with--this was the time when things really were happening in the cities around the country.  This is '63 [1963] now.  So I took a master's degree.  I actually went to work as a teacher for one year.  And then I got the call to go into banking.
Story_ID: 666100
Speaker 1: So how did that come about?  So you're teaching, you're--are you a high school teacher or administrator or what?
Speaker 2: I'm--I'm actually spending most of my time as a coach.  But teaching at the junior high school level when, as we started to say earlier, I got, I got that call from Wachovia [Wachovia Bank and Trust Company; Wells Fargo and Company] that they were looking to expand their business with blacks around Winston-Salem [North Carolina] and that they were going to initiate a management training program to expedite that process.  They had a branch that was essentially catering to blacks that was on Church Street in downtown Winston-Salem.  It was managed by Roy Phillips and Roland Hayes, who were both graduates of Winston-Salem State [Winston-Salem Teachers College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  We had known each other.  We'd all known each other from the neighborhood.  And their wives, Barbara [Barbara K. Phillips] and Barbara [Barbara Spaulding Hayes] were both my classmates in finishing Winston.  So when Wachovia announced that it wanted to expand the business and was going to seek a management trainee to expedite this process based on, you know, what they'd known about me academically and otherwise, I got a phone call from Roy and Roland.  And they explained what Wachovia intended to do.  I met with the head of HR [human resources] at Wachovia a couple of days later--a man named C. Eugene Looper.  He was a Ph.D. in psychology.  So Dr. Looper painstakingly explained to me that Wachovia could teach me banking and finance, provided other things were equal, and you could guess what he might have meant by that.  But then he asked me if I would take a battery--if I was willing to take a battery of tests and I did.  It was four or five hours, as I recall, invited me to go to lunch.  I did that.  So when we came back from lunch, he excused himself and went in to look at test evaluations.  And he came back, and I got another little talking to about Wachovia's success relied to a large degree on its selection of management talent.  And he offered me a position, and I took it.  Roy and Roland had known about or had expected that this was the traditional management training program that the guys and gals from Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] and UNC [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] and Wake Forest University [Wake Forest College; Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] went through.  But as it turned out, they telescoped the program.  They truncated it a bit.  I spent my time analyzing financial statements, looking at structuring installment loans, learning how to secure loans with collateral, whether it be real estate or automobiles.  And within a few months, I was given loan approval authority and a desk.  This surprised my colleagues.  I mean, ordinarily this program is much longer but it--a part of it had been cut out, and I was going to be in this fairly specialized function.  So I went to work at Wachovia.
Story_ID: 666101
Speaker 1: Is there, there a backstory for this in terms of pressure being put on the banking industry anywhere by Urban League [National Urban League] or NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or by--I don't know.  In '63 [1963], it would have been a Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]--well, this is like sixty--
Speaker 2: This is '64 [1960].
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], yeah, it would have been Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration and--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --I mean, I just don't know.
Speaker 2: No, that didn't seem to be the origin of it.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What seemed to be the origin was again, they had a successful branch [of Wachovia Bank and Trust Company; Wells Fargo and Company] that had a lot of deposits from people in the black community.  Keep in mind now, we've got the university [Winston-Salem State College; Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] here.  We've got the bus company here [Safe Bus Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  A couple of the institutions I didn't mention--one was Kate Bitting Reynolds Memorial Hospital [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  We had a black hospital in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we had physicians that were--a number of two income families working for Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and Hanes [Hanes Group; Hanesbrands Inc.] at that point.  So you--with a population percentage somewhere around 38 percent, I mean if you take a look at the marketing opportunity, they saw money.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, the way I believe it, they just wanted more of this business.  Roy [Roy Phillips] and Roland [Roland Hayes] were running a successful branch.  And as it was presented to me, they just saw a business opportunity to lend money to people at the university, to lend money who--to people who were working at Reynolds and Hanes and, so it was a, you know, a market position that--no discussion ever came about, either, either before or after about pressure from those guys.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What also I think, should be added here was that timing, timing is important.  I came into this abbreviated management training program and went into a position of lending money very quickly.  Roy and Roland had come along maybe a decade before me.  They worked their way up through the system.  They weren't brought in at a training capacity.  And both of them were very capable, very smart guys.  Roland, uh, Roy got several promotions during the time and retired as a vice president.  Roland elected to go to law school, became an attorney and eventually a judge.  So this opportunity was a matter of timing.  I'm repeating some of these really--it didn't seem at that time to be pushed by the Urban League.  So, but I--after a while, I left there and came to Boston [Massachusetts].  Let me not get too far in the story, but I don't know if there's more I can say about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, okay.  Now you've said enough, I guess.  And, so then, and at that time, there was no, no black owned financial institutions in Wi- in Winston-Salem?
Speaker 2: No, other than Winston Mutual Life Insurance Company [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], there wasn't a deposit and lending institution.  Although there is a backstory I believe I have been told in the past that the origin of the (background noise)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: You can go ahead--continue.
Speaker 1: There had been a Victory Credit Union [Victory-Masonic Mutual Credit Union; Victory Credit Union] who had been owned by blacks that I believe had been purchased by Wachovia [sic.] sometime in the past.  So it went, within Winston-Salem, there was not a black institution.  There was a black institution in Durham [North Carolina], Mechanics and Farmers [Mechanics and Farmers Bank], been there for a hundred years.  So they--the family owned or held interest in both the bank and in an insurance company [North Carolina Mutual and Provident Association; North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, Durham, North Carolina] but no black insured bank in Winston-Salem at that time.
Story_ID: 666102
Speaker 1: So when you went through your training, were you the only black in, in training?
Speaker 2: I was the only black in the training program--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the formal training program.  Again although Roy [Roy Phillips] and Roland [Roland Hayes] had preceded me, and they were manager and assistant manager, they had started as tellers and worked their way up through the system.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was it--how were you treated?
Speaker 2: I had, I had, at that point, been in a number of systems where I was the only one or one of the few black people, both in the [U.S.] military and in the graduate school [University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut].  And it was sort of the same way.  Professionally, everything seemed to be okay.  Socially, it was a, you know, you go my way, I'll go mine.  Struck--at Wachovia [Wachovia Bank and Trust Company; Wells Fargo and Company], what was really striking was the fact that they telescoped the program for reasons of their own.  And I don't know all of that, but it was--there were aspects of the program that were deemed extraneous for my getting out lending money and generating income for the bank.  The--
Speaker 1: Like what, like what?
Speaker 2: In--well, when I did a summer trip here--some of the operational aspects of the bank, learning how checks flowed through the entire system, how the trust department really functions, were all extracted from the program.  So it went directly to the lending business, period.  That's where they wanted to make money.
Story_ID: 666103
Speaker 1: So you were assigned basically to the black community to--or what (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was the black community.  There were, there were a few white customers because it was on the edge of the white community, but it was 98 percent black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, the whites who worked in the tobacco factories down the street cashed their checkers, cashed their checks had checking and check- savings accounts.  It was still Wachovia [Wachovia Bank and Trust Company; Wells Fargo and Company], but it was on the edge of where the black community met the downtown community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there were some white customers, a few.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not many--a few.
Speaker 1: So this is a bra--
Speaker 2: And I was, I--it was not my--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --task to pursue and develop business with them.  My task was to pursue and develop business in--with the black professionals and the black community in--at Wachovia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was the community excited?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I, you know, I had a really good reception, both by the community, and the bank was very pleased, so overall I think it went very well.
Speaker 1: Who was your first I guess, client?
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: Do you remembers?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't, I don't remember.  I do remember, you know, a number of teachers being clients.  There was a comfort level of being able to talk to somebody that they knew about borrowing money for a car or a house.  No one in particular but a large number of teachers as clients, a large number of employees of R.J. Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] as clients.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you--was there, was there--well, are there any, any good stories about what peo- people wanted the money for that you can tell me?  Is there, is there somebody that you didn't give any money, that you made sure didn't get any money or (laughter)--'cause the idea was too weird or what?
Speaker 2: I can't, I can't remember a lot of that.  There were--it was starting to be a few requests for loans around franchises but it was still rel- relatively small stuff at that time.  And I don't remember Wachovia.  I can remember some from later in my life, but not much around that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now the--1964 is a year that houses were being sold for about ten thousand dollars, right?  Or roughly--
Speaker 2: Fifteen, twenty thousand dollars, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Yeah, this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So with this, you know, the dollar is worth a lot more (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --than it is today.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, so as business grew--I mean, what kind of businesses did you finance?  I mean, did you, can you name some of the ones you had to give--
Speaker 2: They were mostly mom and pop stores.  There were several restaurants.  There were a couple franchises, a lot of family stuff, but more automobiles--kind of things.  The business portion of it, relatively small at that time.
Speaker 1: So mostly homes and cars and--
Speaker 2: Homes and cars, and there were some, you know, there were some personal loans, some consolidation loans but more homes and cars.
Story_ID: 666104
Speaker 1: So the Wachovia branch [Wachovia Bank and Trust Company; Wells Fargo and Company] is doing, doing well--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --you said and, so I think I asked you off camera that the complaint I had in Dayton [Ohio] about the Dayton local black bank, and a fellow was saying that he thought that he'd get more support buying a Cadillac than he would buying a piece of equipment for his contracting business.  And, you know, I heard people say, "Yeah, that's true, that's true."  But is that kind of thing--did you run anything like that or did anybody have those kind of--
Speaker 2: At Wachovia (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) issues.  Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I don't recall any, any specific items like that at Wachovia.  One of the things that probably comes to mind in that situation is how do you evaluate ability to pay?  So if you look at whether or not repaying the truck is dependent purely on income generated by business from the truck, that's a different evaluation than if you worked for General Electric, you have a steady paycheck every week, and you want to buy a car.  But having, having said that, branches that are located in the minority community have to know that, you know, you won't see the same types of credit histories and sometime employment histories that you would see in the, in the larger banking world.  So I mean, that's something that you would but--anticipate.  To answer specifically, you know, about that, I don't, I don't know what his credit history was, what the--
Speaker 1: Right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) down payment was, what the income he could show to repay the loan would be.  But it would not be unusual for an inexperienced--maybe even an experienced person--to look at steady income much more favorably than it would, you know, what they would consider to be speculative income coming purely from contracts that you would get from owning the truck.
Speaker 1: Yeah, to be fair, he never owned a Cadillac to my knowledge.  He never tried to get one, but he did try to get--he always had some kind of a truck.  And maybe you're right. That might have been the factor he saw that the truck didn't cost as much as another friend of his that got a loan on a Cadillac.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But he couldn't get the loan for a truck because his income was probably not as guaranteed as--it didn't seem to be as steady.  That's a--yeah, people have all kinds of conspiracy theories about why things don't happen the way they want to.
Speaker 2: And about what year would this have been?
Speaker 1: This was have been in the early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Well, you know, if I can apply that to some other parts of financial decision making, I can recall, and have to say it in the past, that there was a credit evalua- a credit scoring system that was coming into place in the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s] that would score income, payment history and a few other things along the lines--you--a person--two people having graduated from University of Indiana [Indiana University], both having jobs, let's say, as teachers, both having identical incomes, one living in an upscale white zip code, the other one living in a black zip code.  They would credit score differently--one would pass.  One would not.  In that time frame, redlining and giving lower scores purely based on your zip code, purely based on where you live, negatively impacted, you know, your ability to get credit.  I'm not saying that's what happened in his case, but there certainly are, and still may be today, instances wherein, you know, if you have a name that sounds like you're from the inner city or if you live in certain parts of the inner city, even with identical academic records and levels of income, are you considered a higher risk if you live in certain parts of the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I'm sure that probably still exists (laughter) on some level.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'd be surprised if it didn't.
Story_ID: 666105
Speaker 1: Now how long did you manage this branch before you went to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] as a--
Speaker 2: Well, Harvard came a little later.  I moved to Boston [Massachusetts] in 1965 and went to work for State Street Bank [State Street Bank and Trust Company; State Street Corporation].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: State Street has an interesting story, too.  This one has--may have a little chuckle to it.  I came again, I had with my history at Wachovia [Wachovia Bank and Trust Company; Wells Fargo and Company], I came in State Street, into a management training program that was a full program.  And one morning, the chairman and CEO of State Street Bank, a man by the name of Fred Hagerman [ph.], who always dressed in three piece suits with a chain across the vest--
Speaker 1: A watch chain, yeah.
Speaker 2: --a watch chain straight out of central casting.  He parted his hair in the middle.  Mr. Hagerman stood before the officers and trainees of State Street Bank.  And he said, "Gentlemen, I'm here to announce this morning that against my better judgment, some young officers of this bank have convinced me to enter into an agreement with BankAmericard to offer a credit card as a partner with the Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation] here in New England."  He went on to say, he said, "I personally am not convinced that proper New Englanders would reach into their pockets and pay for goods and services with a piece of plastic."  He said that, he said, "But we have agreed to do it, and the program is being kicked off today."  So think about that.  That program--the Bank- the BankAmericard program that he was kicking off today is now today known as Visa [Visa Inc.].  It was good for me because I got out and hustled.  I sold and installed a lot of BankAmericard systems.  And in fact, I was promoted to assistant treasurer by the board of directors in November of 1967, the first African American promoted by a board of directors to an official position in New England.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're on the cutting edge of new technology here.  So the--they had like--so these are the first ATM machines [automated teller machine]--such--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --such--
Speaker 2: --we hadn't quite gotten to the ATMs but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but we are getting to a point now where, you know, most of your retailers are taking credit cards.  We haven't even gotten to debit cards yet.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But most of them are now--
Speaker 1: So they don't have the magnetic strips yet.  They're the kind you run across the, with the--
Speaker 2: They're the kinds you run across--
Speaker 1: --carbon with the plate--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --like--yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, with the carbon paper, the whole, the whole bit.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So that was the earliest thing.  That was the beginning.  We haven't been--gotten to the debit cards and the swipes that you see today yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is almost like a primitive equivalent of the old Standard Register system [Standard Register Company; Taylor Communications] of the three layers that they write for--
Speaker 2: You got it.  That's absolutely--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So--
Speaker 2: But it did well for me.  I did a lot of them.  I got, I got a promotion out of it.  And, so for those people who were standing, you know, looking back at another century, it was the beginning of a lot of new change.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's an interesting story for me.  "Gentlemen, I don't agree with this but," (laughter)--
Speaker 2: He said it, yeah.
Story_ID: 666106
Speaker 1: Were you at State Street Bank [State Street Bank and Trust Company; State Street Corporation, Boston, Massachusetts] when you made the arrangement to go to Harvard?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I came--that's a couple steps later.  I--at--the next banking move was actually Unity [Unity Bank and Trust Company; OneUnited Bank, Boston, Massachusetts].  While at State Street, Unity Bank was formed.  Now Unity was in some senses a great experiment.  A magazine, Careers Today, was quoted as saying, you know, even its birth was unusual.  Unity came about as the product--or following a thesis written by a student at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], John Hayden [John T. Hayden].  And it said that a bank in the ghetto of Boston [Massachusetts] would provide credit and cash flow and a foundation for economic growth and stability in the community.  And a group of businessmen bought into the idea.  They raised the capital for the bank, which was not quite as much for this bank as it was for some later things.  And the bank was originally managed by a board of directors of twenty-two people, six of them being white.  Unity Bank had conflicts early on in the sense that there were two, two of the six white directors were out of the Harvard Business School, looked at large stable management systems.  And, so there were, there were culture clashes with the community directors right from the beginning.  And while the Harvard Business School guys thought that they were bringing management techniques, systems and discipline, the community people saw them as trying to dictate to them what they were doing.  And one of them ended up saying, "You know, we didn't start this bank for you to tell us what to do."  So it was about a year or more when the two Harvard Business School directors left.  One of them, John Seiler [John A. Seiler], had been instrumental in bringing me to Unity Bank.  But the two directors went back to Cambridge [Massachusetts], went back to Harvard.  And it wasn't too long when I actually, I stayed, I stayed at Unity a little more than a year.  I ended up going back downtown.
Speaker 1: So what--was it in Cambridge?
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: Unity Bank?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, it was in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Roxbury, okay.  And it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) managed by the Harvard Business School?
Speaker 2: Well, there were two Harvard Business--the person who wrote the thesis was a student at the Harvard Business School, a black student.
Speaker 1: Okay.  John Hayden?
Speaker 2: John Hayden.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two Harvard Business School professors thought it was a great idea.  In fact, a lot of people thought it was a fantastic idea.  I think something like three universities invested a small amount of money in the stock of the bank.  The concept was right on target.  The Harvard Business School's professors were accustomed to looking at structures and systems and behaviors in large well run, well managed systems.  And they thought that they, what they were going to do was to share their knowledge and to bring some of that discipline over.  And the people in the community saw that as an imposition of something that was, not punitive but--but other than what they, they wanted a looser system (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 666107
Speaker 1: Now was, was there a black savings and loan in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] in those days?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Unity [Unity Bank and Trust Company; OneUnited Bank, Boston, Massachusetts] advertised that it was the only interracial bank in--let's see, there was a, there was a credit union here run by the Bynoe, Bynoe brothers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Peter Bynoe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Vic [Victor Bynoe]--
Speaker 1: --Bynoe--
Speaker 2: Well, Peter, I think, was the nephew--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two younger--yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Victor and [HistoryMaker] John Bynoe were the two brothers that really ran the credit union here, but there was a credit union.  And in fact, John Bynoe became a director of Unity Bank.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I know now in the, in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] was the time that a lot of black banks were started.  And they were a lot of times, a lot of people thought they were brand new, but there were black banks in the turn of the century, in the '20s [1920s], in different ci- cities.  I know Chicago [Illinois] had the Binga Bank [Binga State Bank], and there was others in different parts of the coun- country that came into existence and went out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Atlanta [Georgia] had a couple.  Dur- Durham [North Carolina], as I mentioned earlier--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --had Mechanics and Farmers [Mechanics and Farmers Bank].  There were banks around.  There were a number of banks that were started in the late '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  A lot of that now was some of that now was, some of that was motivated (background noise)--
Speaker 1: They're playing with us now (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, some of that was--came out of the riots of the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s].  And, so the rebuilding of the ghettos, so to speak, were motivated around some--so when you mentioned that earlier, the connection wasn't quite there at Wachovia [Wachovia Bank and Trust Company; Wells Fargo and Company], but it was for Unity and for some of the banks that came along at the end of the '60s [1960s] when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] were assassinated.  Following that, there were--the creation of several banks did come into play at that point.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So Unity Bank, so that--how long did Unity last?
Speaker 2: Well, Unity actually still exists in a form.  It has changed names and changed hands several times.  It's been recapitalized.  The first time through--it came in, it went into receivership after, you know, several years.  It was subsequently recapitalized.  And it has had prominent members, or did have at one point Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] on its board.  It exists today in a recapitalized and reformatted condition.  It is OneUnited [OneUnited Bank] today.  It has its headquarters here, but they bought some branches of banks that were fielding in Florida and in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], so it's spread out a good deal from its early days.  Its headquarters are no longer in the ghettos, its headquarters are downtown, but it does exist in a different form today.
Story_ID: 666108
Speaker 1: Now are we at, at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We are, we are close to getting to Harvard.
Speaker 1: So, okay.
Speaker 2: So when the Harvard--so here there's a bit of a story that goes with how Harvard came about.  When the Harvard Business School professors went back as I stated, I actually, through a friend and contact that I had met at the SB [savings bank], Larry Lofton [ph.], was introduced to the president of New England Merchants National Bank [Bank of New England Corporation].  And I came back downtown initially to establish a small business lending program for them.  I advanced through their ranks a bit quickly here.  I did have some stellar training at their program and some skills and some customer following.  I knew the Merchants had a unique marketing slogan.  At that time, it's--it marketed itself as where the man you talked to is the bank, were the man you talk to is the bank.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's a, that's also an issue in terms of black banking.  I've heard it said a few times in Chicago [Illinois] when we had, you know, several of the black banks that are now defunct--well, one time, there were like five I think when I was there in the '70s [1970s]. They're mostly gone but there was a saying that if you talk to, talking to somebody at the black bank, we'll just use the general term, they have to call like Harris Bank [Harris Trust and Savings Bank; BMO Harris Bank, Chicago, Illinois] downtown to get you a loan or some other bank, you know.  So you're not really talking to the bank.  You're talking to a surrogate of someone.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is significant what you're saying to me.
Speaker 2: Well, at the time--now Mer- now New England Merchants was the third largest bank in town now.  It was a big bank.  And it was an old line bank that prided itself on its training programs and the quality of the bank.  But the slogan flowed into this type of structure.  After you were given known authority, you could actually commit the bank on your own signature for the full lending, lending, legal lending limit of the bank.  That included me.  I could commit the bank for several million dollars.  But that's after you've gone through a vetting program and you've been given loan authority.  That didn't last forever.  The bank started to impose a structure.  The lending limits were still fairly significant, but they started to allocate lending limits based on skills, experience, expertise in certain fields.  And, so you start to have a hier- hierarchy reporting in.  And, so they started, they reorganized.  And actually at that point, I received a promotion, and in addition to lending, I had a small group of branch banks to manage.  Interesting story that goes with it, my first territory that was given, included Revere [Massachusetts], Everett [Massachusetts], East Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] and Charlestown [Boston, Massachusetts].  At that time, Charlestown was known as the bank robbery training capital of the world.  There are several movies about that.  (Mumbles) look at the movie 'The Town.'
Speaker 1: Is that the bank they robbed (laughter)?
Speaker 2: That's the, that's the, that's the neighborhood where they trained--
Speaker 1: They trained--
Speaker 2: --the bank robbers.  It was a neighborhood where I would go and--to do my marketing at ten o'clock and I was out by three [o'clock], back coming, coming back downtown.  But after that, after I proved myself, I did reasonably well with that.  I received a new territory that included South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] which was famous for bus- crosstown busing.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and the violence that that, you know--
Speaker 2: And the violence that went with that.  Finally, I was told by a senior manager, "Well, we've seen you manage regular banking serv- we now want to see if you can manage a territory with rich people," and I was assigned Beacon Hill [Boston, Massachusetts].  Again this was actually said to me, face to face.  I did that and by this time now, I have reached the title of vice president, first African American vice president here.
Story_ID: 666109
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: This is '76 [1976] or so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now we, we bypassed Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], haven't we?
Speaker 2: No, we're at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We haven't gotten to it yet?
Speaker 2: --we're at, we're getting to Harvard.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So I'm now reasonably high up in the structure.  And I'm vice president bucking for senior vice president.
Speaker 1: Now did you have like, did you have--were there any special people in the bank that helped you, you know, that they're really trying to show you the ropes and stuff?  'Cause I'm sure you weren't welcomed by everybody but were there any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I--
Speaker 1: --specific people that really tried to help?
Speaker 2: I had two or three people who allowed me and helped me.  I can't say they took me--again, I'm the first, you know, and, so they're--I was the trailblazer in that, in that case.  One of them again, was kind of like Wachovia [Wachovia Bank and Trust Company; Wells Fargo and Company], Les Sutherland [Leslie Sutherland].  He was an old [U.S.] Air Force pilot who was running a branch system, and he deemed that I could do more for him than could some other people, so it was in his own self-interest that he kept promoting me.  The executive vice president of retail banking, Dick Driscoll [Richard D. Driscoll], who also had his own issues to work.  He was Catholic.  And the banking world had been slow in moving Irish Catholics up the system.  He had finally made it, but he had made it, in part, based on the fact that he had acquired the business of the Catholic archdiocese [Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Boston].
Speaker 1: Now this is interesting.  I never would have guessed--I know, in most of the, I guess, the East Coast to the Midwest at least, Irish, by this time are really the major politicians in cities like Chicago [Illinois] with the Daleys and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and New York [New York] and, you know, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The mayor of Boston [Massachusetts] was Irish Catholic.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and especially here, too.
Speaker 2: --and that, and that probably, that probably--we'll talk about him a little bit more but that probably helped Dick Driscoll along but--
Speaker 1: And going back to Honey Fitzgerald [John F. Fitzgerald]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Mayor Curley [James Michael Curley] and all these other Irish mayors.
Speaker 2: But see in Boston, political power is separate from economic power (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From wealth.
Speaker 2: Wealth.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  Okay, that's what I'm getting at, that's what I'm getting at.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you've got--you--I've heard--I read a lot of 19th century stuff.  And they talk about the Boston Brahmins, the old money here in Boston--
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: --being--
Speaker 2: --that was Mr. Hagerman [Fred Hagerman (ph.)] that I spoke of before and that was the people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was a Bo- he was a Brahmin.
Speaker 2: He was a Brahmin--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --as were a couple of the people who ran New England Merchants National Bank [Bank of New England Corporation].  And--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --the Irish and blacks and women were coming along very slowly.
Speaker 1: They were strivers in this scenario (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Something like that.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And tugging at the pant leg of these people that had wealth, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: So people like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) trying to look, trying to get into the club.
Speaker 1: Yeah, like Henry Cabot Lodge would be, his family would be like that kind of family.
Speaker 2: He would have been in, they would have been in a private bank but people of that ilk.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where the--who are above the scramble of politics (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They cover the cousins and nephews.  Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 666110
Speaker 1: I'm now vice president and running a good sized piece of business for the company now.  And it's getting close to time where I would come up for consideration for promotion to senior vice president.  So, now discussions are starting to be held like--I had a good friend and colleague, African American woman, in HR [human resources] that I communicated with.  So we started to talk about this.  And I said, "Yeah, well, what's the issue?"  And she said, well, you know, some people think that you have done very well and, you know, they're not sure I'll put the next step or how it's to be accomplished.  So as the discussions rolled on, a decision was made after lots of consultation that one of the ways that would be helpful in my getting a higher assignment would be for me to go out of the system to go into Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] where credentials were impeccable and recognized.  And then I could come back into a position of higher responsibility with less challenges to it.  So I applied, was accepted.  It was a program that the bank [New England Merchants National Bank; Bank of New England Corporation] paid for.  I had to go back to the bank.  I had to stay for two years after I did that.  It was a program that--one of the two programs that grants alumni status to its executive program.  So I returned from that--at that point, I became department head of all retail banking, a good assignment.  We--it was some changes in the law.  We actually ended up moving out of Suffolk County [Massachusetts] into Chestnut Hill [Massachusetts] and to Wellesley [Massachusetts] and into Natick [Massachusetts].  And in 1984, now I went to Harvard in '78 [1978], seventy- coming out at the end of '78 [1978].
Story_ID: 666111
Speaker 1: Tell us about Harvard school of business school or business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] and your experiences there, and who was there when you were there.
Speaker 2: First day was memorable, the first full day was memorable.  One, we had entered on a Sunday.  We had a reception and being unaware of what was about to come, there were a number of us that had a couple glasses of wine.  And about nine o'clock on a Sunday night, we were told, "Here's your assignment for tomorrow."  So we were given cases--case histories to read, to analyze and to be prepared for discussion at eight o'clock the following morning, having been up at (unclear) (laughter).  So they were letting us know that in the real world if you had had more than your share to drink, you still had to be prepared to discuss this case the following morning.  The first session was a joint--there were 126 people in this class from around the globe.  The session opened by Daryl Wyckoff [D. Daryl Wyckoff], who was the head of the program at that time.  His specialty was operations management.  He was a very dynamic guy, and I can remember even today his walking into the room, waiting until the room was absolutely silent and with dramatic pause, he said, "Here's to dear old Boston [Massachusetts], home of the bean and the the cod, where the Cabots only speak to the Lodges, and the Lodges only speak to God" [Charles Murdoch].  This is the way the program started.  These were people who were at the vice president, senior vice president level from companies and governments around the world.  And they were all expected to go back to be in top positions.  They had all signed agreements that, you know, once you complete this program (cough), you will not use it to change companies right away.  You have to go back to the company that did this.  I mean, that was the nature and (unclear).  There was, there were several significant things, but one stands out very quickly.  And it's noteworth- it's noteworthy today.  One of my mates in this class was a man named Mohammed Zeykar [ph.].  Mohammed was from Iran.  In December of 1978, Mohammed disappeared at night and was never seen or heard about again.
Speaker 1: From the United States?
Speaker 2: From the United States.  He was recalled because the revolution, the overthrow of the shah [Mohammad Reza Pahlavi] of Iran was occurring.  I'm not sure what his role was in Iran, but as you recall that was a period when the overthrow of the, of the shah was beginning.  And, so one of our classmates left us and, you know, we never heard anything about him ever again.  On a much different note, one of the people that I met, one of the people in my study group was Fred Wang [Frederick A. Wang], son of the founder [An Wang] of Wang Laboratories, Wang company.  Fred lives in the Boston [Massachusetts] area.  He and I have remained friends.  We communicate.  We actually have invested in a company together, so there were some long lasting things that came out of it, of that stint at Harvard Business School.
Story_ID: 666112
Speaker 1: What's the most significant thing that you learned there?  Or can you frame it like that?
Speaker 2: There's an awful lot that I learned.  I mean, the, in the, in the case method, one you learn that there's no one absolutely right answer to business prob- any business problems.  There's more than one way to approach it.  Two, I learned that the best way to approach th- things is to have other smart people around you.  Three, they gave some systems for analyzing and evaluating people, as well as companies.  There was one technique that I'll describe briefly.  Tony Athos [Anthony Athos], a HR [human resources] lecturer at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], described, said, "Every successful manager has three ways that they get things done--they accomplish things in a company.  And they are achievement, they are high achievers that obviously do well."  He said that there's a military style or he called it power.  There are people who get things done strictly by power from the top down.  The third way he described was association, that you have friends, colleagues, others that you get things done because you know them and because, you know, in today's--we consider networks to be really big.  He said that every manager, every successful manager gets things done.  "You have a primary and a secondary way to get things done," he said.  Within large business structures, many people, at least at that time, got things done because they were high achievers.  And if they didn't get things done through that, then you have to fall back onto whether you rely on your colleagues or whether you just drop the hammer and say, "You know, this is the way we're going to do it."  So, you know, the benefits of the system, the, some of the thoughts looking back at some of the cases, one very famous case being, you know, Penn railroad situation [Penn Central Transportation Company] where, upon analysis, people learned that they weren't really so much in the railroad business as in the real estate business.  You learn to ask questions and determine, you know, what business are you really in, so what are some of the things you carry forward out of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So just because you own the railroads doesn't mean that you're--I mean, the--your main business may actually be real estate in that sense, acquiring (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It--
Speaker 1: --real estate to--
Speaker 2: It turned out that the real estate was much more valuable than the railroad business.  And if you look at some other franchises today, the well known names, and I'm not going to call the names on the screen here, but some of the well known hamburger businesses operate basically, real estate businesses.  They're renting real estate to franchisees who operate, who sell hamburgers, but what they're doing, they're doing is that they're leasing buildings and equipment there in the real estate business.
Story_ID: 666113
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There's been some discussion during the election about what business Trump [President Donald John Trump] is really in.  I mean, he's--as a developer, they say he started off with a bang, but he basically failed as a developer.  Now, he's in the branding business.
Speaker 2: He's in, he's a salesman, he's in the branding business.
Speaker 1: So his name is worth more than anything he creates.
Speaker 2: I, I have been to Atlantic City [New Jersey].  I have seen the casinos.  I served on the board of higher education here in the Commonwealth [Massachusetts Board of Higher Education] for six years.  And one of the things that we looked at just before I rotated off was for profit colleges.  And Mr. Trump has been in that business, I will tell you that the view of how, of the operation of for profit colleges is under the microscope.  It has been under the microscope, and there are a number of cases where it is obvious that people are making promises that they don't deliver on.  And, you know, whether or not some of them are again lending their names and not really showing up teaching in the classes or delivering anything is a question mark.  It's something that departments of higher ed and people in compliance are looking at, all across the country, yeah, absolutely.
Story_ID: 666114
Speaker 1: So after Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] you, now you go back to, you go to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: To New England Merchants, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's New England Merchants Bank?
Speaker 2: It's New England Merchants National Bank.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It eventually merged and be- with Connecticut Bank and Trust Company, it became Bank of New England [Bank of New England Corporation], but it's all the same bank.
Speaker 1: So this is--New England Merchants Bank, I don't think we discussed this in the beginning, but it's one of the oldest banks in the country, right, going back to 1831.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It again, it was one of the banks you talked about, old Brahmin banks.  In the old days, the--our chairman at that time, Mark Wheeler [Mark C. Wheeler] and our president, Peter McCormick [Peter H. McCormick], all dated their families back to the Mayflower.  So, yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you're the, you're senior vice president and New England Merchants Bank, nineteen seven- what is it, seven- so you came out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was promoted to senior vice president, '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984], okay, all right, 1984, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all right.
Speaker 2: So, at this time now, Bank of New England and Connecticut Bank and Trust Company are forming a merger.  And at a point in that history, we started to buy a lot of banks.  And for a while, I continued to run retail, then I worked in some, in commercial lending.  But when we started to buy all the banks, I even--see, eventually was assigned to one of the bank holding companies to become head of the private banking division in 1988.  And I was promoted to executive vice president where I continued until 1991.  The bank was acquired by Fleet [Fleet Norstar Financial Group, Inc.; Bank of America Corporation], and I went to work at Grant Thornton [Grant Thornton LLP], which is an accounting and advisory firm.
Story_ID: 666115
Speaker 1: So you left the Bank of New England [Bank of New England Corporation] at this point?
Speaker 2: In 1991, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So, well, what happened?  What's--why did you leave?
Speaker 2: The bank was taken over by Fleet [Fleet Norstar Financial Group, Inc.; Bank of America Corporation].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 1: So we just--is that--all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and there wasn't going to be anything comparable or worthwhile.  The bank was taken over by another organization and--
Speaker 1: Now this is a period of time, if I remember correctly, I never had much finance to be involved (laughter) but from just reading the news in those days, there were a lot of takeovers of banks and businesses (mumbles).
Speaker 2: Well, and in a period from 1989 to 1991, '92 [1992], there was a recession.  There was a tremendous downturn in real estate, and a lot of banks got in trouble.  One of the things that you will see as a connecting point coming up is that there were a lot of banks that feel here they were being taken over and--big banks and small banks.  And as I, you know, I worked at Grant Thornton [Grant Thornton LLP], we started to--a couple of friends and I started to look at banks and said, "You know, we can do a better job than some of the people that are involved in this and, so maybe we ought to look at buying or starting a bank."  So while I'm working at Grant Thornton, we actually started, I first started to write a business plan, a business brief to start a bank.  So you're absolutely right.  There were a lot of takeovers and that produced, the consolidations produced opportunities.
Story_ID: 666116
Speaker 1: What did it take?  What kind of resources did you have to bring together to found Middlesex Bank and Trust [Middlesex Bank and Trust Company; Eastern Bank] in '97 [1997]?
Speaker 2: Well, there are several levels here.  You may not, you may be aware--I don't know if the people watching may be.  The banking process in Massachusetts is a two step process.  First, you have to be approved by the Board of Bank Incorporation and the FDIC [Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation].  And then you have to raise capital which, in this case, in our state's the largest capital requirement in the country, $8 million net of expenses.  So when you open the door, you have to have $8 million that you can lend, a minimum, on that date.  So let me, let me pull back and answer your question.  When I started the process at the end of 1994, I had to write a check for five figures to hire a law firm and an auditing firm.  So we, at that point, applied to the Board of Bank, messages the Board of Bank Incorporation, with our law firm, Goodwin Proctor [Goodwin Procter LLP; Goodwin LLP], who are leading the way.  And in the spring of the following year, we receive approval after a public hearing for public convenience and service for the bank.  This meant that the state--it now said that the plan was more than sufficient, that management was capable of lending a bank of this size and type that we were proposi- I was proposing and that we would now have to raise 8 million net of any expenses we incurred in raising the money.  So we set out to do that.  What I learned along the way was that running a bank or even writing a business plan that would satisfy the Board of Bank Incorporation and the FDIC and even getting a letter of no contest from the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] that raising $8 million was harder than I thought.  Some people didn't think that we'd ever make that.  We went through a long period of raising the money.  We finally, I finally came up with an agreement being introduced to the people that headed a whole, headed a (unclear)--I showed you the pictures earlier of Affiliated Community Bancorp [Affiliated Community Bancorp, Inc.].  They owned banks and mortgage companies in the suburbs of Boston [Massachusetts].  They had been trying to get into Newton [Massachusetts] for a number of years.  They hadn't been able to write a business plan that was sufficient for the footprint that they were looking at.  I had the charter.  I had the management team.  I even had a lease on a building.  They had the money.  So we came to an agreement that they would capitalize the bank, and we did a deal at the beginning of, at the--actually, the initial agreement was signed at the end of '96 [1996].  The formal agreement was signed at the beginning of '97 [1997].  We got final permission from FDIC and the Federal Reserve [Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts] in May of '97 [1997].  We opened the doors on June 2 of 1997.
Story_ID: 666117
Speaker 1: Middlesex Bank and Trust Company [Eastern Bank].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, and it--the bank lasts until 2002, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the bank actually exists.  I mean--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --it exist- it is part of another bank.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, well, okay, but we--yeah, it was acquired in 2002.  But what was some of the--so, well, what happened?  I mean, you know, this is a--so it was established (mumbles) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, it, you know, it--well, it--the mayor was very proud.  We did a job in, keep in mind that the banking business is one wherein shareholders own the bank.  So again as as a former dean of MIT business school [Sloan School of Management, Cambridge, Massachusetts] used to say, "In the days of acquisitions and mergers, everything changes."  So the owners saw a favorable chance to sell the holding company, and they sold the holding company.  We did, ultimately, refinance with a private owner, more of that, but the same thing ultimately happened.  He got an offer that he liked.  And the bank was sold to Eastern Bank and Trust Company [Eastern Bank].  If we--I didn't own enough of the bank to maintain control.  So the stock was sold to someone else and, it lives on as a part of a much bigger organization.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: There's actually, again, there's an actual portfolio that you will see how it was acquired by someone else later on as we look at that.
Story_ID: 666118
Speaker 1: I don't want to minimize the accomplishment of it.  But founding a bank is a big accomplishment and just want to ask you like what were, what were you able to do as a founder of this bank [Middlesex Bank and Trust Company; Eastern Bank], you know, that, you know, you're proud of and that's part of your legacy today?
Speaker 2: Well, as you've said, I mean, one of the local newspapers, the Herald [Boston Herald] said, "You know, there are a lot of things easier to do than start a bank."  And Newton Graphic [The Newton Graphic] called it adventures in banking which I wasn't too happy about thinking (laughter) about, investing my life savings and they're calling it adventure.  But we were able to provide services, we had talked earlier about small businesses, small companies and families.  Here I was actually able to do that full time.  So there were companies, both owned by people of color and of Caucasians that we financed that we helped grow.  We had some impact, you know, in a smaller neighborhood within a wealthy suburban community of Newton [Massachusetts].  I mean, it was a big deal.  It received a lot of newspaper coverage.  We actually were covered on a couple TV stations, Channel 5 [WCVB-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] and Channel 68 [WBPX-TV, Boston, Massachusetts].  We were able to finance some real estate companies.  We financed an automobile operation.  We financed a summer camp.  We did, you know, a number of buildings for small businesses and a number of homeless families around Newton.  So, you know, it accomplished its mission and it's--it is still there.  It, you know, did not do any bad or crazy things.  It was owned by people who wanted to sell it.
Story_ID: 666119
Speaker 1: It sold in nine- in 2002.  Now the Westport National Bank [Westport, Connecticut] that acquired it, they weren't known as a black bank, right, or were they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was, this was never--let me clarify that.  I mean, the person that started it in one of the newspaper article declared it to be a black bank, but under the federal guidelines, we were never a black bank or minority bank [Middlesex Bank and Trust Company; Eastern Bank].  The owner, the chairman, president and CEO was black.  And, so the assumption was at many places that I, you know, I was the chief decision maker.  I had put up the initial money.  I did all the heavy lifting to get it going.  But under the guise of whether or not it met the government terms of being a minority owned or minority control, other than decision making, I did, I did not own 51 percent of the bank.  So, you know, I--if you look at the public portrayals, the public statements, you know, you would have seen my face.  You would have seen my history.  It was not in the ghetto.  It had both black and white customers.  I would have been just as happy to have all customers, but its charter was, its mission was to serve people in Newton [Massachusetts] and the western suburbs, that's--bank charters are approved for a geographic territory.  And, so of course, I brought, you know, many of my friends and some colleagues along with me, but it was in Newton, and that was the designated marketing territory that we had.
Speaker 1: What do you think--now one of the banks in Chicago [Illinois] that was--it wasn't quite a black bank, but it was in another sense was South Shore Bank [ShoreBank]--
Speaker 2: I've heard that name.
Speaker 1: --that Milton Coleman [sic. HistoryMaker Milton Davis] was the pre- president of, and he grew out of an activist kind of--it was an integrated group of activists that created it as a development bank, you know, that was why it was created as a development bank (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that sounds more--
Speaker 1: Do you have a--
Speaker 2: --that sounds more like Unity [Unity Bank and Trust Company; OneUnited Bank, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went into Newton because at that point, all of the commercial banks that had been headquartered in Newton had been acquired, you know, in the merger and acquisition process.  So there was--and the mayor of Newton mentions that in his citation.  There was no commercial bank headquartered in Newton because the big banks, Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation] and BankBoston [Bank of Boston Corporation; BankBoston, Boston, Massachusetts] had acquired those small banks, so it was, you know, a market opportunity.  I lived in Newton for a long time.  I knew the turf.  And in this particular case, it's centered more around the fact that mergers and acquisitions had taken out all of the banks that were headquartered there.  A previous assignment, a previous work assignment that Unity was more like (unclear) than this.  Than this one came about because, you know, once the banks were acquired, everyone was saying we'd be better off having local decision making here in Newton, rather than have people making decisions, you know, in Charlotte [North Carolina] or Phil- St. Louis [Missouri] or somewhere.
Story_ID: 666120
Speaker 1: Tell us about GoBiz Solutions [GoBiz Solutions Inc., Brighton, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: GoBiz Solutions is a software applications and distribution company that I became involved with through some friends who used to work for Digital Equipment company [Digital Equipment Corporation] and Wang Labs [Wang Laboratories].  They had cashed out of Digital, and were doing some high level consulting, as well as incubating companies up and down Route 128 [Massachusetts Route 128] just outside of Boston [Massachusetts].  And I had known a couple of them for a long time.  We had done some other things together.  We had houses on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  And, so the discussions kept coming around about me getting involved.  I looked at a few things that they were involved in that were technically outside of my realm of interest.  And finally a discussion came up around about a project that was launching or developing and preparing for launch, a software package for small companies that would impact efficiency and financial performance, something that I knew something about coming out of the banking world looking at small to medium size businesses.  GoBiz automates the front office functions of smaller companies similar to the way QuickBooks operates the back office functions.  In fact, GoBiz, at one time, operated fairly significantly a partnership with Intuit [Intuit Inc.]. It still exists--not very active today, but it has six active modules, contact management, sales, inventory, service, dispatch and it has some administrative functions.  Its purpose is to get small businesses online and being able to sell and track business in an automated way in the digital world.  It's really, in some ways, an absolute requirement.  You can't really, businesses can't really function with the large businesses unless they're on- online.  So GoBiz is in the business of helping those companies automate, helping them get their sales functions, get their service functions and get some inventory product on display for small companies.  Something I said a little earlier, I just want to expand on a little bit.  It did have a partnership with, does have a partnership with Intuit for--with their QuickBooks line to combine front and back office to fully automate functions.  So in its ultimate use, it would be something that--similar to QuickBooks where people learn that you aren't going to get that phone call anymore, that you need to be online, that--and, so its ultimate purpose is to get small companies online and to have them improve their sales and efficiency by online operations.  It wants to grow through partnerships, it does have, you know, growth through its own website and through a website partnership with another large company.  But to try and come back around and just look at GoBiz, I can remember the time when, you know, all banking was done across a teller win- window with paper.  That is no longer the case, and it is no longer the case where small business people can rely on telephone calls.  For example, all dispatch through places like Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] is done by online operations, and this is the world that GoBiz intends to participate in.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So GoBiz provides software and--
Speaker 2: And software solutions--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for small companies.
Story_ID: 666121
Speaker 1: Who's your competition out here?
Speaker 2: Well, there were a few small companies, some CRM companies, customer relationship management companies that only do one function, so there are a lot of those.  We have been told that the product line is somewhat similar to Salesforce.com [Salesforce.com, Inc.].  They deal with small, with medium and large companies.  We are at the smaller end of the business.  But I think a--the most direct answer to your question would be that there are a number of small companies that don't combine full automation.  They either do customer relationship management.  They try to do dispatch or they try to do inventory.  We are one of the few that lets you automate end to end from sales to inventory and administrative functions.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So that's the difference.
Story_ID: 666122
Speaker 1: This is your major business operation [GoBiz Solutions Inc., Brighton, Massachusetts] at this point.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and you serve on a number of different boards in the Boston [Massachusetts] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm at a point in my life where some of those are winding down.
Speaker 1: Are they?
Speaker 2: I serve on a few.  I have served on an awful lot, and we are seeing some of those expire and not be renewed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there are a couple of major boards that--I mean, it's something--some things that connect with what we've talked about here.  I mean, previously, I did serve on the board of higher education in the Commonwealth [Massachusetts Board of Higher Education] when we talked about that.  I served on the VI, Virgin Islands Next Generation Network [viNGN, Inc.], which is, which is a broadband operation that distributed broadbands throughout the [U.S.] Virgin Islands.  I served on the board of the Mass Technology Leadership Council [Massachusetts Technology Leadership Council].  That's a major technology player around the state.  It started out as an association for software developers.  It now includes all of the big guys like Google [Google Inc.], Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation], IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], (unclear), all joined, and that's one of the reasons I said earlier that integration and collaboration are so important.  You got little guys, who are literally a one man operation talking, sitting in rooms now with Facebook and those guys, so the Technology Leadership Council is looking for, you know, the next big thing, and they've got some of all the players in there.
Story_ID: 666123
Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about your tenure as a member of the Massachusetts Board of Higher Ed [Massachusetts Board of Higher Education]?  I don't, I don't think we really talked about it that much, but what are some of the issues that you dealt with on that board (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we--some of the issues that we dealt with is that--one of the bigger ones is that in the last twenty years or so, the state's contributions to state run institutions has been declining as enrollments have been increasing.  So the funding of institutions is a major concern.  A lot of discussion today about the amount of student debt that people are leaving with.  It has come about in part because the state has, to some degree, shifted the burden of running schools away from all taxpayers to families that go to state institutions.  So the institution and fees have gone up dramatically, one of the situations that we dealt with.  A second situation that we dealt with is the number of students who enter college and don't graduate, leaving them with debt and no degree, major concern of the board of higher education.  Somewhat closely tied to that is the number of students that enter schools, particularly community colleges, and have to take remedial courses to get started.  The remedial courses don't offer course credit, so you end up using your borrowed funds for courses that don't help you toward graduation, ex- exacerbating owing money and not having a job to get a, not having a degree to get a better job to pay for it.  In the Commonwealth of Mass [Massachusetts], when I was on the board, we did approve the acquisition and start up on a state level for a public law school [University of Massachusetts School of Law] operating out of UMass Dartmouth [University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, Dartmouth, Massachusetts].  At that time, we were actually--the Commonwealth of Mass was actually paying for students to attend law schools in--at the University of Connecticut [University of Connecticut School of Law, Storrs, Connecticut].  So regardless of what their thinking is about how many more lawyers are needed, we felt and we still believe today, that it is much better that, you know, the Uni- University of Massachusetts has its own law school, rather than the residents of Massachusetts paying to send students out of state.  A couple of issues that we tackled that are ongoing, efficiency of operations in the colleges.  There are twenty-nine state colleges and universities here in the Commonwealth.  And each one of them has its own IT [information technology] center.  There is a good deal of thinking that the number of IT centers and therefore its operation of real estate and the number of managers that go with that could be substantially changed.  There is an example here in Boston [Massachusetts] right now called the College of the Fenway [Colleges of the Fenway] where five colleges essentially do joint purchasing.  They even occupy--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --some dormitories along the same lines.
Story_ID: 666124
Speaker 1: And I think maybe the last one that I want to comment on here sort of touches on two points.  And that is how the digital world is impacting and will impact on the world of higher education.  MOOCs [massive open online course], massive online coll- courses now, where, you know, fifty thousand people can take a course from a master teacher is thought to be one of the ways that can reduce or control college costs.  And there are a number of experiments going on now as to better ways to do that as we try and educate more and more of the population.  We're going to have to find ways to control costs in doing that.
Story_ID: 666125
Speaker 1: And lastly for-profit institutions and the way they have marketed to students and how they conduct their operations in terms of graduating people and keeping the promises that they made on the way in is, is something that the board of higher education [Massachusetts Board of Higher Education] has a good deal of concern about.  Two large institutions have closed in the last few years, leaving a number of students without places to go.  I think the most recent is ITT Tech [ITT Technical Institute], so the management of how, of knowing, one, how many people are really in that business, how much money they're getting from taxpayers for tuition and how many people are graduating.  It is a major concern, and I think that many people have (unclear).  Elizabeth Warren has made lots of noise about this.  The president's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] talked about it.  It's something that's going to get a lot of attention going forward.
Story_ID: 666126
Speaker 1: What about the, in a similar vein, the charter schools?  I just heard something on the news today about the--a referendum around charter schools.  And did you have a po- position on those?  It's supposed to be like private elementary schools and high schools.
Speaker 2: Char- charter schools are actually controlled by a separate board here.  They are, as you point out--there is a group that wants more charter schools.  Second group saying that charter schools is taking money away from the traditional public school system.  The board that I sat on [Massachusetts Board of Higher Education] did not deal directly with it.  There's another board [Massachusetts Board of Elementary and Secondary Education] that deals with that, but it is a referendum item that comes up in November, and it's pretty tightly contested.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would you prefer to see more of them or less or more public--
Speaker 2: Well, my three children [Deanna Fulp, Rachael Fulp Cooke and Cyrus Fulp, Jr.] went to public schools.  And the public schools, granted this is in a suburban town [Newton, Massachusetts], did very well for them.  I mean, they all got into very good colleges.  They all finished in undergraduate degrees in four years.  I am in favor of public--good public schools for everyone, so to the extent that, you know, some charters can help, I can't argue against that.  I am concerned about diluting support for the public school system.  I believe that poor people, people of color will be cheated if we don't pay attention to how those dollars get allocated.
Story_ID: 666127
Speaker 1: What do you think is the future of, I guess, nominal black banks, as such, in the, in the age of larger, larger institutions?  Do you think there's--is it, is it tougher now to start one than it was when you started a bank [Middlesex Bank and Trust Company; Eastern Bank]?  But you didn't start it as a black bank per se.
Speaker 2: I didn't start it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But is it tougher now to do that?
Speaker 2: I believe the answer to that is yes.  I believe that because of the recent deep recession that the rules have been tightened, both for management experience and for capital requirements.  I think of that, though, as separate of--part of your question.  Part of your question deals with how does the inner city get service?  And it was, it took a long time for major pharmacies, major food companies to decide that they would and to learn how to operate in ghettos and, you know, black banks and other types of financial organizations, including credit unions, serve those markets well.  I believe that as an entry point, there still is a place for organizations to be started and to operate in the inner cities that require different approaches, different skills than what you see, you know, in Greenwich, Connecticut.  So, but that requires capital.  It going, it's going--it requires more scrutiny from regulators and Washington [D.C.], and in the state capitols, but I still believe it's helpful.  Just as Safe Bus Company really served Winston-Salem [North Carolina] very well, black banks and black credit unions can also serve those communities well, where other banks are slow to move in.  I mean eventually, I think they'll get there.  But there was quite a long time where Boston [Massachusetts], you know, in certain neighborhoods, maybe even today, there was not a major food store, not a major (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: There was a long time when there was not a major pharmacy in certain parts.  I mean, they've learned to manage security and some other things a little bit better now.  And, so service has been coming into the community slowly.  Today, a large part of the inner city are served by check cashers.
Speaker 1: And currency exchange--
Speaker 2: And currency exchanges.  That's a very expensive way to do business, it's a very expensive way to do business.  On the other hand, you know, the requirements to get a bank charter are pretty strenuous, but I still think that having a bank would be a big advantage in most of those communities.
Story_ID: 666128
Speaker 1: Now in a larger sense, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: (Pause) You talked earlier about some of the counsel and advice I got in high school [Atkins High School; Atkins Academic and Technology High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  I remember talking to one of the assistant principals a few years after I left the high school around the same subject.  And I remember saying something about, you know, how different the world would be in fifty years.  It's fifty years later now, and some of the stuff is still here.  He said, at that point, it would be four hundred years before things get changed.  I don't know if it's going to be four hundred, but some of the issues that we were wrestling with when I came to high school fifty years ago, haven't changed nearly as much as I thought they would change.  I--in some cases, the techniques are different.  The motivation may be different, but we are, we are separating again along income lines.  It's bad.  I would hope for better education equality, better income equality.  And I certainly want to see black boys stop getting shot.
Story_ID: 666129
Speaker 1: Tell us about, about your family now.  You, you have at least, was it, was it four children, three?
Speaker 2: I have three children--
Speaker 1: Three children, okay.
Speaker 2: Three children and one grandchild.  My doctor opens the folder every time I go in.  I chuckle (laughter).  He said, "You have three children and one grandchild."  Yes.  The oldest child, Deanna [Deanna Fulp], lives here in Boston [Massachusetts], she works for Blue Cross Blue Shield [Blue Cross Blue Shield Association].  She is a senior director in their finance department.  Her daily function seems to change a lot, but she has to do with bringing new financial products on board for Blue Cross Blue Shield.  She has a bachelor's [degree] from Wesleyan University [Middletown, Connecticut] in math and an M.B.A. from Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts].  Rachael [Rachael Fulp Cooke] is married.  She had, she has one child, Audrey [ph.] whom you saw earlier.  She lives in California, in Davis, California, where her husband [David Tom Cooke] is on the faculty at UC Davis [University of California, Davis].  He is, in fact, head of thoracic surgery practice there.  Rachael is a CEO of a small start up company [A_2_Z Project, Inc.] that actually is dealing with manufacturing some tech products having to do with head safety for small children, helmets and a few other things there, but it's a start up that Rachael is head--she has a, Rachael has a bachelor's degree from Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] and a master's in pub- public health administration from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  The youngest, Cyrus Bernard Fulp, Jr. [Cyrus Fulp, Jr.] is a graduate of Connecticut College in New London [Connecticut], a degree in economics.  He currently works for Bank of America Merrill Lynch, as an analyst.  He lives in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And your wife, [HistoryMaker] Carol Fulp, we're going to be interviewing later on.  But you all got married in two- 2002?
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000].
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000], okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: We got married in St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands].  It's a second marriage for both of us.  Some of the gorgeous pictures that we'll see later on, you know, over- overlooking Cowpet Bay and the water there.  We actually, we met--we'd sort of seen each other around town for a while, but we met at the Museum of Fine Arts [Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Boston, Massachusetts].  There was a John Biggers [John T. Biggers] art exhibit (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's a--yeah, he's a great, great artist, yeah.
Speaker 2: Great artist.  And we were there.  We, as you see around the house, we, we've collected some art.  We don't have any, we can't afford any Biggers, but we do have one of the best known artists here in Boston, Bob Freeman [Robert Freeman], in a couple of places here.  And as you know, Carol is president and CEO of The Partnership, Inc. [Boston, Massachusetts], an organization that works for the development of people of color in corporate development.
Story_ID: 666130
Speaker 1: Now we ask this question a lot.  When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Could I choose to be born rich (laughter)?  Oh, I, what I--is there something I would--let me, if I'm allowed to--change, rephrase the question a bit?
Speaker 1: Oh, sure.
Speaker 2: I would like to have been able to raise the capital for Middlesex Bank [Middlesex Bank and Trust Company; Eastern Bank] more broadly, so that the controlled, the selling of the bank would have had a different time frame.  So one of the--and I think this may hark back to your other question.  One of the things that I really hope happens is that capital and income in the African American community happens differently than in the past, that it is more broadly shared, that we really reverse the trend.  Right now we are getting less and less of the pie.  In some cases, it almost appears that we have less ownership than we had thirty years ago.  That is not a good thing.  So I clearly, on so many levels, would like to see our proportion of income and wealth move in a diff- in a, in a higher direction.  And there are so many ways that happens and all of the good reasons why.  I mean, our health depends on it.  I don't want to see grandmothers and grandfathers paying off their college debt when their children are going into college.
Story_ID: 666131
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done again today, what today do you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I'm most remembered for my career in banking.  And it's spanned five banks and without question, both among my current colleagues here [GoBiz Solutions Inc., Brighton, Massachusetts], even for people who know me or at--around universities, the banking career.  I mean, I was first in a number of positions.  I also think that I was able to establish or expand opportunities for several people of color and in a pretty substantial way.  So I think that combined with being first and being the founder of a bank [Middlesex Bank and Trust Company; Eastern Bank] that lives on would be mostly what I'd be remembered, remembered for, in addition to being a good father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's a--you've actually answered the last question, too, which is how would you like to be remembered so (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I would certainly, I certainly would like to be remembered as a good father.  I think that the children [Deanna Fulp, Rachael Fulp Cooke and Cyrus Fulp, Jr.] have--are healthy, productive people, and I'd like to think I played a part in that.
Story_ID: 666132
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So go ahead and tell us about this picture, please.
Speaker 2: This is a photo taken--I think, approximately 1937.  It's a picture of my cousin, Gladys [Gladys Whitworth], and myself sitting on my grandmother's [Fulp's maternal grandmother, Mary Davis Murray] porch.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Right.  This is a photo taken recently at my eightieth birthday celebration.  This is my family.  My son, Cyrus [Cyrus Fulp, Jr.], is on the left.  That's my daughter, Deanna [Deanna Fulp], with her hands over Audrey [ph.], who is my granddaughter.  That's your truly, yours truly.  My wife, Carol [HistoryMaker Carol Fulp], is next.  In the blue dress is Rachael [Rachael Fulp Cooke], and next to her is her husband, David Cooke [David Tom Cooke].
Speaker 1: This is a photo taken on June 2, 19--correction, June 17, 1997.  This is the ribbon cutting ceremony for Middlesex Bank and Trust Company [Eastern Bank] beginning operations in Newton, Mass [Newton, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: This is a photo in The Boston Globe that tells about my being elected to the Massachusetts black hall of fame, and the fact that I've spent a good deal of my career helping small companies grow up.
Speaker 1: I've seen, I've seen no blacker picture of a black banker (laughter).  He needs a--
Speaker 2: This is a picture that is--occurred in the magazine, Careers Today.  It focused on people with somewhat unusual careers for themselves at that point in time.  I am thirty-two as appearing here.  The dashiki came from one of my customers in the banking world at that time, Haran Bishop [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you really play the drum?  That's (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Of course not.  Well, I look good, though.  That's what counts (laughter).
Speaker 1: I (unclear).  I'd like to have a copy of that.  This is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  This is a front page.  This is the speaker's copy of the program for Founder's, the Founder's Day Convocation [at Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] this year, October 2016, where I was the keynote speaker.
Speaker 1: Here I am presenting a check to Suffolk University [Boston, Massachusetts] to help establish a program for scholarships for Boston [Massachusetts] students.
Speaker 2: This was, this photo was taken when I was promoted to vice president.  This was one of the things that occurred back in New England Merchants [New England Merchants National Bank; Bank of New England Corporation]. We have a very famous photographer in town, Bachrach, so one got a shot by Bachrach [Bachrach Studios] when you were promoted to vice president.
Speaker 1: That's a good shot.
Speaker 2: This was taken in 2000.  This is at a saf- on a safari in Kenya.
Speaker 1: This is on the same trip.  Wherever we saw a picture of a commercial bank given--that's the world I was in at that time we took--so this is the Kenya Commercial Bank [KCB Group Limited] in Nairobi, Kenya.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: This is one of my great adventures.  Here I am at an animal orphanage, and this is a warthog that is eating salt off of my shoes.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: This is a photo taken in November of 1967, where I was elected assistant treasurer by the board of directors of State Street Bank and Trust Company [State Street Corporation].  This was the first election of an African American by a board of directors to an official post in New England at that time.
Speaker 2: This is a photo taken a couple of years ago.  That would have been somewhere around 2014.  The person on the far right is Walter Carrington [HistoryMaker Walter C. Carrington], former ambassador to Nigeria.  This is taken at the home of Smoki Bacon [A. Smoki Ginepra Bacon], a local television producer.
Speaker 1: Smoki Bacon.
Speaker 2: Smoki Bacon.
Speaker 1: What does that mean?
Speaker 2: Well, you know smokey?
Speaker 1: No, I was just--
Speaker 2: What a name, huh?
Speaker 1: --asking you about the name though, Smoki Bacon, (unclear).
Speaker 2: This is from the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce.  It was at a time when I had been promoted to executive vice president at Bank of New England.
Speaker 1: This is 1997.  This was shortly after the ribbon cutting at the grand opening of Middlesex Bank and Trust Company.  My son, Cyrus, is on my far left; Rachael over my right shoulder and my daughter, Deanna.
Speaker 2: This is a still shot take, extracted from streaming on CNN.  This was taken at Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois] in November 2008.  It is at the precise moment where which Wolf Blitzer announced that Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] had been elected president of the United States.
Story_ID: 666133
Speaker 1: This is one of the warm and--shots with my wife, Carol [HistoryMaker Carol Fulp], and I on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay (unclear).
Speaker 1: This would be 1994.  Here I am presenting an award by the Small Business Admini- U.S. Small Business Administration.
Speaker 2: When [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama visited Boston [Massachusetts], we were invited to be along the ropes greeting him.  This would have been I believe in 2010.
Speaker 1: This is at my daughter, Rachael's [Rachael Fulp Cooke] wedding.  Carol and I flank Rachael.  This is Carol and I partying down.
Speaker 2: This shot dates back to 1970.  I am on the far left.  In the center with the white shirt on, is the governor, then-governor of the Commonwealth, Francis Sargent.  The occasion was a board meeting for Opportunities Industrialization Center [OIC].  And the governor was coming over to congratulate the unit for outstanding performance.
Speaker 1: This is around 2004.  This is me greeting the governor of the Commonwealth, Deval Patrick [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick].
Speaker 2: Carol and I are flanking Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton].  This would have been taken at an event here in Boston around 2009, 2010.
Speaker 1: Here I appear with the mayor of the City of Newton [Massachusetts] David Cohen [David B. Cohen] and the director of the local chamber of commerce [Newton-Needham Chamber of Commerce, Inc.].
Speaker 2: This was taken 2015.  Carol and I are talking with Tony Bennett.
Speaker 1: This is a shot, an overhead shot, taken from a camera on a pole at Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois] election night, 2008.
Speaker 2: This is attendance at a Christmas party at the White House [Washington, D.C.], 2010.
Speaker 1: This shot is mostly me, but in the lower hand, right hand, you can see my daughter, Rachael.  This is at her wedding.  We are both happy (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my daughter, Rachael, and her husband, David Cooke [David Tom Cooke], cutting the wedding cake.
Speaker 2: Rachael and I walking down the aisle at the church, at Harvard chapel [Memorial Church of Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: This is Rachael being helped with her wedding outfit by her older sister, Deanna [Deanna Fulp].
Speaker 2: Carol and me walking down the aisle at the Harvard chapel.
Speaker 1: Rachael and her brother, Cyrus [Cyrus Fulp, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Aha, the wedding dance, the waltz with father and daughter.
Speaker 1: This is me and my three brothers.  From my right, William Leon [William Fulp, Sr.], Theodore Calvin [Theodore Fulp] and standing in front of me in the picture is Jarvis Reginald [Jarvis Fulp].
Speaker 2: My brother with two sisters at it.  In the lower right is Olivia Amanda [Olivia Fulp Hairston] and sitting directly in front of me is Elma Delores [Elma Fulp Weaver].
Speaker 1: This is my father, Cyrus Orren Fulp [Cyrus Fulp].
Speaker 2: This is my maternal grandmother, Mary Murray [Mary Davis Murray].
Speaker 1: My maternal grandfather, We- Wesley Murray [Calvin Murray].
Speaker 2: This is my study group at the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].  Fred Wang [Frederick A. Wang] is at the far right.
Speaker 1: This is the paternal side of the family.  This is my father's family reunion.  This is 1926.
Speaker 2: Here's a guide for all of, all of them.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is the youngest member of the clan.  This is our granddaughter, Audrey [ph.], with pretty good form going after the soccer ball.
Speaker 1: This is Audrey at, I think, about nine months old.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my father, Cyrus Orren Fulp.  He was seventy-two years of age at that time.
Speaker 2: This is my mother, Amanda Belle Murray Fulp [Amanda Murray Williams], approximately seventy years of age at this time.
