Story_ID: 7247
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And Samuel Adams is the observer.  And I'd like to start out by having you state your name for us, entire name and spell it for us.  And give us your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I am William P. Foster.  My date of birth is August the 25th, 1919.
Speaker 1: And you have to state your name and spell it for us.  So P stands for Patrick, right?
Speaker 2: All right.  That's William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Patrick, P-A-T-R-I-C-K, Foster, F-O-S-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: And can we have today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is April the 19th--.
Speaker 1: Is it the 20th? I think it's the--.
Speaker 2: The 20th.
Speaker 1: Oh, today's date is April the 20th, 2002.
Speaker 2: And I'd like to have your, the address that we're at and your profession?
Speaker 1: The address is 1003 Tanner Drive, Tallahassee, Florida 32305.
Speaker 2: And your profession?
Speaker 1: My profession at this time is retired (laughter).  Well, really, I'm past administrator in the area of music, director of bands, the marching band, the symphonic band, also adjudicator, conductor, clinician and guest lecturer.
Story_ID: 7248
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Favorite what?
Speaker 1: Food.
Speaker 2: Food, okay.  My favorite food, I believe, would have to be prime ribs, beef, and a various second running is very delicious, highly seasoned chili.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite what?
Speaker 1: Time of year, favorite season or time of year?
Speaker 2: I guess springtime is, would be my favorite because one of the joys that I have is working in the yard, and at one time I used to do all of the yard work, planting, fertilizing, cutting, spraying, and it's one of my joys of working with flowers and shrubs.
Speaker 1: I'm surprised you had time.  And favorite, favorite color?
Speaker 2: I believe red.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a big question there because I took very few vacations, and I guess New York and the West Coast would probably be close together.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: You almost have me there.  I guess it would be--I'd like to have an opportunity to do some reading of a book, and time to relax and enjoy myself.  I don't know whether I particularly have a particular phrase that I can recall just now.
Speaker 1: Would there be anything that you typically said to your group, to your band?
Speaker 2: Mostly things that I would say to the band had to do with motivational items and the development of themselves as individuals in terms of character, hopefully that I would them to be successful in their school work, to have an opportunity to excel, to do more than just the average, but to really come across and be real achievers.
Story_ID: 7249
Speaker 1: My mother was a, a very great lady.  She had a very unusual first and surname, Venetia, and the last name was Highwarden.  Her total interests, of course, was as a homemaker. And it was always a delight to come home because she always had something pleasant to say, and she was a very good listener.
Speaker 2: So, do you know where her name originated from, both first and last?
Speaker 1: I would assume that it was French Canadian that was involved because she was born in Minneapolis, Minnesota.  And, and I think the French Canadians had a--there was some connection of a line there.
Speaker 2: And your--did she talk about growing up at all in Minnesota?
Speaker 1: From time to time she did, but as you know, in those days, life was very hard, very barren, and I don't know whether there was too much in the way of pleasantry to talk about.  So I never had an opportunity to have her to speak too much about that.
Speaker 2: She was more of a quiet person then?
Speaker 1: She certainly was.
Speaker 2: Now, your father [Frederich Foster], can you talk about him and his background?
Speaker 1: He was a railway mail clerk, and from the title of the position, and--would indicate that he was very seldom home because he was on the road with the railroad.  And I was so small, I don't recall hardly anything about my father really.
Speaker 2: And you--do you know how your parents met at all?  Did you ever know that story?
Speaker 1: No, I do not.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 7250
Speaker 1: You are the youngest, and I'd like you--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I am the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I'd like you to give your siblings names in order, starting from the oldest and coming down to you?
Speaker 2: The oldest was Vondurus (ph.) Foster.  His main trade was a carpenter.  And next was Dorothy Foster, and she was mainly an entrepreneur in working at various entertainment city--cities, with respect to being a hostess in the restroom and the lounges.  And my next person was my brother, Delphus Foster, who was a fireman.  And his job was, of course, was, I think a dangerous one because as we hear about the events today, you can understand the trials and tribulations of a fireman.
Speaker 1: And wasn't there--okay.  Was there an Anthony [Foster] and a--?
Speaker 2: Anthony would be my son.
Speaker 1: Your son, okay, oh, so this is where this, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is where this goes.  Okay.  Now, what about David Foster and Kimberly [Foster]?  Are those grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Now, those are grandchildren.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 7251
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about one other person too, and that's your, was it your step-grandfather, 'cause you were named after him, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And I want you--was he a step grandfather on your mother's [Venetia Highwarden's] side or father's [Frederich Foster's] side?
Speaker 2: On my--he was my step-grandfather, and the amazing thing about my grandfather is that I was not aware until I was in college that I realized that he was my step-grandfather and not my blood grandfather.  I owe everything to him because every evening as a little lad I would meet him with, get his lunch pail, and we would talk every evening on the porch or in the glider.  And there were just so many jewels in terms of character and things of great interest, of life, that we shared together.
Speaker 1: Can you, can you talk a little bit more about that?
Speaker 2: Well, he was very understanding, very kind-hearted.  He was, in fact, at that time, I guess he was my major person of, of interest and the person I always looked forward to at, at all hours of the day.  We were that close.  And it was, just a, just a wonderful feeling to know that you had someone that would be that close and who would be interested in you.
Speaker 1: Now, you were named--do you know why you were named after him?
Speaker 2: I would imagine that because my mother and the family, they moved in with my grandparents and therefore, I guess my grandfather exhibited a great interest in my birth that they decided that they would name me after him.  And so, and that's just about it.
Story_ID: 7252
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: What was what now?
Speaker 1: Earliest memory.  What is your earliest memory, if you look back and--?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess my earliest memory in growing up would be as a small lad.  As you know, there weren't many opportunities for interplay in terms of things for young people to do at that time.  And there isn't too much that I can recall; only that I do remember having loving care and always my interest at heart in terms of the family.
Speaker 1: Now, if you were to take yourself back to that time, sir, in Kansas City [Missouri], I mean can you even describe like what sights, sounds or smells remind you of your childhood and growing up?
Speaker 2: I really can't.  And I believe one of the reasons for that is the fact that, at that time, I think just about everybody was extremely limited financial-wise.  They had a very limited resource in terms of life and living.  And there weren't too many things of joy going on at that time.  So I think that it's probably very difficult for me to recall anything that would be enlightening.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you--so this, when you're born--well, this is even, you're not even in the [Great] Depression, but you're saying life was hard for black people in this--,
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That's right.
Speaker 1: --in this time.  And you're saying that in the family, you even felt that, and the environment, that life was sort of a struggle?
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: Your father [Frederich Foster] is away a lot--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Mh-hm.
Speaker 1: --and your mother [Venetia Highwarden] is holding everything together.
Speaker 2: Mh-hm.
Speaker 1: What--can you describe family life a little bit, just, you know, what it was like?
Speaker 2: It was very difficult for me to recall, and I think one of the reasons for that is the fact that most things that are unpleasant, we have a tendency to shove into the back recesses of our mind.  And I haven't been able to get on the couch to try to recall those things.  So therefore, it's, it's just a blank area in my, in my thinking.
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?  Were you, you know, were you a quiet--you have a quiet sort of demeanor, but were you a quiet child?  Were you an imaginative child?  Were you, you know, talk--but what kind of child were you?
Speaker 2: I think I was a quiet child, but I could more or less, entertain myself and do things that I wanted to do without involving anyone else.  And there weren't a whole lot of things that I would ask for.  It, it looks like I had knowledge that things were a little tough and real and really tight.  And therefore, I didn't request a whole lot of things.
Story_ID: 7253
Speaker 1: With your grandfather, though, was that relationship set from the beginning?  Do you remember being close to your grandfather from the very beginning, or was it as you got, you know, more conscious of--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well, I, I think I can recall, the earliest time was probably when I was maybe six or seven.  I, I very vividly recall that he, and my grandmother, they took me to Omaha, Nebraska for a reunion of the Old Timers of the Union Pacific Railroad Company.  And I can also remember him taking me to an Indian powwow in Omaha, Nebraska.  Evidently, he was part Indian, and he participated with the activities at that particular time.  But I don't have any vivid memory of actually going through dances or anything like that.  But I do remember being there.
Speaker 1: So, they often called those stomp dances, as I am told?
Speaker 2: Yes, and--but I, I don't recall any participation that I had.  It was more or less as a dormant bystander so to speak.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather, how--what kind of person would you describe him as?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would say that he was a very strong and quiet type of individual, had serenity, and very seldom would, did I ever hear him raise his voice or anything like that.  And, but he believed in doing the right thing and from time to time he was involved with the, I recall, the Masonic Lodge, and he just seemed to exemplify what, in my opinion, was a, a fine person.
Speaker 1: Did he give you any like code--you know, codes of life to go by or anything that he, you know, told you that has stayed with you throughout your life?
Speaker 2: No, I don't recall anything along that line.  I think most of the things that we talked about were probably current or current events at the time, and things that were of concern to the family.
Speaker 1: I remember that you--or what I read that he had a sense of wisdom, that you felt that your grandfather was a very wise man.
Speaker 2: I think he was because he purchased quite a bit of property and farmland.  In fact, I used to, as a little lad, I used to go with him on Saturdays to help work the farm.  And it wasn't that far from Kansas City [Missouri].  It was in Quindaro [Kansas], but it was an enjoyable thing to be with him and to share our lunch together, and then of course, to--later on when the crops would come up, to share those.
Story_ID: 7254
Speaker 1: What was Kansas City [Kansas] like in that time period that you were growing up in?
Speaker 2: I don't recall too much about Kansas City because, as you know, not many people had a car, and the only transportation was by streetcar and usually they had to walk several blocks to catch it.  It was, Kansas City was, I think was a very dormant area.  It was, certainly was, in my opinion, wasn't progressive.  And I, I just don't recall much of anything about the city itself.
Speaker 1: What about your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Neighborhood, the interesting thing about that neighborhood, a number of achievers came out of that neighborhood.  And I do recall, there was an article in 'The Kansas City Star', and they had a write-up.  And they also wondered how and why and from this particular area, there were so many achievers.  And I certainly can't give the reason for that, but there were.
Speaker 1: Do you know the names of some of them?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Let's see, one individual is over the public radio.  I can't recall, I can't recall his name right now.  I just--my memory would fail me on that.
Speaker 1: No problem.  But was it an all-black neighborhood or was it a mixed neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No, all-black.
Story_ID: 7255
Speaker 1: You say that you discovered music at twelve and I'm wondering what led to that, that, you know discovery.  I know that you were wanting to play the saxophone, and I'd like you just to tell that story.
Speaker 2: Well, that was very interesting because I, sometimes I wonder how in the world I, I came across my interest in music because we had no members of our family who had any musical inclination.  And at that time, of course, the only music that we could listen to was on the radio.  And there were very few live performances that we went to.  And, but I don't know what intrigued me in regards to wanting to purchase an instrument and to learn to play a saxophone.  And, of course, as you know, that was changed shortly after I went to the Kansas City Conservatory [of Music, Kansas City, Missouri], which was then the Horner Institute of Music [sic, of Fine Arts, now the University of Missouri-Kansas City Conservatory of Music], and they indicated that the instrument that I had was obsolete, that they suggested I would buy clarinet, which I did.  And then I went back to the Italian instructor and studied clarinet.  So I, seemingly I wanted to learn whatever it was in the correct manner, I don't know why.
Speaker 1: So you don't know the clari--I mean the saxophone at the beginning?  You have no--?
Speaker 2: I would imagine one thing was the price because it was very cheap.  It didn't, it didn't cost much.
Speaker 1: But you didn't have like a favorite saxophone player or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no, I, I really didn't.
Speaker 1: Now, at that time, were you--'cause you went to elementary school at Stowe [Elementary School, Kansas City, Kansas] right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So now, elementary school, was there any, any teacher there that influenced you or any music exposure that you had?
Speaker 2: No, there wasn't, and even before that, at Kealing Elementary School [Kansas City, Kansas], which would run through first and second grade, I believe, maybe one, two, three, but at Stowe School, I don't recall any activities outside of the academic arena. And the only one that I can recall is on the basketball team.  I was on the fifth and sixth grade basketball team.  But other activities were very sparse.
Speaker 1: And, but how did you--you took odd jobs though to buy your saxophone, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.  Yes, I, I took a lot of jobs doing yards and washing and polishing cars.  And those were the two main assets that I had in my early years.
Speaker 1: Tell the story about the saxophone 'cause you bought this saxophone, I don't remember how much you paid for it, but--?
Speaker 2: It must have been a very small amount of money because I didn't have much money (laughter).  And that may have been the reason why I purchased it because it was cheap, but I didn't know what I was doing.  And so, but and then the other thing is this, that I don't know why, what possessed me to go to an institution for, good instruction.  You know, and I guess to try to learn to blow it myself, but I, I wasn't interested in that.  I, I wanted to get good instruction so I could learn the proper way of blowing the instrument.  And that always intrigued me, even today, I don't know why.
Speaker 1: And, so you--but you found out that the saxophone you bought wasn't any good, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  It was obsolete and no use to anyone.
Speaker 1: But I'm surprised, I didn't know that, you know, instrument could become obsolete?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was C Melody saxophone, and no one played it, and no used them.  There were--no music was written for them.
Speaker 1: And when you went to Horner, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You don't know how you found out about Horner [Horner Institute of Fine Arts, Kansas City, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I, I really don't.  But I guess I had an inquisitive mind, and just because I didn't know something, it didn't mean that I would not find out how to do something.  I would get the information, and, but I found my way over to the Horner Institute of Music to get instruction.
Speaker 1: And what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: Well, the first was, it didn't last long because the person said they couldn't teach me on the C Melody saxophone, that I would need to--and suggested that I buy a clarinet when I would come back and study with him, which I did.  It was an Italian instructor.  And that led to my development on the clarinet and in, in my overall performance.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't like you knew what a saxophone sounded like and so you have a preference.  So clarinet was just as fine for you?
Speaker 2: That's right, and because of the price.
Story_ID: 7256
Speaker 1: So, you're studying at Horner [Institute of Fine Arts, Kansas City, Missouri, now University of Missouri Kansas City Conservatory of Music], and you're, you know, you're studying the clarinet.  And I don't, how much did you buy the clarinet for, do you know?
Speaker 2: Now, the clarinet, I believe I paid a pretty good price for it.  In fact, I believe my sister helped buy, purchase that clarinet for me.
Speaker 1: And this teacher, he, he was nurturing and encouraging, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what--how did, I mean you obviously liked playing the clarinet?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And what did this, what did this open up for you, playing the instrument?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it--the clarinet became my major performing medium.  And it opened up the whole, the musicality of my life because it was from, when I, proficiency on the clarinet that I went on to [Charles] Sumner High School [Kansas City, Kansas] and became the leader of the clarinet section and the student director of band and the orchestra.  And so, it led to many good things.
Speaker 1: And you didn't have any trouble learning how to play, you know, the wind instrument.  A lot of times, say that it's tricky with the--?
Speaker 2: No, well, I think the, the saving grace there was the fact that I had very excellent instruction from the Horner Institute of Music [sic, Horner Institute of Fine Arts].  I don't remember the instructor name.  He was an Italian, and, but evidently, I had very good instruction.
Speaker 1: And you--also at this time are involved in sports quite actively, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, not to, too great a degree.  I ran track in junior high school, the 440 [yard dash], and--but I didn't pursue that very much because I was more interested in music.
Speaker 1: And you also--weren't you a good student too, at the--weren't you a good student?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And who was--was that of your own doing or was that a lot with your family's encouragement?
Speaker 2: I think that was on my own.  And my, at my mother's house and grandmother's house, I don't think they took any interest in my academic pursuit.  What I did was really on my own.
Speaker 1: And what did you like about school and learning?  What sort of motivated you?
Speaker 2: I don't know except that it was, it was something that I wanted to do.  And I guess it was an attitudinal thing.  I was a leader in, in school and I, I guess it was one of those things that I just took it upon myself and went on to do.  I don't know why (laughs).
Speaker 1: Did you gravitate to certain subjects over others?
Speaker 2: Science, yes, mathematics, physics, geometry, and the sciences.  I, I enjoyed those more.
Speaker 1: You know, it's said that there's a lot of similarity between music and the sciences?
Speaker 2: And there--there really is.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there, there really is.  And it, it paid off.  There's no question about it, cause I know even in geometry, I use some of those same principles when I begin to develop and work on formations and things like that.
Story_ID: 7257
Speaker 1: Are there other teachers that were influencing you?  You know, whether it was at, you know, Northeast--?
Speaker 2: My major influence in at [Charles] Sumner High School [Kansas City, Kansas] was the band director, Gaston O. Saunders.  And by the way, several years ago when I was honored at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan], at the end of the ceremony, someone came up to me and said, "I'm Martha Saunders so and so, I'm the daughter of Gaston O. Saunders."  And that was my band director's daughter.  And she came and she brought some mementos of pictures and it was a very, it was very touching.  But I owe my career to, but really my career to him because he's the one that encouraged me to go into music.  And also, he gave me an opportunity of leadership of, of being student director of the band and the orchestra.
Speaker 1: So that was where you first learned some of your conducting, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did he teach you?  Was he a good conductor himself?
Speaker 2: Yes, I thought he was a good conductor.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did he teach you about conducting 'cause some people think it's just getting up there--.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't recall him teaching me anything about conducting.  I, I--he must have done something though.  It must have been the beat pattern or something.  But I don't recall.  And, and I do remember also that he recommended me to be the director of the summer band program that went on for about two weeks because he--it was something that he was not able to fulfill.  And so  I served as a band director for these--my fellow students for two weeks.  And, you know, I never had a discipline problem, never.  And it really was remarkable (laughs).
Speaker 1: You know, what's amazing is that, that's pretty heady, sort of, to be up there in front--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That's right.
Speaker 1: --and allowing people to make music.  And you're like, I think--how were you?  You were seventeen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about seventeen, about, yeah, seventeen.
Speaker 1: And what--did you find--did you feel--I mean I'm just trying to get a sense because music has great feel to it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering whether, at that time that you were the, you know, leading the band, were you also--were you doing any playing or you were just really conducting during that time?
Speaker 2: No, I, I was conducting part of the time.  But most of the time, I was, I was playing.
Speaker 1: You were?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And you said that you were the head--were you the head chair with the clarinet?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was first clarinetist.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Okay. And tell me what is, you know, cause people, I mean those who have a love for music, you know, and sitting and being part of band, but was there a certain way that you would feel or, you know, when you were playing your instrument that you would, you know, sort of be taken away by the music or?
Speaker 2: Not that I can recall.  I guess I had a pretty good sense of balance.  I don't think I let anything go to my head (laughter).  But I'm just talking about the feel, the way the music would make you feel?
Speaker 1: Well, I enjoyed it.  I'll put it that way.  I don't know whether I got any special feeling from it or not (laughter).
Story_ID: 7258
Speaker 1: At the same time that you were in the band, weren't you part of the drama club and the honor society and all that?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And you were really a big guy in school?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes, that's correct.  And my services were in great demand (laughs).  And I enjoyed it all.
Speaker 1: Was your family aware, or were they sort of taking this in or were you experiencing--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No, they were, they were just taking it in stride, nothing extra or anything.  And, no special interest in it.
Story_ID: 7259
Speaker 1: Were you dreaming?  Did you have any thoughts or ambitions about what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I don't think so.  I, I can't recall anything.  I may have, but I, I don't recall that.
Speaker 1: Now, when you graduated, and when it was time for, you know, to--time for graduation, were you thinking what you wanted to do after that?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, go, go to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] to major in music.
Speaker 1: Now, what was--the University of Kansas, did it have a good department?
Speaker 2: Well, it had this, it just had a good reputation because so many good people had been there.  One person that you, I believe you interviewed, there was a graduate there, Etta Moten [Barnett], yes.  And I, I didn't know her at the, at the time, but it, it just had an outstanding reputation as an outstanding school.
Speaker 1: Now, sir, what is curious to me, both in the case of Etta Moten and the case of you, though, you know, she preceded you, what--? 'Cause this was, this was basically a white institution.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right, and so what was the admissions policy?  Was it, I mean did they allow a few people in?  Do you have any idea, like when you went there, how many other black students were there?
Speaker 2: I believe the total number was, there may have been sixty or seventy other black students there, not that many.
Speaker 1: And were you welcome on campus or not?
Speaker 2: I don't think they cared one way or the other.  I really don't.
Speaker 1: What do you think, were they admitting you because it was a public institution?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was because it was a public institution.
Speaker 1: So they wouldn't prohibit people from coming?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Now, when you--so you get at the, you know, University of Kansas, and you really--you tell the story about being--auditioning, and I'd like to have you talk about how you and your friend were trying--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Elihu Moore (ph.) was my very good friend from Kansas City [Kansas].  We, we went and prepared everything together.  I remember the night before we stayed up half the night and the early morning working on our instruments to get ready to take audition.  And we both knew that we had done very well, played better than just about all of the others.  And, but later on, we found we were turned down because we were black.
Speaker 1: And that was disappointing to your, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: That was probably disappointing because you had had, you had come off of [Charles] Sumner [High School, Kansas City, Kansas]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: having such a great, you know--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That's right.
Speaker 1: --great promise and all that?  So, when, when that happened, no one said anything to you.  What did they--I'm just--if you could just tell the story.
Speaker 2: No, one of the things back then was that segregation was the law of the land.  And there weren't too many challenges at that time.  That was unheard of.  And so we just went about our business.
Speaker 1: And what did that make you determined to do or, you know, because here you can't really participate in the band?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And what is--I mean that's what you had gone to school for.  So what did you end up doing, and what did you get out of the University of Kansas?
Speaker 2: Well, participated on everything else.  And--but I think the crowning words were from the dean [Dean of Fine Arts, Donald Swarthout], when I strolled into his office one day, and why I went into his office, I'll never know.  And in the course of the conversation, he indicated what I planned to do.  I told him I wanted to be a conductor.  He said, "Well, you know, there's no opportunities for colored conductor, and maybe you'd better rethink that."  And it was then and there and shortly after that I was determined that I was going to develop a black band as fine or finer than any white band in the country.  And you see, that was a seed that was, that was planted that all of my efforts began to jell in that direction there.  And that was the motivator, that was the motivator.  And even though it didn't come up at the time that I was doing these certain things, but that, that was it.
Speaker 1: Now, you--when I think of that--you know, a band, you almost think of basketball--I mean baseball, sorry, baseball, apple pie, it's viewed as very American in some respects.  And so, but what, I guess--I won't go there.  What I want to know is what was your education like at the University of Kansas, and what did you get out of that experience?
Speaker 2: Oh, everything was, I would, I would say it was kosher or the same because I, I pursued my studies hard.  You know, I had, I had great determination.
Speaker 1: And what are the--what are the courses that you took, some of the types of courses you took then?
Speaker 2: Well, in music, there was music theory.  There was history of music, there was different clinic groups, the band, choir.  There were courses in conducting, courses in theory, courses in music education, literature.  And then, of course, the standard academic courses that would be involved with humanities, English and history and social studies and things like that, you know.  So that particularly, it didn't bother me at all, but I knew that I would have to work hard to get whatever grade that I got.
Speaker 1: And what do you think, in terms of foundation building, what foundation did you get at University of Kansas? (Pause in interview) But what foundation do you think got laid there because you had some decent teachers.  I think one's name was Russell Wiley--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the band director.  He was there.  He was a decent guy, but he, nothing he could do about the system, you know, and it was, it was just a black and white affair, that's all.
Speaker 1: And did that dean, the dean--was his name Swarthout?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Swarthout.
Speaker 1: Swarthout.
Speaker 2: Have you heard of Gladys Swarthout? That was his daughter.  She was an opera singer.
Speaker 1: Did he ever see your success at all?
Speaker 2: I doubt it.  I doubt it.
Speaker 1: Now, it's--you graduate.  Did you do well, though, academically?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Story_ID: 7260
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts then about how you're gonna proceed with the rest of your career, you know, your life and career?
Speaker 2: Well, for my first job at the Lincoln High School in Springfield, Missouri, it was, you know, it was go, go, go.
Speaker 1: How did that position come up?
Speaker 2: I really don't know how that--I, I really don't know.  The only thing that I know is that I received an offer, and I accepted it.  But even in those days, there weren't too many jobs available-- there were not too many jobs available.
Speaker 1: This is like the mid-'30s [1930s], right?  Or with--?
Speaker 2: Well, this was, this was--.
Speaker 1: In the early '40's [1940s]?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Forty, yeah, let's see, '41 [1941]--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Yeah, '41 [1941] to '44 [1944].
Speaker 2: '41 [1941] to '43 [1943].
Speaker 1: Okay, and so what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was, that was an unusual experience because they hadn't had much of anything like that before.  And my major organization was the a cappella choir, you know, in voice singing.  And I had to start the band from scratch.  They had, the kids had never seen an instrument before.  And most of the instruments that I was able to get were used instruments for them.  And, but the first year, the second year we gave a big concert, and there was a, it was like something unbelievable (laughs).  And, but I knew I had to move on because there wasn't that much future there.
Story_ID: 7261
Speaker 1: And then that [teaching job at Lincoln High School, Springfield, Missouri] led to a job at Fort Valley State College [now Fort Valley State University] at Fort Valley, Georgia, and that's where  [Julian] Bond's father was president, [Dr.] Horace Mann Bond.  And you see at that time, jobs were so scarce, you, you didn't have an opportunity to make any kind of selection.  So I only remained there a year, and then next year, I was at Tuskegee Institute [now Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  That was a lot better because they had, they had a lot of history of good programs there.  And, and that led after two years to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], with the promise of the president there to give me the things that I thought I needed to develop a program.  But we had absolutely nothing here at that time.
Speaker 2: So when you--what are your--you had said that you felt, one, that you wanted to do music, and you wanted to teach music?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: And you wanted to have a black band, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: And so those other environments, whether it was Fort Valley or Tuskegee, they didn't provide the environment?
Speaker 1: No, and--or the money.  One of the great weaknesses of black institutions at that time is that they didn't have money to support activities like.  This is one of the things that Dr. [William H.] Gray [Jr.], at Florida A&M College [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College, later Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University]  promised, and he delivered (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, was he--how did he know about you?
Speaker 1: The Florida A&M College football team played Tuskegee in Tuskegee, and he saw the band, the Tuskegee band there.  And he had with him Reverend M. G. Miles and we went to an Alpha meeting, Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity after the game.  And then after that between 11:30 and 12 midnight, a knock came on the door.  And it was Dr. Gray and Reverend Miles, and they indicated that they wanted to develop a band at Florida A&M College that would be a sort of a milestone and the creator of a--something for the college to put it on the map, you know.  And after conversations and letters back and forth, we found that this was the place.
Speaker 2: And did you--'cause you had already been at two other institutions, where you had been recruited, right?
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Um-hum.
Speaker 2: So were you--obviously, this, the third try was the right one?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But were you a little leery, you know, about promises made, and then when you would get there, things would change?
Speaker 1: No, I wasn't--I had, I guess I had faith and confidence.  And those things I, I think I had in the forefront at all times, and one of the things of, beginning my, my beginning days at Florida A&M College is I never accepted "no" for answer.  It was that type of a strength that I had (laughs).
Speaker 2: And what made this situation a good situation here, you know, beside, you know, the president, Dr. Gray, what else made it a good situation?
Speaker 1: Well, I think that was the principal thing because it made, the revenue made it possible for revenue to be available and things to come about in terms of program, in terms of the scholarship program and anything that would, would come about to make it possible for you to develop a program.
Speaker 2: And what were those, what did you see as critical things?  And just talk about it.  If you could just talk about--.
Speaker 1: Well, I would say this, that in my final summation with Dr. Gray, the thing that I was interested in, more than anything else, was the program.  And I was interested in monies for, for operation, monies for capital outlay, monies for faculty and staff, monies for facilities, monies for--well, I guess just about everything to make, whatever was needed to, to make a program go.  And these things were promised and delivered.
Speaker 2: So did it take some time to deliver them, and how--?
Speaker 1: Gradually, gradually, not everything at one time.  And--but it was enough to give you good encouragement.
Speaker 2: Now, you--so you arrive here.  You even were talking earlier about how Tallahassee was a much different place?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: And I'm just--'cause you had come here from Tuskegee--Tuskegee is in a rural environment too, though, too.
Speaker 1: There was just nothing much of anything here in Tallahassee.  And let, and let alone at the college--but it had, it seemed to have had that potential that most other institutions in the country did not have.
Speaker 2: And what was that?  Talk about that?
Speaker 1: The willingness to, to seek funds for the things that I've, that I've mentioned, and with, with that in mind, you know, we just piecemeal, by piecemeal, it began to develop.  But there was growth going on.  That's the big thing.
Story_ID: 7262
Speaker 1: Here you're at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], sir, and I'm just wondering if you can tell, lead us through what steps you took to put things in place?
Speaker 2: What was that?
Speaker 1: What steps did you take to put things in place, cause here you come, you're recruited here--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, you get on campus.  You have Dr. [William H.] Gray [Jr.], supporting you, but he--all you know is that he's impressed with you.  And he's also made a commitment to you.  But what did you, how did you get even things started?
Speaker 2: Well, the biggest thing is a plan.  You got to have a plan for a program, and no one will do anything without knowing what you want to do, you know.  And I had that.  So, and it was a step rise procedure.  It's not all at one time, but by degree.  And, and the main thing is that, if you have a developing program and it's making progress, that's about as much as you can expect.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--what did your plan--the plan that you laid out, what did it say?
Speaker 2: The plan what?
Speaker 1: The plan that you came up with--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.
Speaker 1: --what did it say?
Speaker 2: It, it involved everything with respect to what I mentioned earlier.  Number one is where you set up a, a degree program for instrumental music majors.  And then with that, you have to have the curriculum, and with that, you have to have the faculty and staff.  And then you got to have operating expenses for the, for that type of program.  And then part of the plan has to be that, with, what is your goal in mind in terms of the, the instruments that you--are needed, budget-wise.  And that is a step-by-step procedure because the instruments are very expensive.  And then also with the activities that are planned, and, now, this will include some trips because the people don't want to rehearse just to be rehearsing (laughter).  They want to be, they want to be going somewhere (laughter).  So all of this was inculcated as a part of that.  And then the facilities for, for the band rehearsing, the practice rooms, rehearsal rooms, sectional rooms.  It's just a whole host of things, you know, that, that have to be, that has to fit in with the syndrome.  But it's a--I would say it's almost like a system, and when all these things are fitted in there, you just move right on and continue to progress.
Speaker 1: So the system that you put in place, how long did it take you to put that system in place?
Speaker 2: I would say about, about three years, three to four years, three to four years because part of that system develops as you develop.  And some of the things that, that, that will take place, say four years from now, that first year, you, you had no idea that that happened.  And, but it's--you can see the development coming along though.  You can see it coming along.  And also the students can see it.
Speaker 1: And, so what--I just want to know, you know, you opted to create a major there, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And did you have any other programs to judge on or base this, you know, this program--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Well, we brought along the choral program and also the other applied music programs like the piano and voice and things like that, you know, in addition to the instruments, and organ and things like that.  So it's, I would say it's comprehensive, comprehensive.
Speaker 1: And what is the--at this point in time, Dr. Gray is supporting you all the way?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So there was no, like, I didn't know it was gonna cost this much or I didn't know that this was going to--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, there was never any hedging, never any hedging.  Evidently, he had complete confidence in myself and my ability.  And unfortunately, that ended in 1949 because some other things happened to him that he had to give up the presidency.  And, but so many, so much of our program was in order that it would keep on rolling (laughter).  Nothing could stop it (laughter).
Story_ID: 7263
Speaker 1: What did you, besides putting, you know, your plan in place and getting your, you know, getting the degree program going, were you actively recruiting certain students and, and then how were you also going about building your staff?
Speaker 2: Well, the staff, we thought in terms of, of course, the most qualified as possible that we could get.  And students from bands that I knew the band director, so that I knew the qualify of the individuals, it would be valid.  So things, things worked in order.  Things worked in order.
Speaker 1: And your first assistant, his name was [L.] Allen Pyke , right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, yes.
Speaker 1: And he, what did he, how did he help you in that process?  How long did he stay on?
Speaker 2: He was here for, let's see, two, not quite three years.  He got in some, some kind of entanglement with the president, and he was fired.  Now, I was quite surprised, but he was a great help because he was a graduate of the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And he was able to bring certain techniques, you know, that we were able to utilize.  And then he got a job at Bethune-Cookman College [Daytona Beach, Florida] after that.  So he moved right along.
Speaker 1: And who took his place then?  Do you remember.
Speaker 2: Yes, William Penn.  He played French horn.  He didn't have the leadership ability or some of the other assets but anyway, he was here only about two or three years.  He didn't quite work out.
Speaker 1: When do you think it was that the band started to take shape and there be a create--you know, a creative aspect to that because--I'm just wondering how that happened because you were really building more of a traditional band, right, at that point?
Speaker 2: No, it was a, it was an experimental band.
Speaker 1: I know, but did you always start out to be an experimental band?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: You did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because we were, we were doing things that others were not doing.
Speaker 1: And what made you even try to do that?
Speaker 2: For improvement, you know, of the, of the technique of band pageantry, the technique band pageantry.  And, of course, as a result of that, there was a lot of interest in the students to come here because it was different.  It was different.  And we--they responded to it.  And then on top of that, the audiences in the stadium responded to it.  So that, that just set it off.
Speaker 1: But what I want to know, Dr. Foster, is how, you know, things do, you know, there things that just come, come to someone or sometimes, you know, it may be a combination of experiment and accident.  Or it may be that you, you know, as a visionary had this idea that may have needed some shape.  And I'm just wondering if you can describe what brought these things together.  What were some of the sort of critical building blocks, you know, in those very years?  You know, because it's one thing to say you want to do something different.
Speaker 2: To be, very frankly, I think it's trial and error because you never know what the reaction of the, of the audience is gonna be.  Some things work, some things don't work.  Now, those things that don't work, you don't do that again (laughter).  Things that do work, you continue, and move, move ahead.
Speaker 1: Now, did you start out with more traditional things, you know--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: You know, you had the formations--[simultaneous]--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah, without a question or doubt.  And the experimental things came about as a result of, of trying to add interest to what we were doing because nobody wants to see every Saturday the same thing out there on that field.  You know, it's, becomes deadening.  So it is, well, it's a great challenge.  In fact, that's the most difficult thing that a band director has to do is the creativity.  And, of course, we don't have too much creativity in bands now, you know.  They're just, they've just about given up on it (laughter).  That's why they stopped being on--televising bands on, at the football games.  You know, they don't have bands on.  They don't show them (laughter).  That's, that's the reason why.  That's the reason why.
Speaker 1: So, now, here--okay, in those--I want to still stay in those early years, you had Allen Pyke who was good.  He put some important things in place.  What were his contributions?  What were the things that he felt he really sort of contributed because of his background?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would say that, just his abilities at, of marching technique, drilling, cause you have to have a drill master, you know, I mean to drill with them.  And he was young enough to do that at that time (laughter).  And then also in formation school, but then, if things don't work out, you have to change.  And individuals you don't have a mindset and the, and the ability to change with times, they get lost in the shuffle, and they can't work out.  So you just to be evenhanded.  You have to be evenhanded.
Speaker 1: So with the band, at this point, in the early years, how many members is it, about?
Speaker 2: Well, it left--my first band was forty-five members.  And, you know, interestingly, enough shortly after we got started, my goal was to have a hundred band members, and I believe in about 1949 or 1950, we had a, we had a hundred band members.  But we had forty-five, then let's see, I don't remember what the next size was, something like seventy-two and then eighty--eight and so forth and so on, but it was a gradual increase in size, not a sudden  leap.
Speaker 1: And did you, do you find that it takes some time for, you know, the band members to understand formation and how that works and what's required?  Or, it easy enough; that's not really important as long as they go through the drills?
Speaker 2: No, they have to understand what they're doing, yeah, and be able to read the charts as to what their, what their designated movement is.  And so it takes, they've got to have some brains (laughter).  They've got to have--and the smarter they are, the better your band is gonna be, I can tell you that (laughter).
Speaker 1: So in recruiting, because you have at this point, you know, the school hasn't developed a reputation at this point.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So how did you go about recruiting the right students and making sure--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Recommendation of the band director, the recommendation of the band director, cause you, you're not able to, to evaluate that student yourself.  But you're, but you do know the band directors.  And there're certain band directors, if they send you a student, you know you've got a good student.
Speaker 1: And the band director was--who was the band director at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean in the high schools?
Speaker 1: No, no, I meant, I--oh, you're talking about at the high school--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: High schools.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you would recruit from them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and were you recruiting all throughout the South?
Speaker 2: Only certain, but to certain, certain schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were the schools that were turning out the good--?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say in Florida, it would be Booker T. Washington High School [Miami, Florida], Carver High School--not too much, but some, Jones High School in Orlando [Florida], Roosevelt High School in West Palm Beach [Florida].  One of the major ones would be Stanton High School in Jacksonville [Florida].  And then we had a large number of recruits to come down from Norfolk, Virginia, and Mr. Clark was the band director there.  And then we had a number of students form New Orleans, in Louisiana--what other places?  Then at one time we had students come in from St. Louis, Missouri.  That's because of the band directors.
Story_ID: 7264
Speaker 1: Tell me when the first magical moment happened with the band?  Was there a moment?
Speaker 2: Well, let me see?  You know, this whole process with the band and its, and its performance is a, it's a gradual thing, probably be very difficult for me to pinpoint that.  I can tell you this though that the beginnings of our performances on national television had a great impact, a great impact on everything.  And our first television performance, I think was 1964.
Speaker 1: No, 1964 was the second.
Speaker 2: Cause, 1963 then.  They had probably the greatest impact, those early television performances.
Speaker 1: But, sir, in a way, you already prepared by the time the T.V. cameras came?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Laughter), okay, I'm just trying to get to the brilliance before that, you know, but if you weren't already prepared, it wouldn't have mattered--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: They could have come out of their way, and people would say, okay, well, that's nice, and they'd just go on their merry old way.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But I, you know, cause, what I had read was this whole thing, and I, I had read that it came out of an experiment, and that was with the double and triple marching step?  I mean that's one of--was that one of your first--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, and again, this is such a gradual development.  You see, most of those things came at the end of rehearsals too, especially, when they had done well.  They had a good rehearsal, you find that they, the cadence and everything went faster.  And, another thing is at big games where they had a large attendance, the crowd applause and all that energized that band.  It certainly did, prelude and halftime.
Speaker 1: So, you--did you encourage things though, I mean, you know, of the band members, cause you said it was at the end a lot of times, you know, when--(Interruption: scratching sound ). (Unclear.)
Speaker 2: No, I, I think, I think the occasion on most things were the biggest things that promoted that.  It's only so much that you can do in talking and, you know, motivating and inspiring, but it's actual performance that does the job.  There's no doubt about it.
Story_ID: 7265
Speaker 1: No, no guesswork and no per chance.  And no per chance.  So the things that they do on the field is something they have rehearsed time and time again.  It's not by accident.  As I said before the, one of the greatest inspirational things is that audience, applause from that audience.  And that's the thing that sends chills down their spine (laughter).
Speaker 2: So the audience, the band would react to the audience?
Speaker 1: Oh, definitely, definitely, no doubt about it.
Speaker 2: So, can you talk about some of the innovations, the things that the band really became known for?
Speaker 1: Well, there're so many, but their, their multiplicity and they're based upon, on the basic concepts that we have with the marching step.  All the movements are designated to be precise, whether it be the instrument swing to correlate with the knee lift, whether it be forty degrees, forty-five, sixty or seventy-five and ninety degrees.  But all that's correlated that you get a compact precision pattern.
Speaker 2: And then, but that's--so with that contact precision pattern, what other things were you, you know, was the band known for, and what, you know, and what aspect of things because all this is happening at halftime?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: You know, during halftime, and you have these large crowds coming, but you've rehearsed, but I'm just trying--I want you to talk about the things that you were able to develop, you know, the--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: All right, now, I think one of the biggest, I guess, show pieces would be the dance routine.  And the dance routines are based upon the facsimile of the steps.  We, we do not do the exact thing that they do in the dance thing, but a facsimile.  It's like a cartoon drawing.  And many of the formations that they put on the field are really a cartoon drawing, not an actual drawing itself.  And it's by this particular technique that we're able to get the band members to respond, there isn't too much that I could say in regards to a dance routine except that the movements are based on the basic movements that we have with drill techniques.  And they are exaggerated because the, it takes large movements of the dance routine to show up.  Small movements, they're inconsequential, just a waste of time.  So you want to get large movements or sweeping movements that would be the ones that would be effective.  And the other thing that we haven't mentioned here that is, is a key thing and that is the, the selection of the music.  Selection of the music is so very important in terms of, of the audience and establishing empathy.  And a very close section--second, section of that is the arrangement of the music.  Arrangement of the music is extremely important so that the listener, his or her ear, they like to hear what they hear.  And that is not by chance or coincidence, and then there are certain techniques that you have to use in terms of arranging that would bring this about.  So the other thing, it has to do with all of those things, it has to do with variety.  And, for example, with a dance routine, we never use just one tune, we always use three, sometimes four tunes, because that way, you're able to catch the ear of somebody who's, will think well of another tune, so to speak.  But those things are very, very, very cautious.  The other thing that would be, and most bands have lost all concept of, and that is thematic development.  We always had a theme for the show.  And that way, the--everything is tied in together from the very beginning, with the music, the, the movement, the formation, the selection of the dance routine, everything is tied in together.  And it's through the correlation of the tunes themselves that make everything a hit.  In other words, it's like a television show, and not many people realize that, however.  And it's gotten so that the band directors, they don't know either (laughter), but it, but it's true.
Story_ID: 7266
Speaker 1: Let me ask you a little bit about your selection of music.  How did you about selecting your music, and?
Speaker 2: Now, the selection of the music is always based upon the familiarity of the tunes.  In other words, you think about the top ten tunes, the music that's high on the charts of the, of the television shows, on the movies or the radio, whatever, whatever means there is of evaluating a tune, if they're somewhere in the upper partial of that , of identity.  And that way, the listener can establish empathy of what tunes are being played.  Now, if they select tunes that are not in that spirit, this whole show is lost.  Nothing is, nothing is of interest.  And so it's very important that there be familiarity of the, of the music itself and the tunes, and that they have enough variety in enough selection of tunes that there'll be some selectivity on our part of the audience will feel, that they'll have interest in.
Speaker 1: Now, you--but this is in stark contrast, though, to the white marching band because they really did more standards.  They would not necessarily always do popular tunes, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's--they, their shows are, that's, that's why nobody looks at them (laughter).  And, but they don't understand it.  They don't understand what it's all about.  And it's very simple also, 'cause if you think in terms of a, of a television show, if you notice, they have a thematic beginning, and they have a development, it's just like a story, you know, climax, ending and so forth and so on.
Story_ID: 7267
Speaker 1: So can you tell me about J.L.--J.R.--?
Speaker 2: J.R.E. Lee, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did he come up with the idea and what did that?
Speaker 2: I really don't know except that he and Jake Gaither who was the great football coach [of Florida A&M, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] at that time, he just had an idea of this promotion, you know, that this would be a great thing for the, for the college at that time, you know, to have something like this.  And they, they went really worked at it.  At one they, they had national advertising agencies to promote that game.  And when they dropped the advertising agencies and some other things, the attendance went right on down.  The, the--you can't do that by--that's, that's a job for a specialist (laughter).
Speaker 1: But now, did they consult with you when they were coming up with the idea or you just got presented that we're gonna do this classic, and, you know, you'll be the halftime entertainment like in--?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, they, they operated (unclear) on their own, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were just part fill in for that, but it was only the Orange Blossom Classic that made it possible for the marching band to, to get all of this publicity.  We owe all of that to the Orange Blossom Classic, no doubt about it.
Speaker 1: And so you--so what--how long--what were the heydays of the Orange Blossom Classic, from what year?
Speaker 2: Those first years.
Speaker 1: First years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, those were the early, early years.  I can't recall the year right now, but on through the, probably the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: And why were the audiences mixed?  Do you know that--I mean you were saying you didn't--.
Speaker 2: Those were the days of segregation.  That's when we had our biggest crowds.
Speaker 1: And do you think people were just fascinated by the whole--?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but the band played a big role in bringing those people in the stadium.  Our, our development, the development of that band played a major role in, in the Orange Blossom Classic.
Story_ID: 7268
Speaker 1: At the same time that you had the marching band, you had started symphonic band [at Florida A&M, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's not known as much?
Speaker 2: No, well, it's, you know, a sit-down concert, you have an audience of, you know, six hundred to a thousand, maybe fifteen hundred people versus millions on television, you know.
Speaker 1: How did the TV coverage first happen?  How did that happen?  Do you remember how it came about?
Speaker 2: Let me see, that was a play-off bowl in Miami [Florida].  I think it was a [1963] play-off bowl in Miami, Florida that, that--where our first television show, but television really enabled the band to receive the PR that really set it off.
Speaker 1: So what happened after that first TV, the first one and then the second one?
Speaker 2: Well, we were on just about every year, in different events, you know, that, that happened.
Speaker 1: So how did that affect your department, how--what things?  Was money coming in by the bucketfuls?
Speaker 2: No, not, for those television shows, we weren't paid extra for that.  We got only our, all of our expenses.  But our enrollment increases in the band and the university.  Enrollment increases, yeah.
Story_ID: 7269
Speaker 1: And was it around that time in the '60s [1960s], cause in the '60s [1960s] there was a lot of fighting going on, you know, in the country with the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But at the same time, here is this band that's gaining, you know, and there's a sense of pride, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because that, that's in the, sixty, yeah, '66 [1966], '67 [1967], '68 [1968], yeah, that was a, that was a rough time during then.
Speaker 1: But it didn't affect your performances and things like that, did it?
Speaker 2: No, not per se, but I think the Orange Blossom Classic began to go downhill after that 'cause we, we didn't have that white audience.
Speaker 1: But at the same time, the band represented a tremendous sense of pride in the black community?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, certainly so, yeah.
Story_ID: 7270
Speaker 1: Will you talk about you being invited, your first trip to the Bahamas when you were invited by the Kiwanis [International].  Can you talk about that in more depth?
Speaker 2: Oh, there isn't very much to talk about except that we were invited, and we went there (laughter).  It was a day, one-day event because we were there during, got there in the morning, and the parade and then the, and performance, and then we left that evening.
Speaker 1: What about the commercials that were done?
Speaker 2: Our first commercial was, well, it was, it was Coca-Cola [1975], I believe, and then Welch grape soda [1980].  Those were the early commercials.  And we, we hadn't done many, any since that time.
Speaker 1: Well, how did those even come about?
Speaker 2: Ah, we just contacted.  They wanted us to do a commercial for them.  And let me see, we were paid, but it wasn't a large sum of money.
Speaker 1: And did you find that a new experience, really shooting for that commercial?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, that was a different experience.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about that a little bit.
Speaker 2: Ah, well, one of the first ones was that they made a clip of the [Florida A&M, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] band getting off the bus in downtown Miami, Florida, getting reading for the parade, and they filmed that as a part of that.  Then another occasion for the Welch grape soda, they did that on the, on the stadium field, and there wasn't really a lot of activity there except that they got me a couple of times drinking soda (laughter).  They were, to me, very simplistic.
Speaker 1: Did you get with that, though, that also raised your awareness, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  Yes, because they, you know, went all over the country.
Speaker 1: Did it pay quite a bit or was not a large pay--?
Speaker 2: I don't think it paid that much, but it was some, it helped, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 7271
Speaker 1: In the meantime, what is happening?  FAMU [Florida A&M, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], is, is the band at this point in the '60s, [1960s], you know, the late '60s [1960s], are they the best-known thing that's happening at FAMU?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.  The band was very dominant.  In fact, I think one of the things that, that enabled the band to make the progress that it did in this whole pattern of integration with the band, I think at one time they would, talked a lot about the integration [and merger] between FSU [Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, a white school] and FAMU, and I think one of the things that stopped it from going through was that band.  They, they couldn't stomach the destruction of the band.
Story_ID: 7272
Speaker 1: How often you would have to, you know, the [Florida A&M, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] band would have to rehearse and what occurred during those rehearsals?
Speaker 2: There were two formats for rehearsals, one with the marching band and the other is with the symphonic band.  The marching band where you have to do rehearsals of the drill as well as the music itself.  Those were separate entities, although they're combined to make one composite unity event.  Well, three, drill of a band, all of the basic fundamentals are stressed in each rehearsal, and the designated schedule of, of techniques, and they're passed out at the beginning of the rehearsal on Monday as to what needs to be done to do with the crew if the show is on the coming Saturday or a week from Saturday.  And all of this detailed, and it's, actually, it programmed by numbers of minutes for achievement of any particular facet of the show.  So this is highly organized and it is, the expectancy is highly, I would say it's very great.  Again, the same component with the marching band.  We have two sections of the marching band or aspect and one is the outside rehearsals which we rehearse the band, the full band together.  And then we have inside rehearsals.  The inside rehearsals are actually far superior, so far as getting results are concerned because you can hear all the partials of tone coming in from all the instruments.  And you have the unadvised attention on the inside rehearsal hall, where that's not true of the band drill field, although we have bleachers and we're organized and set up pretty composite together.  With the symphonic band, the rehearsals are quite detailed so far as the schedule of numbers to be rehearsed and what areas of the numbers of the sections are to be rehearsed and what the problems are.  It is hoped that at the end of each segment that some progress is made in regards to, I would say, refinement and a, a containment of any errors that have--may have come about during the course of the rehearsal.  It's in the rehearsals of music as well as marching that we are able to discern about where we are in the show in preparation for performance.  So it is hoped that we will program our rehearsals in such a way that we can reach the desired goal by the end of the week.  I think the final rehearsal that we have before going on the field comes, what we call, is a warm-up, and that's on the Saturday before the game.  And we go through each number of the show that we're doing pre-game and halftime.  And it is a, a final review of any problems that may come about.  But usually it's sort of like cold duck so to speak.  So that is just about it so far as the rehearsals of the band, but everything is refined and down to a, a specific evaluation in terms of the music and in terms of marching.
Story_ID: 7273
Speaker 1: But how long would it take to do, you know, to get a new number up?  How many weeks or?
Speaker 2: Really, it would, I would say a number of rehearsals would--I would say two or three rehearsals.  It's according to how much time we would have for rehearsal.  If we don't have too much time for rehearsal of the individual number, and we've got to cover a large number of musical selections, of course, that would take a little longer.  But it's possible that even one rehearsal, if I devote most of the time to it, I, we can get that number finished.
Speaker 1: In one rehearsal, you could get it finished?
Speaker 2: Yes, I could get it finished.
Speaker 1: So you were--how many numbers were you turning out a year or did you have, you know, you had probably standards you brought back, you know?
Speaker 2: The [Florida A&M, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] band has repertoire of some thirty-five or forty numbers that they have memorized.  This is a marching band, and it's just amazing.  Once they memorize a number, it only takes a little review each year for them to, for it to come back to them.  And they enjoy playing new music, however.  And the old tunes are fine, but they--and they like challenges so far as the, not only the difficulty of the music, but sometimes the music offers certain challenges that they have not afforded to have, and they like that.  The other thing that has to do with a great amount specificity is the whole business of memorizing.  As you know, some bands do not memorize all their music.  They, sometimes they have a music rack or folios in front them.  We haven't used a piece of music on the field in, except my first year.  After that, all the music that we play in the stands as well as on the field is always memorized.
Speaker 1: And that's a requirement?
Speaker 2: That is a requirement.
Speaker 1: And why did you do away with the music sheets like that?  What was that, when did that come--I mean why did that come about?
Speaker 2: Do away with what, now?
Speaker 1: The music sheets, remember you said, just the first year you had music stands with music--?
Speaker 2: Oh, the--we never, we never used those music folios on the field during a performance.  We do use them in rehearsal now.  And, and one thing is very certain.  A person can, in their mobility and movement on the field, they can do a much better job if they have the music memorized, and they go about their maneuvers and technique.
Story_ID: 7274
Speaker 1: Now, when did the concept of pageantry come into being and was that something that you brought to the forefront because you--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yes, pageantry is something that I think I coined and placed with the band.  And it is, it has been the makings of the Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] band actually due to the fact that pageantry, as you know, is a, is usually a very attractive display of movement and decorative, in terms of viewing.  And it is always attractive for one to look at.  So pageantry is sort of, I guess you would say that it has a dazzling display of, for the visual concept.  And pageantry also always tells a story.  And this is where I think we have excelled, with all of our pre-game as well as our halftime shows and presentations.
Speaker 1: Give an example of some of the stories you've told with, with your performances and what you've sought as the telling of stories through music and through the marching band?
Speaker 2: Well, I think one of the most outstanding presentations that we made was maybe a patriotic show where everyone can get on the act and have empathy.  And I recall, this was at one of the pro football games and also a television show where we opened up the show and made--formed the, a large object on the field that looked like a bird.  It was, hopefully, it was a symbol of the United States in terms of the eagle.  And the number that we had selected for this was a great number by John Philip Sousa called 'Under the Double Eagle', and, but the thing that we added to this was a, a dimensional movement.  It gave a feeling of a dimensional movement on the field, three dimension.  And it, the wings flapped, the body moved, and we played 'Under the Double Eagle'.  And so this had great appeal, and great, brought great applause from the audience.  Also, as a part of this, was a routine that we had in the way of a drill, which ended up in the formation of the United States of America.  And, of course, I believe we had played 'America the Beautiful' or one of the patriotic tunes.  Anyway, it was a, it was a great and big hit.  So those were things that seemingly, where were able to establish empathy with the audience, and they respond, responded in kind.
Story_ID: 7275
Speaker 1: What I'm curious about is would you sit with your team and map things out?  How would you make it look like it's supposed to look with people?  That's what people, you know, who are in--we don't understand how that happens.
Speaker 2: Well, I use the small metal men, and we called it a maneuver band.  And I had a chart board that I put the little metal men on.  However, we moved away from that to computerization.  All of our shows are computerized now.  And it was, it's really a great marvel because you can make fine, finite adjustments, just with the pushing of a button or what have you.  And it--also, you can get a printout of every individual in the band, not by number, but it'll be a little X there.  So, I know that sounds like it's a mystery, but it's, it's not mysterioso.  It's, it's a great scientific development.
Speaker 1: So, it just, you know, cause you have all the colors matching, the movements, all these things sort of coming together, and it's all people. And, you know, and then you add the music to it, but it's, you know, it just seems like it would take a humongous amount of planning to do that?
Speaker 2: Well, it does take a lot of planning.  There's no doubt about that.  And that's what makes something like that come off with a great amount of effectiveness.  And you have to remember there are several things that are in correlation and in sync with one another.  And that is, the formation itself, the movement that it's going through, and the, and the right music for--that fits in with that.  And with that, you have something that establishes empathy with the audience, just bingo, just like that.
Story_ID: 7276
Speaker 1: Your team, you know, 'cause you had people on like [Dr.] Julian White, he was important, right, to you?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: That was your assis--that was the assistant that really stuck, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you talk about, you know, cause you were saying, you know too, when we were off camera, you were saying how, you know, at the beginning, you had, you brought on all this talent, but there was something missing.  And then so what did you do right with Julian White?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't necessarily just with Julian White, but it's with all of the directors and the members of the [Florida A&M, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] band.  And I think one has to have their, their heart in the right place and attitudinal perceptions, and they've got to have the whole idea of willingness to put their best foot forward so to speak and cohesion and so many of the terms that, that go in for togetherness are so very, very important.  And I think any member of the band or any member of the band staff that we have, they have those qualities, and they, as they grow and develop, they become stronger and stronger.
Speaker 1: And so essentially, what you were doing was recruiting from your student pool, you know, graduate pool?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and your team, I was just wondering if you have anything to say about Julian White and his contributions or Lindsey Sarjeant or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, well, we had an all-star team.  There's no question about that.  Dr. White was my--served as drillmaster.  He did the charting on the, on the computer and did an excellent job of drill of the band and the sections and working with the student leaders from the drum major on down through the section leaders and squad leaders.  Mr. Sarjeant who was our arranger, has always done, just an excellent job of arranging the music.  We have a system there of arranging that is superior.  When you hear his arrangements, you know that they are going to sound good tuneful.  They have a, a beautiful counter melody to them there.  They're interesting to listen to.  And they contribute to whatever is going on in terms of movement on the field.  Another person is Mr. Charles S. Bing who has seniority.  He's been with us the longest.  He's been an assistant band director some forty-two years now.  And he was the writer of the script, and he does quite a bit of analytical work while the band is rehearsing as to what errors that need to be sharpened up a little bit.  It was his job in working with the low brass winds to see that they, everything that they do is, is in order.  And then next is Mr. Shaylor L. James, is responsible for the percussion section.  And that's the rhythm of the band.  And one of the things that we have to be careful is that they don't overshadow the sound in volume to the band and this music--stay underneath the sound of the band.  And we find that he has done a very excellent job of, of scoring for the percussion section.  At all times we have great creativity with the percussion section because all of that music is tailor-made to fit the music in our, and in our movement.  So with a team like that, it's really impossible to come up with a loser.  We always have a winner.
Speaker 1: And John [H.] Daniels, was he part of that team also?
Speaker 2: John Daniels, is, he's just an instructor of clarinet.  But he's not involved with the band staff.
Speaker 1: He's not in--the--okay.
Story_ID: 7277
Speaker 1: With the pageantry book ['Band Pageantry: A guide for the marching band'] , how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, this was a planned structure in, and this must have been about nineteen--it was in the '50s [1950s] anyway, in the early '50s.  And I was getting ready to do the graduate work, and I know that I would have to write a dissertation and some type of a creative work, and then, and I decided then that I would start getting all my materials, all my materials together so that when I went to graduate school, I would be able to, be able to finish it there and come up with a real winner.  And so I went to Columbia University Teachers College [New York, New York].  This was in the fall of 1953.  I was there '53 [1953], '54 [1954].  And I began to work on this after I got approval of my dissertation team.  And I completed it in 1955.
Story_ID: 7278
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Florida Agricultural, Agricultural [and] Mechanical College Band, leading the line of march to Lee Hall during commencement in 1946, the first year Dr. William Foster was the band director.
Speaker 2: [William Foster leads the Florida A&M College Band to Lee Hall during commencement ceremonies, Tallahassee, Florida, 1946. From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7279
Speaker 1: The Marching 100 Band [of Florida A&M University, Tallahassee, Florida] in Orange Blossom Parade in Miami [Florida].
Speaker 2: [William Foster leads the Florida A&M University Marching 100 Band during the Orange Blossom Parade in Miami, Florida, not dated, from the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7280
Speaker 1: This is a picture of one of the baton twirlers of the early marching band under the director of Dr. Foster.
Speaker 2: [A baton twirler from Florida A&M University's early marching band, under the direction of William Foster, not dated, from the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7281
Speaker 1: Dr. Foster gives assistance to the sousaphone player, Albert Henderson, 1957.
Speaker 2: [William Foster gives assistance to a sousaphone player, 1957. From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7282
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Marching 100 Band. Drum major, Julian E. White with clarinet section.
Speaker 2: [Floria A&M University's Marching 100 Band led by drum major, Julian E. White, not dated, from the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7283
Speaker 1: Dr. Foster instructing band members on the art of sound projection.
Speaker 2: [William Foster instructs band members on the art of sound projection, not dated, from the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7284
Speaker 1: Florida Agricultural [and] Mechanical University [Tallahassee, Florida] Marching Band, drum majors lead the band in the pre-game 'Death March' [very slow tempo march] in Tampa Stadium.
Speaker 2: [Florida A&M University Marching Band in the traditional pre-game "Death March' at Tampa Stadium, Tampa, Florida, not dated, from the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7285
Speaker 1: Florida Agricultural [and] Mechanical University [Tallahassee, Florida] Marching Band in performance at Giants Stadium in New York City, New York [sic, East Rutherford, New Jersey], 1981.
Speaker 2: [Florida A&M University Marching Band at Giants Stadium, East Rutherford, New Jersey, 1981. From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7286
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Marching 100 Band under the direction of Dr. William Foster in a group photo, 1968.
Speaker 2: [Florida A&M University's Marching 100 under the direction of William Foster, 1968. From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7287
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Florida Agricultural [and] Mechanical University [Tallahassee, Florida] concert band under the direction of Dr. William Foster, 1961.
Speaker 2: [Florida A&M University Concert Band under the direction of William Foster, 1961. From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7288
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Marching 100 Band in U.S.A. formation in Jacksonville, Florida, under the direction of Dr. William Foster.
Speaker 2: [Florida A&M University's Marching 100 Band performs under the direction of William Foster, Jacksonville, Florida, not dated, from the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7289
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Florida Agricultural [and] Mechanical University [Tallahassee, Florida] Rattler Band, also known as the Marching One Hundred in group photo, 1970, under the direction of Dr. William Foster.
Speaker 2: [Florida A&M University's Marching 100 Band under the direction of William Foster, 1970. From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7290
Speaker 1: This is band members and Dr. William Foster posed in new band uniforms, 1968.
Speaker 2: [William Foster (standing, center) and members of Florida A&M University's marching band in their new uniforms, 1968. From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7291
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Florida Agricultural [and] Mechanical University [Tallahassee, Florida] Rattlers, also known as the Marching 100 Band in group photo, 1967, under the direction of Dr. William Foster.
Speaker 2: [Florida A&M University's Marching 100 Band under the direction of William Foster, 1967. From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7292
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Florida Agricultural [and] Mechanical University [Tallahassee, Florida] Rattler Band, also known as the Marching 100 Band, percussion section, posed for a group photo with Dr. William P. Foster, director of the band, and Mr. Samuel Floyd, 1962.
Speaker 2: [Florida A&M University's Marching 100 Band percussion section under the direction of William Foster and Samuel Floyd, 1962. From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7293
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Florida Agricultural [and] Mechanical [University, Tallahassee, Florida] Band, Marching 100, some members sightseeing in Paris, France, 1989, under the direction of Dr. William Foster after they'd been invited to perform on Bastille Day for--by the President of France.
Speaker 2: [Florida A&M University's Marching 100 Band sightseeing in Paris, France after performing for the French president on Bastille Day, 1989. From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7294
Speaker 1: This is picture of Dr. William Foster, band director, Florida Agricultural [and] Mechanical University [Tallahassee, Florida] in the early 1950s.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of William Foster, director of the Florida A&M University marching band, early 1950s. From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7295
Speaker 1: Picture of Dr. Foster, Dr. [Julian] White and Mr. [Charles] Bing, watching a football game, 1981.
Speaker 2: [William Foster (left) with Julian White and Charles Bing at a football game, 1981.  From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7296
Speaker 1: A picture of Dr. William Foster directing the [Florida A&M University marching] band in the late 1980s.
Speaker 2: [William Foster directs the Florida A&M University marching band in the late 1980s. From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7297
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Florida Agricultural Mechanical University band directors, Dr. [Charles] Bing, Dr. [William] Foster, and Mr. [Lenard] Bowie posing with noted composer, Paul Yoder.
Speaker 2: [William Foster (second from left) and colleagues Charles Bing and Lenard Bowie greet composer, Paul Yoder (second from right), not dated, from the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7298
Speaker 1: From left to right, this is a picture of Robert Thomas, Leonard Bowden, Leonard is spelled L-E-O-N-A-R-D, Bowden, B-O-W-D-E-N, Dr. William P. Foster, Lenard Bowie, Lenard is spelled L-E-N-A-R-D, Charles Cox, Cox is spelled C-O-X and James Latimer, Latimer is spelled L-A-T-I-M-E-R.  They're posing a photo after receiving achievement awards from the university, 1959.
Speaker 2: [William Foster and others receive awards from Florida A&M University, 1959; (L. to R.): Robert Thomas, Leonard Bowden, William Foster, Lenard Bowie, Charles Cox and James Latimer. From the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7299
Speaker 1: This is a picture, from left to right, of Dr. Julian E. White, Julian, J-U-L-I-A-N, and Dr. William Foster, band directors of Florida Agricultural Mechanical University, Marching 100.
Speaker 2: [William Foster (right) and Julian White, Florida A&M University band directors, not dated, from the collection of William Foster.]
Story_ID: 7300
Speaker 1: Sir now, you were talking about the pageantry book ['Band Pageantry: A guide for the marching band'] and how that came about.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  So after I got approval on my project, then I, I just went to work on doing the writing of the book, of the dissertation.  And it, I did all--the first draft of typing, I did all the typing myself, hunt and peck, yeah.  And, oh, what I was unusual about the final product, project of the dissertation, there, there are no references.  There are no references in my dissertation.  It's all from me (laughter).  And, and that's always amazing for some of the students who view it at the, in the library there at the University [Florida A&M, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].  So in the meantime, I had a couple of good friends who always were pushing me to write this book, you know, for band pageantry.  And I finally did, and I got Hal Leonard to be the publisher.  And after that everything is history.
Speaker 1: Now, this was groundbreaking, the book because nothing like this existed.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: It, there wasn't--let me ask you, in the traditional, with the traditional band, did they have any documentation like this, you know, like you had done with book?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: So this was, it was all really sort of handed down about how to do this?
Speaker 2: Right, see, and this was a, this was a how-to-do book.  And also it was one of the few books that had larger lettering.  Sometimes these instruction books are the little, small type.  You can't hardly read it, you know.  And, but these were some of the special occasions I put with publication.  And, of course, that book was sold all over the world, especially in Japan.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So why did the Japanese gravitate to it?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the Japanese will, anything that seems to be progressive and good for the order, they take on, you know.  And, but anyway, they, they certainly did.  You, you ought to see some of those Japanese bands.  They're, they're something else (laughter), very precise and precision.
Story_ID: 7301
Speaker 1: What are the key elements for a good marching band--you know, according to Dr. Foster (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I think that after all of these years as I look back now, I, I would say that musicianship and musical performance is the first key.  The second key is the basic drill of the bands.  In other words, this is the basic drill procedures for the individual band member.  And they were, I think would be--which has to come from the band director, creativity, creativity.  I think that's the hardest and most difficult aspect of the whole thing with marching bands is the, is the creativity because therein lies whether that show and that performance is gonna be a success and whether it's going to be of interest to the viewer and the listener.  I think anything else, it would be just added on to that.  And I think with those three factors there that, I think that's the key to everything right there.  But they're the most difficult of, of all of them (laughter).  And it would be my hope that, that band directors would give a little more time and attention to thinking about how they're going to decide on a show and what, what the components will be in order to have something of, of viewing interests and listening, listening interests from the standpoint of the, of the spectator.
Story_ID: 7302
Speaker 1: They call you 'The Law', 'The Maestro' and what's the other, what's the other term?
Speaker 2: Ah--.
Speaker 1: The, 'The Legend'.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Of course, as you know, most of the time, those are identities never get back to the one who's identified until a long time after (laughter).  And my answer to 'The Law', I tell them I'm their protector (laughter).  But I guess that was because I was very firm, no, no playing around, you know; business, first thing.
Speaker 1: And here you--look at--you have molded thousands of black minds.  And, you know, and the interesting thing in doing the reading, it said that you were, you know, that this was more than a marching band.  It was about culture, and it was about education.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And I'd like you to just talk about that because, I'd like you to talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, that's embodied in our, in our band motto.  And this band motto started the year I came to Florida A& M University [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] because evidently, in my inspiration talks to the students and motivation talks with the students, I needed more than just to talk about music.  And so I decided then and there that these salient points and attributes that go to make up the person is more important than really the music.  And that has to do with character, the way the person dresses or their language, their overall behavior, decorum and all of that.  And then the second has to do with musicality, their musicianship, the ability to play the instrument and play the music with good taste and rhythm and technique and all of that.  And then superimposed upon that, of course, would be the whole concept of the way that music is played because that's so very, very important.  And we call that the, it's an inner play part of musicianship actually.  As many times as I've been over it, I can't--the word won't pop out of my mind right now (laughter).  But anyway, then they go into blend and balance and overall quality of tune and tonation, ensemble blend and balance, all of those things are so very important.  And then after that, we have the interest in that student's, as an individual's academic attainment because that's the purpose of which they're here for.  And that is to get an education.  So that really takes precedent over everything else, and it is hoped that this would be paramount and, for them to get a good education.  And then just behind that is, of course, is leadership because the very moment a person finishes the university here, they're--leadership is thrust upon them.  They don't have any choice.  And we want our students to be leaders and good leaders.  And then we have another important facet that we call upon all the time because the band is that, and it's a service organization.  And we need to think in terms of how we can render service to our fellowman, regardless of what means that we might use.  And so, this is extremely valuable, a valuable tool, tool for all the individuals in the band to have because that's our primary thing.  And then, fifth or sixth, but not least is marching, the marching precision and the, the ability to, to execute any field maneuver that one would have to do physically.  So those, those things are extremely important, and it would be my value judgment that they are as important or more important than just the music themselves.
Speaker 1: So in this whole thing of what you've done, sir, you've taken this, you know, what would typically be an extra curricular activity, and you actually created a whole culture around it--and a culture of success, of how to be success--and how to be successful, how to be disciplined.  And in that, in that whole process you created, you know, a new form of presentation for music in many ways. Okay, and something that the black community could rally around and be very proud of.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's very true.  And it's something that was very, very much needed.  So that it's my hope that this will continue to rub off from the members of the band and those who they have influence with.
Speaker 1: I'm sure--have people told you, because I remember seeing the band, and the thing is, is that, you look at it, and you look with such pride, you know, because not only are they sounding good cause they didn't have to necessarily sound good.  They sound good, they look good, they move with--and it's all innovative.  And it's like they're at the top--when, when, you know, when the [Florida A&M University] Marching 100 comes on, on the field, it's over (laughter) (unclear).  So I'm just saying that, but, you know, I keep thinking about you coming from, you were at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], you know.  And, this, you know, the band director saying--I mean where you weren't, you weren't allowed in the band, and the dean saying, you can't be a conductor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Story_ID: 7303
Speaker 1: So when you look back at that, sir, what do you think?  How do you look and sort of sum up what you've been able to accomplish?
Speaker 2: I really don't think anything about it.  I, I really don't.  I--in a way, it may have been the makings of it, of me and, you know, what I've been able to do.  First of all, when I went into working with the marching band, I didn't have any baggage.  And I didn't have to think about what I did.  It was, used a clean slate (laughter).  I didn't have any drawbacks.  And when it came to not being able to play in the band, the KU [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas] band, and denying that opportunity and privilege, it just gave me an opportunity to, for new horizons.  I didn't have any gates around me, had no enclosures.  It was an open field, so I felt like I would just do as I want to do (laughter).  And that's, that's just about it (chuckle).
Speaker 1: And did you, during, while you doing, you know, doing the creating and studying the groundwork, did you feel in your heart that you were on to something really big, sir?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: You did not?
Speaker 2: No, I, I think, you know, this thing was inside me and it, I probably wasn't aware of it.  And, you know, it had to be a driving force somewhere, but I didn't recognize it.
Speaker 1: And did you have any disappointments, you know, things that you, if you look back, you say I wish I had done differently or, you know, or things that occurred that maybe people don't know, you know, that, or, you know, little setbacks?
Speaker 2: No, because as an experimental thing, I knew that these were experimental things.  And therefore some would not work, and you discarded those.  And those that do work continue on.  And new ones, you continue to try new ones, but don't let anything hold you back.
Speaker 1: And did you ever think that your grandfather was watching you and following you during your--?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  Now, that's, that's interesting.  And I never thought of that.
Speaker 1: Cause it's almost like he was a little angel, still with you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter), possibly so, possibly so.  But I never thought of it.  I've never thought of it, but from time to time, I'd--and certainly I do think about my grandfather.  Yeah, he was a--he's still very much a part of me, and I'm very grateful to him for what he did in just taking up a little time with me.  And as I said before, I'm very grateful, but not in my conscious mind.
Speaker 1: Well, what he did for you, you seem to have done for thousands of others (laughter) in many ways.
Story_ID: 7304
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I've did the best I could with what I had.  I did the best that I could with what I had.
Speaker 1: And what do you want to see live on in your, you know, in your absence?
Speaker 2: Um?
Speaker 1: What do you want to see live on?  What do you want to see live on in terms of what the [Florida A&M, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] Marching 100 represents for the black community?  What do you want to see live on?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to prefer it to exhibit the highest of quality, the highest of quality and follow that motto.  And that motto has been going now for fifty-five years, and it's a old saying, "you can't go wrong doing right." (laughter).
Story_ID: 7305
Speaker 1: And music, which has been such a central part of your life, what do you see as the real value of music?
Speaker 2: Music is one thing that can really get inside the, your mind and your body.  It, it can be such an important force for good.
