Story_ID: 120558
Speaker 1: Good morning.
Speaker 2: Good morning.
Speaker 1: My name is Reginnia Williams and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer today is Scott Stearns and we're here to get your story as a history maker and to be able through our project to share with other history lovers worldwide especially using the archive in Chicago and also by way of the internet eventually.  So I'd just like to get started by asking you if you would please state your name and spell your name, your first, your middle name if you have one and your last name and also to give the location of the interview.
Speaker 2: My name is George Cylie Fraser that's C-Y-L-I-E.  The last name is spelled F-R-A-S-E-R and the location of the interview is Pepper Plant, Ohio which is in the suburb of Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: And Mr. Fraser would you state your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am an entrepreneur business person who focuses on writing, speaking and putting on conferences for people of African descent and other emerging markets.
Speaker 1: And would you also please state today's date for the record?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January 11, 2005.
Story_ID: 120559
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.  In this first part of our discussion we'd like to focus on your early life.  So would you tell me please when and where you were born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Brooklyn, New York in Jewish Hospital in the county of Kings, May 1, 1945, I'm a baby boomer.
Speaker 1: And your parents' names?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Walter Frederick Fraser and my mom's name is Ida Mae Baldwin Fraser.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your grandparents at all?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.  I've a vague remembrance of my grandparents, my grandmother on my father's side who--my father was born in Georgetown, Guyana and his parents and people moved from Guyana to England.  So many of my cousins and my grandparents, nieces and nephews lived in England and I got a chance to meet my grandmother on my father's side about forty years ago when she came to United States for the first time.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: I do not remember my grandmother's name.  I was a young person at the time and I just remembered being in awe by her English accent.  I had never met black people speaking with an English accent although I grew up in a Caribbean neighborhood in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant], New York where there were plenty of black people speaking with--in dialects from the West Indies.  It was the first time I had met a black person speaking with a sort of an English brogue.  I was mesmerized by her.  She was very--I remember my feelings about her, she was very stern and she was very forthright and in a sense righteous and with a strong moral and spiritual base, did not believe in waste, I remember--we talk about this in our family all of the time--I remember eating dinner at the table where she lives and not finishing my food and then taking my plate and emptying it into the garbage can which she promptly told me that food was not to be wasted, that I was to go into the garbage can, take out what I had put in there and to eat it (laughter) what a lesson.  I have taught that same lesson to my children that food is not to be wasted, that they're people starving who just wished they had your scraps and that's what I remember about her.  I didn't lose the lesson although I don't remember her name but I didn't lose the lesson that she taught me in life.
Story_ID: 120560
Speaker 1: Mr. Fraser you say that you were born on May Day [May 1, 1945] and you are a native New Yorker.  Were there other children in the household where you grew up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have six, well actually, it's Edward, Scott, Walter and my sister Emma and Joseph and myself.  We are of the same mother [Ida Mae Baldwin Fraser] and father [Walter Frederick Fraser] and then we have some half-brothers and sisters and that was John, Howard, Benny and Myra and then there was a half-sister that we had that died at a very early age.  So there are eleven of us although my older sisters and brothers-half-brothers--really did not live with us. We knew them and they were in and out of our lives as we got older.  I did not live with my brothers and sisters who are of the same father and mother because when I turned about five years old my mother, Ida Mae, she was from Lumpkin, Georgia became mentally ill and she was institutionalized for the rest of her life and because my father was a cab driver and had to work twelve to fourteen hours a day, he could not take care of his--all of his children.  So we were put into an orphanage for about a year to two years, I remember vaguely and then we were broken up into threes and put into foster homes.  So I grew up with my oldest sister, Emma and my youngest--younger brother, Joseph.  We were in one foster home that was in Manhattan [New York] and ultimately that foster family moved to Queens [New York] and then my older brothers, Walter and Edward and Scott were put into another foster home that was in Queens, New York.  So for a long period between let's say the ages of five and eleven or twelve there was no real connection between them and the three of us living together.  As we got a little bit older, were able to get around, we reestablished the connection with our brothers who were living in Queens and our father Walter Frederick Fraser remained in contact with all of us all the time.  He never remarried and each Christmas and Easter he would come and pick us up from the foster home with our brothers and we would go with him to various places throughout New York, come back to the house in Brooklyn [New York] where he lived and spend time together during the holidays.  I know you didn't ask for all that but that's a remembrance.
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask even though you said your mother was out of the family setting because of her illness, were there other members of her extended family who were a part of your growing up years in New York?
Speaker 2: Not really, mom was born in Lumpkin, Georgia.  She had many brothers and sisters as well and most of us were named after--I was named after one of her brothers, George.  So most of us were named after her brothers and sisters but we really had no familial connection to her side of the family.  We were really very disconnected from that standpoint.  She was institutionalized, we were in a sense institutionalized in foster homes and so the connections were broken.
Story_ID: 120561
Speaker 1: Did your father [Walter Frederick Fraser] ever share with you any stories about why his family decided to migrate to the Unites States?
Speaker 2: Yeah he did, opportunity.  My father was in the British navy [Royal Navy].  His family--he was from a fairly wealthy family in Guyana who decided to move from--at that time British Guyana to England.  He then joined the British navy and basically to get into America he basically jumped ship.  So he was sort of an illegal alien at some point in time and he wanted to live in America and in New York for opportunity.  He felt that there was more opportunity in New York City, it was a little bit more liberal, it was back in the early 1900s as you can imagine and there was more opportunity for him.
Story_ID: 120562
Speaker 1: Mr. Fraser there are some People magazine-ish type questions that we are encouraged to ask.  It's part of these interviews and usually we ask right at the outset but since I neglected to do that I'm going to ask them now and then follow up with a related question.  Can you please tell me if you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Earth tones, browns, beiges I love them.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The spring when the new blossoms and the new foliage and the new growth is emerging from the ground and on the trees.  It's just the temperature is perfect.  I love the refreshing-ness of rain, it seems to clean and refresh everything in the air so spring is really one of my favorite times of the year.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: Hilton Head [South Carolina], yeah our families and Don Williams who is my best friend here in Cleveland [Ohio] and Greg Gavis who lives in Columbus, Georgia and Bruce Williams, Don's brother who lives in Detroit [Michigan], we've vacationed and have vacationed for the last thirty years as a group of families that rent a house in Hilton Head.  We love Hilton Head because of the time of the year that we go and it's perfect for golf and golf is one of my favorite pastimes, it's a golf haven.
Speaker 1: And I wanted to ask also do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chicken and greens, I love soul food.  I love chicken, greens, black eyed peas, that's my favorite food and cornbread.  I was raised--my foster parents [Ariah and Francis Morse] were from the south from Georgia and they cooked every southern dish that you could possibly imagine including grits.  They loved grits, I don't even eat grits anymore.  I ate so many grits every single way that you could possibly eat them as a young person but I love soul food, I do.
Speaker 1: Do you have a motto or favorite saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah it's a saying that I have on my wall here in my home by the great jazz trumpet [sic, saxophone] player Charlie Parker and the saying goes, that if you don't live it, it won't come out of your horn.  I think you have to be who you are, I think you have to live the life that God has put you here to live and if in fact you've found your purpose in life, you will be passionate and energized by the purpose and all that's due you will come to you.  So that's my favorite saying, it's a Charlie Parker saying and I love Charlie Parker.  I'm a jazz fan, I'm of that era as a nearly sixty year old person.  My father [Walter Frederick Fraser] was a jazz musician as an avocation he was a drummer and vibest, and everybody in our family in a sense dabbled in jazz instruments and I grew up at a time when Miles [Davis] and Charlie Parker and John Coltrane and others lived in and around the New York area and I became a jazz buff.
Story_ID: 120563
Speaker 1: Okay well thank you for answering my People magazine-ish type questions.  Now in addition to the chicken and the greens, are there any other smells that remind you of your boyhood days in Brooklyn [New York]?
Speaker 2: That's a great question,
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: --Fried fish in particular whiting and porgies, I don't even know if porgies are around but whiting--my parents [Walter Frederick Fraser and Ida Mae Baldwin] used to fry fish as many black families fried fish.  Fried fish reminds me of my youth.  I happen to love catfish, fried catfish.  So yes that reminds me of my youth, Chanel No. 5 is the perfume that my foster parents, my mother wore and when I smell Chanel No. 5 and it's still around, it reminds me of her and those would be the only smells that I can think of right now that remind me of my youth.
Speaker 1: How about sounds of your youth? Any sounds that remind you--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh wow many sounds.  The sounds of--when I listen to Miles Davis' 'Kind of Blue' which is one of the all time great jazz albums ever recorded, it absolutely takes me back to my youth.  When I listen to 'My Favorite Things' by John Coltrane it reminds me of my youth.  When I listen to old records by The Flamingos and The Platters it reminds me of my youth.  My father again was very much into music and one of the occasions that he picked us up and took us away somewhere was to go to the Brooklyn Paramount to see Allen Freid's rock and roll shows where those groups would appear, those rock and roll groups back in the day would appear whether it was Chuck Barry.  What was the group that sang Charlie Brown?  I'm trying to remember that group, a very famous group but those groups remind me of my youth and my father loved that music.  Although it was considered a little edgy and rebellious when it first came out and we loved that music.  So those--Dave Brubeck for example, 'Take Five' reminds me.  So there's Nat King Cole when I hear the 'Christmas Song' by Nat King Cole which was played in our house during the Christmas season reminds me of our youth and if you, in fact if you look at my CD collection or look at my album collection, yes I still have a large album collection, they are full of all those old records.
Speaker 2: So you have a record player?
Speaker 1: Well I still have a turntable, oh yes I have a turntable, I certainly have a CD player and I have a cassette player and every now and then when I get nostalgic, I will go to my record collection and put my albums on and I still have some 45s that I used to collect back in the day. When I get nostalgic, when I just want to remember the earlier part of my life.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 120564
Speaker 1: Now you've mentioned your foster parents and I'm just wondering if you'd like to mention their names for the record?
Speaker 2: Yes, my foster father was Ariah, A-R-I-A-H. The last name was Morse, M-O-R-S-E and my foster mother's name was Frances Morse and they had a son Raymond Morse.  They basically loved taking care of children beyond, of course their own son and he was much older than we were and there were some issues without question between Raymond and us as foster children which led to some personal trauma in the lives of the three of us.  I don't know if it was sibling rivalry, I don't know what the genesis--actually we were very young but I know that it was not pleasant and in some cases traumatic.  But I've put that behind me but I know that it had an impact on my sister who is a year older than I who lives in Laurelton, New York and my brother Joseph who is deceased.
Speaker 1: And you said you were in that household for several years?
Speaker 2: Until we were eighteen years old, until I was eighteen years old.  My sister Emma left at about sixteen, my brother Joseph left slightly younger but I remained there until I was eighteen and legally able to leave a foster home, in a sense go out on my own and basically moved backed to Brooklyn [New York] where I lived with my father [Walter Frederick Fraser] and older brothers for a couple of years and then went out on my own.
Story_ID: 120565
Speaker 1: Well, there's a wonderful picture here in your home of you and several of your brothers and I hope that we will be able to share that with the viewers of this video as well.  But can you tell me when that was taken, when the brotherhood came back together in order for that photo to be taken?
Speaker 2: It came back together when I was about eighteen, of course my older brothers were older than that.  They were also living in the downstairs area of my father's walk up brownstone in Brooklyn, New York in Bedstuy which would now go for a fortune in the area in which he lived at that time.  And, when we came back together my brother Walter, the oldest brother of the six of us who have the same mother and father was a very innovative, very creative kind of guy.  He was a sharp dresser, very charismatic, had a tremendous personality, wonderful people skills, people really loved him and he attracted people like magnets.  All of my brothers, Scotland and Walter, very good looking, six feet, had a lot of women who were attracted to them and so we were not a bad looking bunch, there were obviously five of us and one sister.  So we decided that we would do some social things together.  This was led by, of course the older brothers they included me because I was a brother.  So we opened a disco and gave parties and brought people together and this picture that you're talking about was taken as publicity shot for the advertising material for our little disco.  Disco was very popular at that time in New York and so we rented a room in the St. George Hotel in downtown Brooklyn, New York and every Friday people would pay us a small fee to come into this area.  We would play music, they would dance and this was our little thing together.  It was really cool and the picture is really cool probably the picture is the coolest thing of the entire scenario.  I loved that picture and every member of my family, the picture that you're alluding to, has that picture on their wall in their home.  My sons in particular who are twenty seven and twenty three think it's the coolest picture they have ever seen.  I told them that picture was taken during my, in quote, mac daddy days.  I was single and I thought I was cool and I probably wasn't that cool probably the coolest thing about me was that I had brothers who were cool and I just traded on their reputation.
Story_ID: 120566
Speaker 1: I'd like to spend a little more time talking about your childhood and perhaps some of the institutions that helped shape your life as well.  So can you tell me about your school days?  Do you remember your first school in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was Emily Dickinson Elementary School in Manhattan [New York], it's still there and that's when I was in a foster home living in Manhattan at 59 West 98th Street between Columbus and Central Park West right down the block quite frankly from the Museum of Natural History.  I remember my early days and Mrs. Sherman who was a teacher who was very strict and helped to shape my life.  But most importantly and I think that was the second or third grade, I remember her and Mrs. Lambert.  She was our little English teacher and Mrs. Lambert felt that there was nothing more important in life than reading.  I also had a crush on Mrs. Lambert, she was a blond haired, blue eyed, very attractive white woman and I had a crush on her, I thought she was beautiful.  But more important than that she felt that while learning the skills of writing was important, we had to put your dots and I's and so forth in syntax, she felt that reading was even more important.  So we spent most of our English class with Mrs. Lambert reading whether we read to her or whether she read to us.  And it was that person, that idea, that thought that planted the seed of the power and importance of reading that when I read in spite of my circumstances which were in some instances as a young person, traumatic at times.  When I was reading I could use my imagination and be any place on earth, it essentially took me away.  Also it was a time when television was really not popular and/or around in any significant way, radio was.  I remember many of the characters from radio and we listened to radio and painted our own pictures in what the people looked like who were acting in the scenes in theater.  I remember 'The Whisperer' and 'The Shadow' and those kinds of series that were on the radio, great for the imagination but reading also did the same thing for me that radio did.  It really activated my imagination and I thank Mrs. Lambert to this day for planting that seed and as a result of it I've become in affect a ferocious reader myself, I probably read about a hundred books a year.  Part of it is because I travel so much, I spend so much time in airports and airplanes I get a lot of time to read and then I've ultimately written several books myself.  So I remember her and Mr. Bones, a white male who was real stern and basically one day when I ran my mouth too much and got belligerent with him he basically beat my ass, okay.  It was back in the day when teachers could do that, can't do it today and that taught me a very important lesson, be careful of what you say and to whom you say it to.
Speaker 1: Was that his given name Mr. Bones?
Speaker 2: Mr. Bones I don't remember his first name because you just remember your teacher's last names.  So that was his name, Bones.
Speaker 1: Now was that also in grade school?
Speaker 2: That was in grade school.
Story_ID: 120567
Speaker 1: How about your junior high school/high school years, any memorable moments?
Speaker 2: I went to Junior High School 59 [Queens, New York].  Of course in New York the schools are numbered, and for the most part I think they're getting names now or have for the last decade or so but they were numbered.  So I spent--Junior High school 59 was in Queens--we were living in Queens, St. Albans which is a suburb in Queens at that time and I went to Junior High School 59.  I don't remember very much about Junior High School 59 other than it was a good education, there was discipline, it was interracial and they were critical years because I was developing a sense of esteem, a sense of who I was, a sense of my own maleness and masculinity and all of the competitive things that come with young men and the rights of passage that young men go through.  So I just remember some of those kinds of things, girlfriends--first girlfriends that people did--that you loved or liked but really didn't love or like you and all of the stuff that goes with that, then from Junior High School 59 on to high school.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the numbers of the schools?  I see references to P.S. this, that or the other, I'm assuming that's public school.
Speaker 2: Yeah I went to--when I left Emily Dickenson in Manhattan [New York], I went to P.S. 15 [Manhattan, New York] and then Junior High School 59.  Most of the high schools were named but the elementary and junior high schools back in the day were not.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah Thomas Edison High School [Manhattan, New York], it was a vocational high school and at that time we didn't get very good guidance although there were guidance counselors.  As an African American I didn't really know what I was supposed to be doing, I didn't know what I was supposed to be training for what I was really trying to learn.  All I can remember is I was always concerned about how I was going to make a living and what was I going to contribute.  I remember thinking about that but I had no idea of what to pursue and my guidance counselor at the time because I was really at best a C student.  I did not have the discipline and the home training quite frankly--the discipline at home to really focus on education.  I knew that I had to get in and out of high school and get a high school diploma.  There was always emphasis that you've got to get a high school diploma but my foster parents were never very much involved with what I was doing in school, what my grades were, etc.  My foster father was also a cabdriver as my real father was a cabdriver.  Because there was no real emphasis there, I didn't do very well in school, I was a C student.  Because I didn't do very well in junior high school, it was recommended that I go to a vocational school and take up woodworking, okay what do I know, sure if that's what you think I ought to be doing and so that's what I did.  I went to Thomas Edison High School ultimately graduated but I majored in cabinet making basically and that was a mistake.  I remember one teacher in high school his name was Mr. Deats [ph.].
Story_ID: 120659
Speaker 1: Mr. Fraser at the end of the last segment you mentioned the name of a Mr. Deats [ph.], a special teacher from high school.  Can you just tell us what made him so special?
Speaker 2: He was our guidance counselor and I was just sort of an average student in high school.  I hadn't failed any grades but I was at best a C student and a clown.  He brought me into his office one day and said to me, "you're a C student and a clown, you probably would be better off leaving high school and going out and getting a job so my suggestion to you is that you quit because you're not taking your high school work seriously." And I was traumatized by that suggestion because although I was a C student and a clown, I hadn't failed any grades and I really knew the importance of getting minimally a high school education and the criticalness of that back in the day.  And so I said that to him, I said that I really don't want to quit school and go out and get a job, I'd really rather finish school and I guess maybe I'll stop clowning and do better in school but don't kick me out, I need to stay in.  So he relented and I stayed in school but I never forgot that because so many of us are prejudged early and given very bad advice from adults who we believe in or think that they know and they are a hundred percent wrong.  It would have been the biggest mistake of my life.  Now I don't know if he did that for psychological reasons.  Some people need the KITA method of management, a kick in the ass, and he might have been thinking that we've really got to straighten him out and maybe if we threatened to throw him out he'll straighten up or maybe he was sincere.  At the moment I thought he was sincere and it would have been the biggest mistake of my life, I probably would have changed my life dramatically.  So it goes back to we must stop prejudging people that in spite of the fact that some of our young people get into problems and trouble in the early and development years it doesn't mean that they do not have the potential to straighten up their lives and to go down a good and righteous path and that we must give that opportunity.  In other words, it's really never too late, don't make any judgments about the human potential.
Speaker 1: Did you share that experience with any of the other older brothers or your father [Walter Frederick Fraser] that you were encouraged to drop out of school?
Speaker 2: Yeah I shared it with my father and he disagreed but he was sort of lukewarm about it.  He was sort of whatever you think, whatever you believe.  He was not adamant about the fact that I stay in school, he was adamant about the fact that I be productive and however that productiveness manifests itself with or without an education that's what he focused on being a productive and contributing human being.
Story_ID: 120660
Speaker 1: Let me spend a few more minutes talking about your father [Walter Frederick Fraser], talking now about your high school years and entering into young adulthood yourself and about to leave high school and then--and your father is there telling you it's up to you, it's in your hands young man.  I'm wondering about your father the musician and a cabdriver if he had favorite songs and stories or lessons about life that he shared with you at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father was a great model--an important model for me.  What I noticed and what was embedded in me deeply about my father's personality and character was that he truly loved people and people truly loved him.  Our home was sort of the center of the block that we lived on in Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York] and he treated everyone with dignity and respect.  He had a wonderful sense of humor and he really loved people.  He could really bond and connect with people whether it was the guy fixing his big Cadillac which he liked to drive or a Packard in a much earlier time or the guy bagging his groceries in the Key Food Store around the corner.  The ladies and the men really liked dad and I noticed that about him.  He got along with everybody and he was a great conversationalist and a great one to bring people together.  So I never asked him about it and he never talked about that as a skill that he had, I just observed it and I think that registered deeply in my own mind in terms of the way I would conduct my own personal life going forward.
Speaker 1: But how about those special songs and stories?  Do you know if he had a favorite song?
Speaker 2: No, dad was a great lover of Lionel Hampton because he was a vibest and I still have reel to reel tapes of his music and I don't know if he had a fav--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Of your father's music?
Speaker 2: Of my father's music, oh yeah.  He would tape his stuff on reel to reel tapes back in the day and so I collected that stuff up and still have them in storage.  But he was again a great lover of jazz, a great lover of Lionel Hampton and a great encourager of us to in fact appreciate and love music and we would spend a lot of time as a family together when we came together listening to music and playing music.  So I'm forever grateful to him for that as well because he's given all of us in our family a deep appreciation for music, the messages in music, the psychological healing and the enjoyment that comes through music.
Story_ID: 120661
Speaker 1: I wonder if your father [Walter Frederick Fraser] ever shared any concerns or if he ever discussed the issue of the scattering of the family if we can call it that.  That took place because of the illness that your mother [Ida Mae Baldwin Fraser] suffered from, did he ever talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was concerned about that, he was deeply concerned about it.  He talked about it in simple terms and his own way but the most important thing that he did because I believe that as dad taught us what you do speaks so loudly I can't hear what you say.  And dad, A. never remarried, he stayed married to my mom who was in a mental institution so that he could demonstrate to us the sanctity of the male/female relationship and the family and then we on holidays would go and visit with her, he would take us to her although she didn't really know who we were and on occasion each year, he would bring her home and we would then come back home and be with her and have dinner with her.  So to me it was a demonstration of the power and the importance of family and keeping that union together even in the face of the kind of traumatic conditions in which we were living.  Mom, in a mental institution, daddy cabdriver, three of us in one foster home, another three in another foster home.  Our foster home, the one that my sister and my younger brother were in was not the best of circumstances but I think it's one of the reasons that I am still married today thirty two years into a relationship and my older brother Edward who lives here in Shaker Heights [Ohio] is also still married today.  It's the sanctity and the power of the family that in spite of the odds, he kept his family together and he never remarried even upon his death he never remarried.  I'm not saying that he did not have friends, of course he did but we still considered our mother, who is in a mental institution, our mother.
Story_ID: 120662
Speaker 1: All right, can we talk about that transition from high school [Thomas Edison Vocational High School, Queens, New York] as I said before to the world of work or education beyond the twelfth grade?  You talk about your high school graduation?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was actually I remember my high school graduation as really nothing special.  I don't have fond memories of it.  I had some friends in high school but my high school experience was, in my own mind and maybe I buried that experience in my own subconscious, was nothing special.  I got a vocational diploma in cabinet making which by the time I graduated from high school did not feel that it was anything special.  Actually I felt that I was less than others who were graduating from high schools majoring in academic course work to prepare themselves for college.  So I had some esteem issues about that.  Upon graduation of high school I got a job with my brother, my half-brother Benjamin Evans.  He had the largest African American owned printing plant in America at that time, Satellite Lithography was the name of it and several of us worked for him, several of his half brothers worked for him as printing press operators and production and I got a job with Benjamin in the printing plant.  That was important because Benjamin taught us--all of us some very, very important lessons.  The lessons of hard work is critical, find your niche, find something you love, be the best at it.  Entrepreneurship, he was the ultimate entrepreneur who absolutely did not have the kind of personality where he could ultimately long term work for someone.  He wanted to do his own thing and then the crazy world of business, what it takes to survive in business, the risk taking, the hills and valleys, so valuable, valuable lesson.  I worked--I was being paid $2.50 an hour and I was basically handling paper, preparing it for the printing press and doing other miscellaneous things and I worked for him for about a year or so and then finally I decided that I wanted to get the kind of job that would allow me to work at night and go to school during the day and I could not do that with Benjamin.  So I left there and got a job at LaGuardia Airport [Queens, New York] with the Port Authority.  That was a government job so to speak, quasi government.  It had vacation, it had benefits, it had all things that come with government jobs, better pay but basically I worked the night shift from twelve to eight at night mopping floors.  I was in maintenance and LaGuardia back in those days was very quiet from twelve at night to eight in the morning and that's when you could clean all the hallways and so forth.  I was on a maintenance crew and I enjoyed it actually.  I enjoyed it because it gave me the freedom during the day to work if I wanted to or go to school if I wanted to.  In other words I could have gotten another job to make more money never had any problem with that, or get some more education and that's when I decided that I would get some education, take some day courses.
Story_ID: 120663
Speaker 1: And started some courses at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] but I just found, I didn't stick it out, I didn't get a degree.  I only did it for a very short period of time.  It was interesting but school for me at that time just wasn't enough.  I wasn't learning what I wanted to learn, I wasn't learning fast enough, this is all in my own mind and I just didn't have the discipline at that time to stick it out.  I enjoyed taking my free time and reading and studying and observing and doing the things that I was interested in.  I didn't want to have to take a geometry class that ultimately would lead to a degree because it was a requirement but I didn't have the discipline.  I didn't want geometry, I wanted to read and I wanted to write, I wanted to build my vocabulary and I wanted to get some experience with people.  So ultimately I dropped out of college and pursued really sort of self learning.  I would go to work with a dictionary in my briefcase and I would literally read the dictionary and study words and read books that I was interested in and that was my in a sense informal education.
Speaker 2: So there's no business school diploma hanging on the wall of this beautiful home?
Speaker 1: No, there's no--there are honorary doctorates and as I got older and wiser I took some wonderful certification courses at Amos Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and so there [sic, are] those are hanging on my walls but that was well into my career when I really needed to refine my business skills and management skills and entrepreneurial skills, well into my career.  That was in the nineties when I took those courses.
Speaker 2: And when you're making those choices to leave NYU, to carry the dictionary to work, to build a vocabulary what years are we talking about?
Speaker 1: Oh we're talking the sixties, we're talking '63 [1963], '64 [1964], '65 [1965] and then ultimately I came to Cleveland [Ohio].
Story_ID: 120664
Speaker 1: So in the 1960s there's a lot of history was being made nationally as far as race relations are concerned in the United States of America.  Were you conscious of everything that's going on around you?
Speaker 2: Yeah very much conscious, I mean I grew in a place in time where there was Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.], a huge voice, flamboyant voice, bold voice and he was very a part of the New York [New York] persona.  Malcolm X, huge voice, a contradictory voice to [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.].  I was certainly conscious of what Dr. King was doing at the time but Malcolm had a bigger voice in New York at that time.  So yes very much interested in that kind of thing, very much traumatized like a lot of us when Malcolm was killed, basically by his own people.  I didn't quite understand that, couldn't quite connect the dots on that but very interested in it. And I remember I had been an avid reader of Time magazine since the early '60s [1960s] and I remember my brother Joseph asking me one day how is it that you know so much or, so little really, about so much and I tell him that I read Time magazine.  And so I was very interested in current events, very interested in what was going on around me.  I'm not sure that I could do anything about it but I was interested in it and I was conscious of it and I was conscious of this whole shift from Negritude to black power.
Speaker 1: Was there any message from any of those messengers that you named, Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm X El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz.  Anyone that was especially appealing to you or were you just listening to all the voices?
Speaker 2: Clayton Powell was especially appealing to me 'cause he was bold and brash, he was good looking, he was smooth, he was suave.  So he was appealing really to a lot of young brothers and sisters my age certainly at that time and even older.  Malcolm was appealing because he defied the system and he talked of self love and ridding ourselves of self hatred which I didn't quite grasp--I didn't quite grasp this thing that black people hated themselves and suffered low esteem and the imagery of our people was not what it needed to be.  And, so that was--it was very provocative conversation, didn't quite grasp the deep psychological ramifications of it but it was interesting and certainly as I track my life had a profound impact on the direction in which I took my life.
Story_ID: 120665
Speaker 1: Now, may I ask a question, if you don't want to answer it that's fine.  Are you familiar with the terms good hair and pretty color?
Speaker 2: I'm familiar with that term and I'm familiar with the term light, bright and almost white.  One of the things if you've ever heard me speak publicly, one of the things that I do when I speak and I'm sort of famous for was after my introduction I approach the podium, I pause, I look out at the audience probably for ten seconds saying nothing.  You could hear a pin drop every time I do this and that I start by saying yes I am black.  It always gets a laugh and then I always say yes there is someone over there on the right hand side asking their partner, their seatmate is he black.  There's always someone doing that and they always come up to me after the speech and say did you hear me say that.  So I know that people look at me in many instances and not everybody is quite sure.  Now once I deliver my talk there is no question but initially you don't know where I'm coming from.  So I believe that God put me in this package, this costume, this space suit so that I can operate in both worlds because I do, I operate very effectively in both worlds.  I'm in places where people have absolutely no idea that I'm black and they are free to talk as they wish to talk and you'll be surprised what they say about black people and I'm in places where there are all black and they have no idea that I'm all black and you'll be surprised (laugh) what they say about white people.  So to be able to flip flop and to get a perspective from both worlds regardless of socio economics is a gift that must be shared through the written and oral word with others.
Speaker 1: Well I ask the question just to follow up on what you said about Malcolm [X]'s comments about self hatred and self-loathing and what [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] refers to as this degenerating sense of nobodiness.
Speaker 2: Or [W.E.B.] Du Bois refers this to this two-ness, this duality that we live in.
Speaker 1: A Negro and an American.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I hope we can share some more of those pictures again that we keep referring to this-people are going to wonder what I'm talking about.  You have this family such a beautiful rainbow of colors and you talk about your handsome brothers and so I want people to be able to see them and know that when you're coming of age, you have all these role models and you have the Malcolms and the Martins and the Adam Clayton Powell, Jrs. and they all look so different but they are all black men and role models.
Speaker 2: Strong black men, strong black men, my brothers were just awesome models for me especially being the younger and being able to look at them and the good, the bad and the ugly. And so I learned from the good things that they brought to my life and some bad things that they brought--I learned from those bad things and those lessons were just as important.  There were things that I learned I saw them do that I said I absolutely do not want to do and will not do.
Story_ID: 120666
Speaker 1: I know you mentioned that you and your brother started the disco and maybe that's entrepreneurial activity but I'm just wondering is that the beginning for you of small business, I guess activity--
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: --in your life?
Speaker 2: It was but really Benjamin's, my half brother who I worked for, was really the beginning of entrepreneurial thinking.  That's where the seeds were planted as I observed him in this role in charge and doing his thing.  So I think the seeds were planted there and those seeds manifested itself in this--our first entrepreneurial venture which is basically a disco.  That would be one way of looking at it.  If you were to talk to my sister, Emma who I love dearly with a brilliant, brilliant mind, she would tell you that I was always entrepreneurial that the seeds of entrepreneurialism was always in me that even as a young man growing up in a foster home twelve, thirteen years old I was engaged in entrepreneurial activity.  I had a babysitting service now it was totally unheard of for men to babysit back then, I had a babysitting service.  I also had a house cleaning service where I would clean people's homes like a domestic.  I had so much work that I actually hired my brothers and sisters to do work for me in my stead and paid them a percentage, that's entrepreneurial.  So the seeds probably were--my sister would tell you, were always there.  I was always thinking on the edge, thinking about trying to find a need that people had and to serve that need.  Even in its simplest manifestation of that idea from babysitting to housecleaning which is what guys didn't do back then.
Story_ID: 120667
Speaker 1: You're coming of age and doing all these things in the era not just of the Civil Rights Movement, they heyday of those leaders that you mentioned earlier but also during the era of the Vietnam War [1955-1975].  Did you have any personal experience with the military or any of your brothers involved in that conflict?
Speaker 2: No. We were all adamantly against going into the service.  I think that was a trickledown effect.  My older brother, Walter [Fraser] who was certainly old enough and qualified to go to the service did not want to go over there and fight those people in that war.  So he found ways to beat the draft, it was a draft at that time and that attitude trickled down really to all the boys.  So all of our brothers found a way to become 4F that's what you had to become--not to be draftable back in the day.  I did as well although I was a perfect physical specimen, make no mistake about that.  My brother Scott wore glasses very thick glasses and he still wears them to this day and he was 4F because of his eyesight.  He was legitimately 4F because of his eyesight so I just simply took his glasses down to Whitehall Street in New York City, put them on, of course I was crossed eyed with these very thick like coke bottle glasses and went through my exam with his glasses on and became 4F and did not participate in the Vietnam War.  I was not a protester or anything like that, I just did not want to go over there and fight those battles.
Story_ID: 120577
Speaker 1: Mr. Fraser at the end of the last segment you mentioned that you were classified as 4F and did not have to serve in Vietnam [Vietnam War] and the same was true for your brothers.  I wonder if you had friends or other associates who did serve and brought back stories that they shared with you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, many of our friends, many of my friends did serve.  One in particular, Earl Brown, served and came back really traumatized by his experience, wounded physically and traumatized mentally and was really under the care of the government for many, many years as he found his own way to earn a living after coming back.  He shared that with us and what it was like to be over there, to be in a war and shooting a gun at people that you don't know and they're shooting back.  Somehow I inherently knew that I didn't want that experience in my life and did everything I could and basically illegally to avoid it.  But his stories reinforced my deepest fears and feelings and it was a blessing that I did not have that experience, I believe in my own life.  I believe that God was probably saving me for something else, my own personal war and drama.
Story_ID: 120578
Speaker 1: Now I--at some point in this discussion we're going to have to get to the point where SuccessGuides, SuccessNet and all of those words that we associate with your very public career especially here in northeast Ohio, I suppose as a base and globally with all your traveling when that comes to the forefront and then we start to read all of the articles and know that your books are available.  So when do we really, I guess see the genesis of 'Success Guide' what year are we beginning that?
Speaker 2: SuccessGuide would have begun in 1987, many years after I came to Cleveland [Ohio] basically to visit a sister, a half-sister, Myra Craig and had basically not been out of New York.  Like most New Yorkers I didn't really believe that people lived any place else other than New York, had not traveled.  I knew that there was Jersey, New Jersey, because I could it across the Hudson River but traveled to Cleveland, Ohio and was impressed by the opportunity here and impressed by the fact that people didn't live stacked on top of each other and that my sister lived in a house in Garfield Heights on Beach Grove Avenue on a piece of land that was the size of one of the projects that I had lived in with over two thousand people stacked on top of each other.  So I thought this was the land of milk and honey and so I decided to stay and then my work began in earnest here but it began modestly, it began (pause) with Cleveland Clinic in the laundry room collecting surgical linen--used surgical linen around the--Cleveland Clinic was very small at that time, still very prestigious but very small--and then bringing it down to the laundry room where it was washed and then folded and then redistributed.  I made lots of friends at Cleveland Clinic.  I then moved from Cleveland Clinic after about a year or so to Halle Brothers working in the basement of Halle Brothers I was wrapping gifts for Christmas.  I went from one basement, the basement at Cleveland Clinic to another basement, the basement of Halle Brothers where I actually met Walter Halle who was an icon in Cleveland at the time as Halle Brothers was an iconic department store in Cleveland at that time.  He was a very classy guy, wore pin striped suites, I think that's one of the reasons although my brothers wore pin striped suits as you can see from our picture many years ago.  But I always liked that pin striped look and I was noticed by a carpet buyer, a guy by the name of Frank Fletcher who was from England, really nice guy.  I worked hard wrapping my gifts, I connected with Frank on a personal level.  He had a great sense of humor, I had a sense of humor, we liked each other and so rather than being laid off after the Christmas season was over, Frank asked me if I would like to be the stock boy in the carpet department at Halle Brothers and I said I'd love to.
Speaker 1: Is this the 1970s?
Speaker 2: No this is still the mid '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay. And so I became a stock boy and worked very very hard and then moved from stock boy to assistant buyer in the carpet department and then from there moved upstairs to the furniture department of Halle Brothers where I met the interior designers.  I remember Jim Irvin, he's still around Cleveland and he is one of the great interior designers.  He worked for Halle Brothers for many years and really got interested in the whole art and science of design and decoration and taste and how to put things together and had a very, very wonderful little career there at Halle Brothers.
Story_ID: 120579
Speaker 1: I then moved from Halle Brothers to essentially go out on my own.  I wanted to make more money, I had a real interest in reference materials because I was a reader myself.  A friend of mine had an opportunity for me at the Encyclopedia Britannica and so I moved over to Encyclopedia Britannica.  I had a couple of choices to either sell World Book or Encyclopedia Britannica and I liked Britannica better because it was the best reference source in America at that time.  So he got me a job as a salesperson basically cold calling, getting leads, going out into Youngstown, Ohio, knocking on doors, etcetera, etcetera.  That was a very special time, I really learned how to interact with people.  To meet someone, to then convince them, because in the business there's no coming back.  It was known in the business that if people said we like the set of encyclopedias but could you come back in a week, we'll think about it and maybe we'll purchase it.  Well what you learn in that business is that doesn't exist, you either close then, right then and there and it was about a thousand dollars for a set of Encyclopedia Britannica or you never were going to come back.  So you really have to learn how to connect with people instantly.  Both the husband and wife had to be there and so--and how to talk to people and how to communicate to people and how to basically sell people on buying a product that costs a thousand dollars and signing on the dotted line.  All of this took place in sixty minutes.  So it was a powerful important series of lessons that I learned on how to do this, how to effectively and succinctly and powerfully and passionately communicate my thoughts and ideas and to get people to buy those thoughts and ideas and invest in it right then and there.
Speaker 2: So were you good at it from the start?
Speaker 1: No I was not good at it from the start, something you learn but because I loved people and I really do love people and I love talking to people and I find everyone interesting because everybody has a story, I learned quickly. I learned quickly and I was very effective and very good at it.  So I did that for several years, I truly enjoyed it and then decided the entrepreneurial bug bit me--decided that I wanted to sell my own encyclopedias and this was again in the '60s [1960s] when black power was the thing.  This whole notion of self-esteem and who we are and African people and that we have a history, we were not just slaves.  All this stuff was now frothing up in me from my days in New York, from the things that I was reading and so I found out about the International Library of Negro Life in History and I said this could be the black version of Encyclopedia Britannica.  So I started a company on Lee Road right near Harvard, opened up a little storefront and called it Black Educational Development.  That was the name of the company incorporated, me and a guy named Eugene Blackwell.  Gene is still around and our mission was to go into homes just like I used to do with Encyclopedia Britannica and sell this ten volume edition sort of modeling our presentation after the Encyclopedia Britannica presentation but black and sell these products in the homes of black people in the Lee Harvard area and other areas as well as to sell these same reference materials to colleges, universities, libraries and schools around the greater Cleveland area and the greater Ohio area.  That was our self-anointed mission and that's what we wanted to do.  So we felt that a ten volume set of encyclopedias--of the international wasn't enough that was good.  We then found the Journal of Negro Life and History which was a fifty seven volume.  It was sort of like the great books of the western world that I have up on my shelf.  So we added that to it then we found the Negro Almanac which is a real thick sort of almanac on Negro history and we put together a whole package and went out with black education development and start selling these and did that for, very successfully, for about two to three years and made a lot of money.  No one was doing it at the time.  People were really surprised and mesmerized and engaged with this idea of having black encyclopedias in their home and I was very passionate about it.  So this sort of--this African centric--black centric-ness that was in there and it was latent that I'd gotten from Malcolm [Malcolm X], that I'd heard Martin [Revered Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speak, that Adam Clayton Powell--that stuff was latent in me and it came out, the time was right.  So I was very passionate about it and that passion infected other people and they in fact wanted to have this.
Story_ID: 120580
Speaker 1: Did that for about three years and a good friend of mine Norman Thomas who was the president of Ran Associates--we're now in the late '60s [1960s] early '70s [1970s] and the civil rights laws had been signed, voting rights act had been signed and corporate America was now opening the doors to black people to enter and to learn what it takes to succeed in the corporate world.  So Norman came to me and said, "George I have a contract with Procter & Gamble and they're looking for black professionals to go into their marketing and sales training program but you have to have a college degree." I said, "Norman I don't have a college degree."  He said, "I know you don't have a college degree but there is something special about you and you have a lot of experience and you've done a lot of things and I think that because of your specialness, because of the things that you've done, your entrepreneurial spirit that you've exhibited, I think actually you can convince them to give you a job without a college degree."  I said, "No I'm not really--Procter & Gamble I know it's a great company but I don't know if I really want to sell soap or toothpaste I really love what I'm doing."  He said, "Man they're opening the doors, you'll be one of the first crew of African Americans to get in there, you'll learn a lot, these are some of the best business people, one of the best companies in the world.  You'll have retirement, profit sharing I mean the velvet handcuffs."  So I said okay I'll talk to them.  I met Richard Gilchrist [ph.] who was then the district manager for the greater Cleveland [Ohio] area of Procter & Gamble and I really liked him, I liked him as a human being.  I went through probably eight to ten interviews and he really liked me although I was not technically qualified because I didn't have a college degree to get the job.  He liked me, he liked my experiences and my exuberant spirit, he hired me.  And it was one of the best decisions I've made in my life because he took me under this small world of entrepreneurism, foot in the door cold call selling to a much more sophisticated world that I didn't even know exists, the world of corporate America. All of the lessons that we have learned those of my generation, first generation to get into those doors was marvelous and I stayed there twelve, thirteen years. Probably though I stayed there five years too long because by the seventh year I was a manager, I was truly bored with the work that I was doing.  I had five or six people who were reporting to me, I managed the health and beauty business in the northeast but I could do that job with my eyes closed and I could do it better than anybody and I would only have to spend a couple of hours a week doing it and I was still better than anybody.  I won all the awards--so I knew that I was bored because I wasn't interested in doing it anymore.  How do I know that because I then took on volunteer assignments and became chairman of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] telethon in Cleveland after starting out in some menial assignment and having met John Glover who was then the district manager of the United Negro College Fund.  A small volunteer assignment, did well with that volunteer assignment and within three years I was the chairman of the United Negro College Fund and took that to a whole other level.  It was just when the telethons was starting. It was brand new and put on house parties and just-I think I had recruited successfully at least a couple of hundred brothers and sisters into that volunteer initiative and divided it up into teams and we just-we raised more money per capita in Cleveland, Ohio than any city in America even those cities that had historically black colleges in them.  In fact, a lot of people thought I was employed by the United Negro College Fund when in fact I was actually employed by Procter & Gamble.  Procter & Gamble in its brilliance encouraged all of its employees to get involved in the community.  Volunteer do something other than selling so I took them up on it.  If you look at my resume, you can see that by the time I finished my two or three year term with the United Negro College Fund I was on every major board as a volunteer in Cleveland, Ohio.
Story_ID: 120581
Speaker 1: I suppose that you attracted the attention of a lot of other folks as well because I noticed that in 1971 you were listed as one of the most eligible African American bachelors--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: In America, by Ebony magazine, boy I was hot stuff, was I hot stuff?  Yeah I had attracted attention because most of my volunteer efforts were fairly high profile and required interacting in the public sector and private sector with people all over the city who were leaders and they observed how I conducted myself and what I was able to accomplish.  So as Ebony was, as it did back in the day, were looking for outstanding black citizens--male citizens my name kept popping up and that led to that honor.  It was an honor but it was mostly ego and it was a way for me to get girls.  But it was great and I'll never forget Ebony Magazine for that.  Because, actually that year is the year I met my wife and it was an exciting time very, very exciting time.  She was impressed, she was really impressed not only was I in Ebony at that time, I was in The Plain Dealer because by that time I had a very fancy, very large apartment right off of Shakers Square, right next to the Cleveland Skating Club. And my brother who had come in from New York to live in Cleveland [Ohio] had the apartment next door to me.  I had five big rooms, he had five big rooms and we were only two apartments on each floor so we had a penthouse apartment and we would give New Year's Eve parties and I became famous in Cleveland in our little social circle for our invited only New Year's Eve parties.  Those were really my first big networking events and those parties began back in the late '60s [1960s] and does for many years where we brought together in the name of partying and socializing black professionals, business owners and community leaders but most everybody that came were single and looking.  But it really was about connecting people together about networking.  They called them parties with a purpose and they evolved from my home--my apartment to other places.
Speaker 1: So this is late '60s [1960s] to early 1970s when you're having these first networking activities and then being named one of the most eligible bachelors and then ultimately meeting a woman who would end your bachelor days.  What is your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Nora, Nora Jean, we call her Jean.
Speaker 1: And her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Spencer.
Speaker 1: And, now when were you married?
Speaker 2: 1973.
Speaker 1: '73 [1973], okay. Thirty-one years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, thirty-one. This is our thirty-second year.
Story_ID: 120582
Speaker 1: Now, when do you formally launch all of the businesses that would somehow have success as part of their name?
Speaker 2: There was a couple of transitions, a couple of linkages.  Left P and G [Procter & Gamble]. A friend of mine Cheryl Wills was the volunteer chair of United Way--knew of my work with United Negro College Fund [UNCF]--United Way was looking for a director of communications and marketing,  someone out of the real world of marketing. She tapped me and I went to United Way from P& G and spent three years with United Way as director of communications and marketing and created the balloon fest that was the Guinness Book of World Records release, the largest single release of balloons in the history of humankind, 1.4 million balloons released on Public Square [Cleveland, Ohio].  I don't know if you remember that event but it was off the charts, global coverage.  In each balloon we put a message and the kids sold the balloons in schools for a dollar and so we raised money and brought massive attention to United Way.  I then left United Way to go back and to take advantage of an entrepreneurial opportunity.  Ford Motor Company tapped me to go into their dealer development program.  I was to be the first black Ford Lincoln Mercury dealer in Cleveland [Ohio].  That was a two year program that was back in 1987.  I went into that program, it was interesting but halfway through the program I had personally decided that I don't think I want to sell cars.  It was not the best time certainly to sell Ford cars at that time, or to sell cars in general.  But I do want to pursue this idea of networking and bringing black people together and creating a forum for them to link up and to connect and to work with and through each other that was the central seed and core of the idea.  So I really started that process halfway through the paid training program with Ford Motor Company and basically said let me put on some small events--networking events called SuccessNet.  We did those for five years every month and the attraction would be a top black speaker that would not be from the community and hors d'oeuvres and drinks after work in a first class venue that was the concept called SuccessNet--success through networking.  The seed of that idea really came from Black Enterprise Magazine, [HM] Earl Graves had tapped me to chair the Black Enterprise networking events that were being done around the country and when it came to Cleveland, he wanted me to chair that for him as a volunteer and I did that.  That's how I met Earl and his wife and it was a very successful--with about five hundred people came out.  He was very happy with the results and that was really the seed of SuccessNet and I just carried it forward.  I said we need to be doing this not once a year when Black Enterprise shows up but we really need to be doing this kind of thing every month in our community to strengthen our bond and to find out who is doing what and that's where SuccessNet came from.  But I remember I was in the dealer development program at that time.  So we started doing the events, collected literally hundreds of business cards.  So the next entrepreneurial idea came out of that.  This collection had a thousand/two thousand business cards from people who would come to these events each month.  So what do we do with these cards, I said why don't we create a directory, put the information on all these cards in this directory and then market and merchandise this directory back to the people who come to the conference we'll call them directory success guides--the networking guide to black resources in Cleveland.  So it won't be just a directory, we'll also feature some of the movers and shakers and decision makers.  It was way before all the (unclear).  Well it was a huge success, generated tons of money and it really was the foundation for the money that it generated--the revenues that it generated was the foundation for, if it can work here, it can work in other cities.
Story_ID: 120583
Speaker 1: While conceptually that's right, the mistake that I made as an entrepreneur is growth too fast.  So instead of going to another city which is what I should have done, I went to six cities plus Cleveland [Ohio].  Well I didn't have the training or the resources to get that done and that turned the whole company upside down.
Speaker 2: But it took a while, it seemed to me just in looking back over the written record of your history that you were really out there for a while doing very well.
Speaker 1: Oh very, very well, oh yeah.
Speaker 2: So from '88 [1988] to at least the mid-1990s.
Speaker 1: Yeah mid-1990s and doing very, very, very well.
Speaker 2: SuccessNet and SuccessGuide.
Speaker 1: Exactly, until I tried to bite off a little bit more than I could chew.  Our situation--our entrepreneurial situations is not just with me but it's with most black entrepreneurs are very tedious and very tenuous and one bad decision that results in financial trauma 'cause we are living, most of us entrepreneurially in a house of cards has a domino effect, at that time we were living in a house of cards and so that's what happened.  So that turned the whole business upside down, went into bankruptcy because you are a small business you have to personally sign.  So in spite of the fact that you're incorporated, companies can break the corporate shield because you have personally signed and so they can't collect from you from a corporation they then come after you personally, which is what happened to me.  So my corporate bankruptcy bled over into my personal life and--but fortunately I had a very patient wife, I'm not saying that she was excited and happy about this, she was not and I just said listen we will get over this, we'll get through it, I have the capacity to earn, I have good ideas just be patient.  Fortunately she was working, she's always remained employed while I ventured into my things and we got through it.
Story_ID: 120584
Speaker 1: [At the] end of the last segment we were talking about 1996 and the bankruptcy and I'm wondering, just because I like Iyanla [Vanzant], if you agree with her that there is value in the valley that's not a peak moment for you, you're in the valley.  Are there any lessons learned while you're in the valley?
Speaker 2: Yeah never lose the lesson, I mean, regardless of the experience that you have in life you should never lose the lesson 'cause all lessons are valuable.  Because everything happens for a reason and it serves us in some special way and we will never understand the reason looking forward, we will understand it looking backwards.  So as I look backwards on that experience, a couple of lessons.  Have a large vision but think small because successes are built--large successes are built on small successes and so it is difficult to be successful in a big business until you become successful in a small business and while Success Guide was successful in Cleveland [Ohio], I could have very easily transitioned to a second city instead of seven cities and would have been successful in two cities and then a year or two of growth and development accessing resources and then take it to a third city.  So A, have a large vision for what you want but think small.  Don't grow too fast and prepare yourself and prepare your people for greater responsibility.  Cause it's a huge responsibility and bankrupting the company impacted everybody who touched the company and was involved in the company.  It affected all of us and so you have the lives of people's--in your hand you have the lives of a lot of people and you really have to think responsibly about that.
Story_ID: 120585
Speaker 1: So how do you bounce back from something like that?
Speaker 2: A, you have to believe in what you're doing, you have to believe that it's right and I believe that whenever you're operating out of goodness and righteousness, if you feel in your heart that you're really right and what you're doing is serving a community.  If its adding value then you just sort of have to step back from it and figure out how to do it right.  If it is right then figure out how to do it right.  I hadn't figured out how to do it right, I was doing the right thing but I wasn't doing it the right way.  So I had to take the time to figure how to do it right.  I had to work harder at going back out into the community and finding new resources and then having people around you who say it's okay, you can count on me through the bad as well as the good and we'll start over together and that makes a big difference.  A supportive family, a supportive partner, supportive friends that's how you step back--I'm sorry that's how you recover from failure.  The people you surround yourself with, a right vision and a positive mental attitude about everything in life.  I've always had a positive mental attitude 'cause all the negative things and traumatic things that have happened in my life, I've always sort of processed it in a sense that this is happened for a reason, to teach me a lesson, I'm going to learn from that lesson and then build.
Speaker 1: Again that's 1996 when you're learning that tough lesson about growing too fast.  Does that require you to downsize at all?
Speaker 2: Yes it did, oh yeah we had to shrink in size.  We had to get small because it's not that we had zero dollars.  In bankruptcy you are still allowed to operate, reorganize, rethink, you're relieved of some creditor responsibility so you don't have your phones constantly ringing, people trying to collect money from you which causes stress. But yeah, I had to get smaller, had to move into a smaller office, we had to lay off a number of people and just sort of rethink.  Had to close down the six or seven other cities that we had and just really start over, clean sheet of paper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120586
Speaker 1: But I believe I saw in some of the news articles that I gathered for this interview that two years later you have a brand new book and it's a bestseller.  So you didn't stay in the valley very long.
Speaker 2: No, you can't stay in the valley very long.  The analogy is if you're climbing a mountain--to climb a mountain almost any mountain you have to negotiate the valley first, if you try to climb Mount Everest there's a huge valley that you have to get through but the point is you have to get through it because if you stay in the valley too long, you will freeze to death if you're climbing Mount Everest.  So no you can't, you just--it's just time to reflect and to regroup and to get stronger.  That's the proper psychological and mental approach that you can't linger there and lick your wounds but so long.  So yes, was I lingering, was I licking wounds, was I trying to figure out, was I under some pressure to make things right, absolutely, but you have a finite amount of time to negotiate that valley and to begin again to start climbing the mountain.  So I decided shortly after that occurred that we would still do our events 'cause they were profitable, that we would continue to do the local Cleveland [Ohio] version of 'Success Guide' 'cause that was profitable and that I would take my experiences, my entrepreneurial experiences as well as my networking experiences and the things that I learned from the events that I was doing and put it in a book.  So that was the next big thing after the bankruptcy, not really after the bankruptcy--yeah because actually my first book now that I think about it--my first book had already been out that was 'Success Runs in Our Race'.  So I had written my second book this was after the bankruptcy or preparing to write my second book and that was the ten best business opportunities for blacks in America, it was called 'Race for Success' and certainly I had a lot of experience about--in terms of what I felt was good and what I felt was significant opportunities and then what I learned from building my own business and applied those lessons and wrote about those ideas and strategies and tactics in thinking and psychology and put into the next book.
Speaker 1: And again it was a bestseller.
Speaker 2: Yes it was, it was the second bestseller and that's very unusual; it's unusual a, to write a book.  There are a couple of hundred thousand manuscripts submitted every year to publishers for publishing.  About fifty thousand or so are published and to be selected to be published by a major publisher is a major accomplishment.  So it was a, unusual and good to get a major publisher to agree to publish the book and b, it is even more unusual to write a bestseller.  But that occurred because of the work that I did and understanding how to sell books in black America 'cause it really is a trick to selling books in our community.  I give this advice to anybody who is writing books, the one sure way to sell books certainly in our community is to speak.  If you speak, you will sell books; if you just write a book depending on the publishing company and the bookstores to sell your books you will not sell a lot of books.  You'll get--books are like records, like movies you get two or three weeks on the shelf and if you don't do the volume there's ten books waiting to take up that same space that you're taking on the shelf so you have to sell.  You can't depend on mass marketing to do it for you.  There are only a 110, or 120 books that makes the New York Times bestsellers list out of 50,000 books that are published a year so the odds of writing a bestseller is slim.  So you have to take the bull by the horns, do the marketing yourself especially in our community and the best and most sustaining way to keep your book fresh and to keep it flowing outside of the bookstore into the hands of people is to go out and speak sort of preach your gospel, preach your theme, preach your title, make sure your books are there, make sure the bookstore is there when you're speaking and that's how you sell books.  In fact, 'Success Runs in Our Race' and 'Race for Success' ten years later, still selling, why, because I speak 120 times a year.
Story_ID: 120587
Speaker 1: That's all going on at the same time you're restructuring the company, you're coming up out of the valley, you're selling the book and you're on the lecture circuit?
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: In 1998?
Speaker 2: Yeah because the lecture circuit was cash flow.  If I was doing--in 1998 I was probably doing sixty or seventy speeches each year and an average of three to five thousand dollars a speech plus book sales after the speech that was cash flow.  And that of course, with that kind of cash flow on a regular basis you can replenish and refuel the financial resources necessary to dig yourself out of this enormous hole that a bankruptcy will put you in.  So it was very important that I maintain my speaking business because it enabled me to share my vision and at the same time create cash flow.
Speaker 1: So did you have to rewrite all of your speeches after the bankruptcy or did you just continue to deliver the same message about being success oriented?
Speaker 2: I rewrote a part of my speech to include the bankruptcy.  I wanted to talk about this personal trauma and people were interested quite frankly, in fact people really are more interested in something like that and how you overcame something like that than they're interested in your wonderful climb to success.  They are much more interested in how one overcomes something traumatic in their life and so that was a part of my speech.  I used it quite frankly, leveraged that bad experience and made money as a result of it.
Speaker 1: Well only because I saw some different figures on a website for a range of speaking fees am I going to ask the next question.  Do you think the bankruptcy was good for your career as a public speaker?
Speaker 2: Yes it was.  There's an old saying in the public relations world all public relations good or bad is good so long as they spell your name right.  Now I'm not talking about some heinous crime, but if people are writing about you and I don't know if you remember this but my bankruptcy was very public.  Not many people's bankruptcy is as public as mine was public.  Mine was on the front page of 'The Plain Dealer', okay.
Speaker 1: Ohio's largest newspaper.
Speaker 2: Ohio's largest newspaper.  Now why would someone, a little old guy who has this small business, why would his bankruptcy be on the front page of 'The Plain Dealer' because people were interested in me and interested in the things that I was doing and saying and perhaps even the incongruency [sic, incongruence] between what occurred in my own personal life and what I was talking about, success.  So if this is the success expert how the hell did he experience personal bankruptcy, that's an interesting story.  So people were interested in that story and therefore I got a lot of engagements as a result of people wanting me to share that personal trauma and again they really wanted to know, well what did you do, how did you overcome that.  They ask the same questions, they didn't actually ask the questions, I answered the questions.  I ask them rhetorically in my speech and answered them in my speech.
Speaker 1: So your stock went up in value?
Speaker 2: Yeah it did in a strange sort of way it can work that way for you especially if you have some character and some trust in your community.  I think for the most part black people trusted me.  I had some integrity and maybe even a little bit of moral authority and as a result of that people are very forgiving.  They know that we are all capable of making mistakes and that's not what's so interesting, what's interesting is how you overcome those mistakes.  That's where the real integrity and character comes from, coming out of the valley and climbing the mountain and then ending up on top of the mountain that's the interesting story.
Story_ID: 120588
Speaker 1: Now Mr. Fraser you said that you had some trust, some credibility in the black community, is that your primary audience, the folks that you speak to is it usually a black audience?
Speaker 2: My primary audience over the last fifteen years has been black. Within the last, let's say three to five years my audience has become more diverse because the principles, the ideas, the concepts, the strategies and tactics that I talk about really have appeal regardless of people's color.  Now depending on who I'm talking to if I'm talking to a predominantly white audience, I can tailor my conversation, my thoughts, my ideas so that it touches and reaches anybody and everybody regardless of gender, regardless of color.  If I'm talking to a predominantly black audience at a black conference then I will my tailor my comments to be culturally specific and touch you specifically as a black male or a black female.  So it just depends on who's in the audience but the principles, the ideas, the concepts, the theories basically remain the same.
Story_ID: 120589
Speaker 1: Mr. Fraser why do you think people are willing to pay thousands of dollars per hour to hear the same basic message which you've been delivering now for over a decade?
Speaker 2: Isn't that interesting?  I think that fundamentally the key to learning is repetition.  I affectionately call my two sons--when we were raising them, my wife [Nora Jean Fraser] and I--the rock-head brothers, alright, out of affection.  Why because they're heads were as hard as rocks.  Why because I had so say the same things fifty different ways on fifty different days and on the fifty-first time they would go ah ha and they would learn. Well that's the same thing with all of us; we constantly need to hear the same kinds of important messages repeatedly to be reminded.  I tell people all the time when I speak, I promise you two things, the first thing I promise you is I will not be saying anything you have not heard before accept this evening you will hear it differently and that's really what it is.  There really isn't anything new there really isn't, it's all been said and it's all been written, okay all you have to do is look in the bible, it's all been said and it's all been written.  I just say the same things to people differently and I say it in ways that reflect my own personal experiences, my own personal style, my own personal sense of humor and I tell stories and people love stories and they love to find in those stories things that they can connect with in their own life.  So you can--because the principles are all the same, there aren't a whole lot of principles that vary or differ regardless of culture, regardless of religion, regardless of any persuasion.  So people just never get tired of hearing good stories told in an interesting and passionate way to remind them of who they are and what they're supposed to be doing or what they would like to be doing or what they should be doing or what they can be doing and we never get tired of it.
Story_ID: 120590
Speaker 1: You said in the last few years your audiences have become more diverse.  Are there--I know you don't necessarily want to tell me who your hosts are for all the lectures that you give but are there places that you've gone this year in 2005 where perhaps you could not have gone or would have not gone ten years ago?
Speaker 2: Yeah I do a lot more corporate talks than I've ever done in the last certainly three to five years. And corporate America many years ago while they have all kinds of conferences and conventions and--blacks, regardless of gender, males or females, were not the kinds of speakers that they typically hired or wanted to hear from quite frankly.  Our style is a little bit different.  The way we frame and talk about the things that are important in life are framed and positioned differently.  We come out of an oral tradition, we come out of a spiritual and moral tradition, we come out of a preaching position and that was in a sense never said but persona non grata in the corporate world that is changing.  As corporate America wraps its mind around what does it take to inspire and to empower the whole person?  What it takes today is appealing to the mind, to the body, to the spirit and to the heart.  Well we're really good at appealing to the spirit because that's who we are, we're spiritual people, in fact I believe that if you're not reaching black people in a spiritual level you're really not reaching them and we're really good at reaching the heart.  So we place a lot of emphasis in our talks on spirit and heart and that's now accepted in corporate America today and it's not just an intellectual exercise of management and control--commanding control, it's now what can we do.  One, to be inclusive also, that's a huge, huge thrust in corporate America today.  We want more women talking to us, we want more people of color whether they are Hispanic, Asians or black.  So the doors have opened so today I'm speaking to more corporations than I ever spoken to simply because times have changed.
Story_ID: 120591
Speaker 1: I'm glad you said that because you're bouncing back from the bankruptcy during the era of President William Jefferson [Bill] Clinton and today times have really changed.  There's a new man in the White House and the era of [President] George W. Bush and the economy is very different, work is different.  Are you having to tailor the message to sort of accommodate folks in these changing times or I know you said it's basically the same though but the challenges I think are a little greater now in this era?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah it's harder.  America is going through some personal changes in terms of how we see things, how we work together, how we work with and through each other.  Black people in this country are experiencing quantum change within their own communities but I think because of this change, people's minds are much more open.  They're open to new ideas and new thinking and new thought and so I think there's even a greater appeal of the kinds of things that I'm talking about.  Basically my conversation, my talk in corporate America is really about relationships, you can call it networking, connecting the dots, leveraging resources but it's really about the power and importance of the relationships in our lives, I mean that's really what it is about because all of life is about relationships, all of life is about working with and through other people.  There is no success that you can obtain, sustain or maintain on your own by yourself in a vacuum.  So that's a good thing to be talking about today.  The question becomes what is it we do to build the kind of relationships necessary to move our lives and our families and our community and our businesses and our companies forward.  And so, in spite of the quantum change moving from sort of an information age to the age of wisdom and knowledge and experience and to the age of people and not things, to the age of empowerment where we really maximize each person's full human potential and stop treating them like a machine assigning to a specific thing that that's all you can do and that's the only thing you can do and I'll tell you when to do it and I'll tell you when to stop.  The whole country is evolving to that kind of approach, the approach of allowing people to truly find themselves, find their voice and to act on that voice.
Story_ID: 120592
Speaker 1: So if the spoken message changes a little in keeping with the changing times, how about your written words?  Are there new publications on the horizon?  Have you had another publication since the 1998 release of that book?
Speaker 2: I'm writing a book now, it's called, "Connecting with People: Ten Lessons for Building Extraordinary Relationships in Business and in Life, Getting Reconnected in a Disconnected World."  So that's the next book that I will finish probably sometime this year and then there is another book that I'm working on--stewing on--soaking in right now collecting research and information and it's called Connecting the Dots, a new agenda--a black agenda for the 21st century and that's some sort of a working title, let the essence of what the book will be about and this is what I talked about in the state of black America with Tavis Smiley in Atlanta [Georgia] that was on C-Span a couple of weeks ago.  The need for black people in particular to connect the dots, to leverage the tremendous resources that we currently have.  I wrote a diagram that I use all the time when I speak and it was--not only that but it was very, very heady panel discussion.  I say heady because there were ten people on the stage, 8,000 people in the audience and C-Span is in 100 million homes and so to the left of me was [HM] Minister Louis Farrakhan, [HM Reverend] Al Sharpton, [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson, [Dr.] Cornel West, Jocelyn Elders, the former mayor of Detroit, Dennis Archer and [HM] Tavis Smiley was the moderator and there were a couple of other people, I don't remember their names but it was very, very, very stressful for a person like me to be sitting in that company and to say something that would make an impact on the audience and that would make some sense.  'Cause it's very easy to be swallowed up and to be overshadowed certainly by someone as powerful whether you agree with him or not, his philosophy, his thinking as Minister Louis Farrakhan who is just one of the great orators certainly in America and certainly in black America.  So having to come up with an idea, a thought that would in a sense hijack the conversation 'cause that was my plan.  What could I say, what thought could I put out there, what mirror could I put up that would change the conversation 'cause the conversation was supposed to be about a political agenda for black America for the next four years.  I don't agree with there should be a political agenda and I think there needs to be a black agenda.  I think that the work has to be done within ourselves with our own community.  So the question is how you say that with 8,000 people looking on and what can you say that would make an impact and change the conversation to something that I was more comfortable with and so that was the ultimate challenge but it came out very good.
Story_ID: 120593
Speaker 1: Mr. Fraser you had just started to talk about this very important meeting convened by [HM] Tavis Smiley to talk about the state of black America and a discussion that's centered on the idea of whether or not there should be a political agenda for black America and you didn't think that there should be.
Speaker 2: No not necessarily, I believe and understand that we're one of the few cultures in the history of humankind that put political empowerment before economic empowerment therefore last year we elected over 10,000 black public officials in America and we're still at the bottom of the educational and economic heap so what does that mean.  It means that we can't do it by politics alone. We can't put that kind of pressure on our political leaderships but again we're no fools, we're all impacted by public policy and we're all impacted by the politics of inclusion.  Therefore we must continue to use the power of our vote to empower those who empower us if they're not empowering us, get them out it's no more complicated than that.  I really think that rather than looking outside for the solution that black people must look inside for the solution.  It is important to remind our people that success runs in our race make no mistake about that.  I travel all over the world, I do about 250,000 air miles a year, and I'm on the road twenty to twenty-five days a month.  I have two and a half million frequent flyer miles.  In the last nineteen months I've been in a 159 different cities around the country and around the globe and two things are apparent to me. A, this is the greatest country in the world, there is no place that I'd rather live than America, b, if you are a black person in America you will understand that there are no black people in the entire world doing better than we are and I've traveled everyplace that black people have been dispersed.  I've been to South Africa, East Africa, West Africa and North Africa all over South America and all over the Caribbean and there are no black people in the entire world doing better than we are.  In fact, we are the beacon of hope for every single person of African descent in the entire world.  So we're doing fine all things considered, we're doing fine in spite of America's isms and America still has isms.  So when we look at the facts and we put a mirror to ourselves, the facts are stunning when it comes to our success.  We are a 723 billion dollar annual economy.  If we were a nation, black people in America would the eleventh richest nation in the entire world but we know at this moment in time that less than five percent of our dollars are recycled in our community and we know that our dollars cycle one time in our community most of it cycles away from us versus the Asian or Jewish community where the dollar is recycled eight to eleven times.  We also know about this huge economy that we have, that we are some America's most conspicuous consumers.  That we've taken the art of consumption to a whole new level.  So much of this 723 billion dollars is not spent wisely.  We don't manage our wealth as wisely as we need to but we certainly have the wealth.  Again we would be the eleventh richest nation in the entire world.  So that's one, number two in the last forty years black folks of just my generation alone and I'm a baby boomer, I'm sixty years old although I know I look thirty five or forty, I'm actually sixty years old, we have amassed from just one generation alone over 500 billion hours of formal education and professional training worth in excess of 5 trillion dollars and constitutes our collective intellectual capital base from just one generation alone.  We have surpassed W.E.B. Du Bois' dream. Remember his dream of the talented tenth that if at least 10 percent of black folks get the finest education possible, they would get that education, they would then come back to the community, they would invest in the community and they would uplift the race.  Well we have surpassed that dream, nearly 14 percent of black people in America have at least a four year college degree or better. So we have surpassed Du Bois' dream by nearly 40 percent.
Story_ID: 120594
Speaker 1: Let me say that differently, we have a lot of Ph.D.s in our community, we now need some ph-dos, right?  So we have a tremendous amount of intellectual capital.  Number three, 60 percent of the black workforce in America really nine million of us are in executive, managerial, supervisory, professional specialty, vocational, technical, administrative, sales and business ownership positions, now that is an army of potential role models and mentors to help those who are stuck in the cycle of poverty.  In fact, there is no army in the entire world larger than the army of black people that have succeeded in this country.  So we are a successful people. It is time for us to connect the dots because God ain't giving us anything else until we prove to God that we can leverage more effectively the collective resources and intellectual capital in our community.  Until we prove to him that we can play the hand that he has already given us, until we prove to God that we can leverage the talents, and this is biblical, that we already have we will not be getting anything else.  We have everything we need as black people to succeed in this country.  We have freedom, civil rights, voting rights and public access.  We have education and training and a 723 billion dollar annual economy, nine million of us are doing quite fine and five trillion dollars of intellectual capital from just one generation alone.  When we learn how to network, when we learn how to connect the dots, when we learn how to come together and work with and through each other and get beyond this crab in the barrel mentality that we as black people have, this negative self-imagery and self-hatred that we have, when we learn how to do that we will be a force to be reckoned with.  Now this if the final thing from my perspective that God wants us to learn how to do and that is to, one, use networking as the infrastructure to complete the third and final moral imperative and moral assignment for our people and that assignment, that unifying purpose is wealth creation, economic development, closing the incoming wealth gap between blacks and whites in America because when the gap between blacks and whites at every level is closed everything else is America will be just fine and every other cultural group will be just fine.  So I like to show a little chart and this is what I show on C-Span and this chart to me represents black people.  Beautiful, educated, moneyed black people all over Cleveland [Ohio], all over America. What will you notice about these beautiful, educated, moneyed black people and by the way this chart can represent black organizations, it could represent black churches, it could represent black communities and what you will notice about these beautiful, educated, moneyed black institutions or people is that everybody is doing their own thing caught up in the Eurocentric value of rugged individualism having forgotten that it takes a village to raise a child.  Well there is no power here, we are disconnected from our history and struggle, too many of us have forgotten, we are disconnected from our wealth, everybody has our money but us.  It goes one way, away from us but shame on us.  We are disconnected from the best practices in our community.  You see I don't care what it is that you want to do, I can introduce you to a brother or sister in America who are already doing what you want to do whether it's a profession, whether it's a business, whether it's an organization that you're trying to build, whether it's an institution you're trying to build there are brothers and sisters already out here doing it together except you don't know who they are.  We are disconnected from them therefore we are constantly reinventing the wheel because we are an oral people and not an archival people.  We don't write stuff down.
Story_ID: 120595
Speaker 1: The world is still being run by dead people.  People who have written the greatest books in the world who've established the principles by which we live by, we still read those books and the world is still being run by them.  So we must do the same thing, we must move from being oral to an archival people, we must leverage the best practices in our community and bring them to scale to improve the political, social and civic agenda of our community.  To do this we must network.  When we fought for freedom Harriet Tubman's network of freedom fighters on the Underground Railroad is a legacy that remains with us today that was a 250 year fight.  When we fought for civil rights, voting rights and public access the minute we got free in 1864 to 1964, that fight took a 100 years and four generations and Dr. King's massive network of rich folk, poor folk, white folk, black folk and garbage men is a network-legacy that remains with us today.  So we to must network because there is no power being separated.  We know that power is most effective concentrated.  You could take a fifty five gallon drum of water, push it over, it will seek its own level and ultimately it will disperse and evaporate, there is no power there.  You can take that same fifty five gallon drum of water, put a cover on it, put it under pressure, put a small hose in it, put a fine nozzle on the end of that hose, put pressure into that hose and you can cut concrete with it.  Power is most effective concentrated.  So this is where all the power is right here whether you are at the center of your own network or whether you're part of someone else's network.  There's a beautiful African proverb that says that when spiders unite they can tie up a lion.  Let me put that another way, try to open up the Booker T. Washington delicatessen in China Town and see what happens but yet anybody and everybody can come into our community, open anything that they want, employ their people which is very smart because it is exactly what I would do, you are a one hundred percent of their economy.  So they take your money selling you products and services back to their community because you know they don't live with you then they spend your money back in their community employing their people, educating their children.  This is a wonderful business model and we should not be hating on them, we should be imitating them because that's where all the power is.  The power is in building networks.  When we build networks like this we prevent interlopers from coming into our communities and taking and destroying at will, this is where all the strength is.  Let me say that a little bit differently, it is easy to break a finger, it is hard to break a fist.  The strength is not in the wolf, the strength is in the pack.  When you cross a suspension bridge you'll notice that it's being held up by cables if you look at the cables closely, it is not a single cable, it is a number of small cables wrapped tightly together and any structural engineer will tell you that there is more tense string in small cables wrapped tightly together than any single cable regardless of its diameter.  This is where all the strength is, this is what we must learn how to do as a people in the 21st century.  When we learn how to do this, when we learn how to network, when we learn how to connect the dots, when we learn how to leverage more affectively the tremendous resources that we already have in this community, again we will be a force to be reckoned with.  That must be, in my opinion, the next big thing in the 21st century for black folk.  If in fact economic development and wealth creation the closing of the incoming wealth gap is going to occur, it will occur by using networking as the infrastructure of support.
Speaker 2: Mr. Fraser--
Speaker 1: That's my story and I'm sticking to it.
Story_ID: 120596
Speaker 1: Well I have a question just about the story.  When we say in 2005 one year after George W. Bush's reelection, the year of the tenth anniversary of the [1995] Million Man March on Washington calling for a day of atonement on the part of black men, don't we risk coming dangerously close to blaming the victim for the problems of this society when you tell African Americans that they have to look within themselves for the solutions to their problems.
Speaker 2: No I don't think so, I don't think it's about blame anymore.  I think it's about what are you gonna do. What are you going to do.  You see the answer for us is not what are they going to do, I don't really care what they are going to do, I care really what I'm going to do.  I accept the responsibility of improving the lives of my children, my family and my community, I'm not blaming anyone you're going to do whatever you're going to do and if you decide to help me, if you decide to assist in any way that you want, that's a wonderful thing and we welcome that.  But if the education of my children does not occur because you don't do what you think or say you're going to do than I'm really at fault.  I cannot allow my children not to be educated because you don't do what you say you're going to do.  I accept the responsibility of doing whatever is necessary that I can do to educate my children and to create wealth for my family, I accept that responsibility.  So it's not about what you're going to do, it's about what am I going to do and I don't blame you or you or anyone.  I believe that we are the only ones responsible for our success or failure.  When you think about it black people have built pyramids and solved complex engineering problems when other cultures were living in huts, eating each other.  Today we are the most educated and professionally trained generation of Africans in the history of humankind.  Surely we have the networks and skills to solve many of our own problems.  I suggest we stop talking about it and just do it.  What I deeply believe is that we as a people, we are not suffering because we cannot resolve our problems, we are suffering because we cannot see our problems and our problem is that we're not so much dispersed as we are a disconnected people.  Asians are connected to each other, they support each other, they don't care what anybody does.  Jewish people are connected to each other and they don't care what anyone does, in fact you can count the number of Jewish politicians on two hands, it doesn't matter to them whether they are politicians.  It's about what they're doing to create wealth in their community, to influence the political agenda through the strategic use of wealth in America.  So they don't care whether they are politicians or not, what they care about is what can we do to create wealth because in a market based economy, in a democratic, capitalistic society the only color that really matters is green.  I'm not saying its right, I'm just saying that's what it is.  So until our pile of green is as big and as high and as deep and as wide as any other cultural groups pile of green, we will never considered an equal at the table of democratic capitalism.  So it is through wealth and the creation of wealth will happen through affective networking that we can achieve the next level of freedom, the highest level of freedom is the freedom to have unlimited choices, unlimited choices and God too wants us to have unlimited choices and then it is the management of our choices that is the essence of living.
Story_ID: 120597
Speaker 1: Okay? Because we know as black people that money is not happiness per se.  How do we know that because we all know people who have money who are not happy.  So we're not saying that money is happiness per se.  The way we internalize money and the need for money in this country, by the way--and this is an aside--if you were to ask a hundred black people today what are the two systems that drive America, ninety nine out of one hundred would tell you democracy and only one out of one hundred will tell you capitalism, the ability to produce products and services for a profit to create wealth.  We know that it's capitalism that enables us to have unlimited choices, the freedom to have and to pick and choose where our children go to school.  Let's assume for a moment that I have six children and they all qualified to go to Harvard, Yale and Princeton, I want to be able to send my children if I choose to Harvard, Yale and Princeton.  All of six of them simultaneously and I don't want that to have any impact on my ability to raise my family and contribute to my children and to my community.  Wealth also provides us the freedom to choose where we live and work.  There's a beautiful home in Pepper Pike that cost about a million and a half dollars and I'd like to buy that home for my son and I don't want it to have any impact on my ability to raise my family and to contribute to my community.  Money provides us the freedom to decide where we play and when we play.  Let's say I don't want to work this year, I want to take a sabbatical and I want to take my whole family to the west coast of Africa and live in Cote D'Ivoire and visit the slave castles for a year and I don't want it to have any impact on my ability to raise my family and to contribute to my community.  Let's say I'd like to contribute a two million dollar endowment to my alma mater to educate black children going to historically black colleges, I'd really love to do that but that requires money.  So this is not blame, it really is about what am I going to do in conjunction with you because we-let's say or assume that we are of like mind because the key to networking is networking with people of like mind because two people who are of like mind are far more powerful and effective than twenty confused Negroes.  So we must constantly evaluate our friendships and relationships.  Network with people of like mind and do something where one and one makes ten and not two.  So it's about what am I going to do not what they are going to do and what am I going to do with you that will take our families and communities to the next level and that's what I'm focusing on and that's what I'm communicating and that's what I'm trying to help black people understand. What are you going to do?  As my daddy taught me many years ago what you do speaks so loudly I can't hear what you say so it's about what are we going to do not what are they going to do and we have plenty of resources to do with.  That's really the focus as far as I'm concerned, what are we going to do.
Speaker 2: I just needed that point of clarification.   I understand-(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: A long way around that point of clarification, I'm sorry about the details.
Speaker 2: No that's fine, and it's your story and you're sticking to it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You won't be moved.
Story_ID: 120598
Speaker 1: But you know a couple of times when you talk about the success enterprises if that's a term that I can use, you said we, now is that the family, the corporation, are your sons involved in the business at all?
Speaker 2: When I say we that means what are black people going to do.  When I say we that's what I'm referring to.  What are black people going to do, we know what Asians are doing, they are concerned about Asians.  We know what Jewish people are doing, they're concerned about the Jewish agenda as they should be, they're concerned about Israel as they should be.  They're concerned about maintaining strong cultural Jewish values as they should be that's who I'm concerned with.  They're concerned about employing their people, creating work and jobs for their people and that's what they should be concerned about.  Just as that's what we should be concerned about.  We black people should be concerned first about strengthening black people and the black community, that's the first thing they need to be concerned about.  Why because the stronger we are, the stronger America is because no cultural group wants to be considered a weak link in this multicultural chain called America.  So when I say we I'm talking about black people and then I reduce it to me.  If I'm a part of black people and I am and I'm concerned about black people and I am and what we're going to do, my first concern then is what am I going to do in the context of black people to add value to my family and to my community and to this country and the first thing I could do for this country is to strengthen our people.  Right now we, black people are perceived I'm not saying it's a reality but the perception is that we are a liability, that we are a weakness and that we are a weak link in this chain called America.  When we come to the table we're begging, we're asking, we're not bringing anything to the table perhaps rap music and perhaps a culture and perhaps our ability to sing, dance, play football, baseball, basketball and that's about all we're good for and consuming.  Because again we are some of the greatest consumers, we drive the consumption machine in America not the production machine at least that is the perception of black people in America.  I don't think that's a full reality and I think we need to work on changing that perception because I think we bring far more to the table than that but that is not the perception at this moment in time.
Story_ID: 120599
Speaker 1: Mr. Fraser how do you or have you been able to achieve a sense of balance in your life with over one hundred speaking engagements a year?
Speaker 2: Well first, I've been married for thirty-two years, there are not a whole lot of black folk of my generation that are married to the same woman for thirty two years.  In fact today divorce is probably more popular than marriage.  When you've been married to the same woman and you share the same vision for that many years.  First let me give you the secret of staying married for thirty two years.  In the twentieth year--how long have you been married?
Speaker 1: I'm divorced.
Speaker 2: You're divorced. I rest my case.
Speaker 1: So I've proven your point, I'm embarrassed too.
Speaker 2: In the twentieth year somebody has to leave and come back on a regular basis, in other words I don't think you can stay up under anybody continuously for thirty two years and somebody doesn't leave and come back, and it renews the whole relationship so I'm gone a lot.  So me leaving, speaking, traveling around the world, I just returned from Prague [Czech Republic] where I spoke at the World Diversity Leadership Summit, this is a wonderful thing, this renews our marriage every time I come back after a week or two or three or four.  So that's one of the secrets, somebody leaves and comes back on a regular basis.  The other way I think that you achieve balance is you look at how you manage your time and you look at what is important, what's important to your significant other, what's important in your own life and then you act on that and if you have the right kind of partner that partner understands what's important to you, they understand your purpose, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120668
Speaker 1: Mr. Fraser I asked you about--I asked you whether you were able to achieve a sense of balance in your life being so busy with the corporation and you said yes and that you've been married thirty two years to the same woman.  What's her name please?
Speaker 2: Nora Jean Fraser, we call her Jean, she's a wonderful lady and she was a gift from God, she's my sort of little angel.  God sent Nora Jean especially to me because I needed just that kind of woman with just that kind of temperament, with just that kind of understanding, just that kind of self esteem and sense of her own personal mission to deal with sort of a weird guy like me who would be out in the world trying to save the world.  It takes a special woman to understand that, to even tolerate it.
Speaker 1: So Mrs. Fraser your partner in life, is she also your partner in business?
Speaker 2: No, she's not my partner in business and I think that's probably one of the things that saved our marriage and enable it to last for thirty two years.  I don't know how you could spend ten to twelve hours a day in business with your wife and then spend the other ten to twelve hours sleeping together and eating together and doing everything else that we do in life together, I mean that would mean that you would spending twenty to twenty two hours a day with your significant other.  I don't know how a marriage can be sustained or thirty two years doing that.  I'm sure that there are special people and special circumstances in this world where that can be done but not with me and not with Jean.
Speaker 1: So in saying then that your wife always worked, she has her own career?
Speaker 2: She has her own career, she has her own mind, she has her own sense of purpose, she has her own sense of self and that has enabled us really to live a very wonderful and productive and fulfilling life.  She focused in the early years on raising and nurturing the children while I went out and did the hunting and the gathering so to speak and she was always the one who planned the family outings and made certain that I allocated whatever time I had to visit with my children in school and to go to football and soccer and do all the things that fathers are supposed to do.  She made sure that I was there when I needed to be there and to take my focus off of my legacy, my vision, my purpose and spend it with the family and I'm thankful for that.
Story_ID: 120669
Speaker 1: There is another question that we like to ask and I want to make sure that I do ask this one before we finish up and it has to do with this idea of legacy.  What do you hope to leave as a legacy to your family and to African American people in general?
Speaker 2: The legacy for my family will ultimately be determined by where my children end up in the total scheme of things and the contributions that they make and carry on in life.  So my legacy will from a family perspective will be my two sons and how they fare and they're doing-they're headed in the right direction for young men.  I'm proud of them and they are doing well, they're learning and they're interested and they're interesting and they're charismatic in their own way.  They are involved, they love-we are a great family together, we love being together, we go out and dine together, we joke, we have a great sense of humor.  I've learned your children do what you do and not what you say and as I look at my two sons today, they really remind me of me and I go duh how did that happen.  Well they are what I am and they model what they see and regardless of what I've said, they are doing exactly the things that I'm doing or desire to do, that's a wonderful thing.  Now how this will play itself out when they become forty and fifty, well they're headed in the right direction, they're going down the right path, I think they'll be just fine and that will be an important legacy and their children will be an important part of my legacy that's from a family perspective.
Story_ID: 120670
Speaker 1: Are they working with you may I ask?
Speaker 2: Yes, both my sons work in the business with me and that's both wonderful and traumatic.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: It's wonderful to have your sons to the left and right of you and to provide them mentoring and modeling every day, to be able to talk to them every day, for them to respect what you're doing, to understand what you're doing, to love what you're doing, them wanting to and having them want to do what you're doing that's the wonderful side of it.  The tough side of it is they never go home (laugh) in a sense.  I mean, at some point in time the parent always desires for the child to grow up and do their own thing--completely do their own thing and be independent totally of you as the parent and to be self sustaining that's the great desire.  My children I see them every day, I pay them, I'm still underwriting a part of their life, they're still in our checkbook but they're working for it, they're earning it I'm not saying that they're not earning their way.  Then they bring to work all of the things that come into their lives whether it's I had an accident today, my insurance is skyrocketing, I have this issue with my girlfriend, I mean it really is a very up close and personal kind--just like work it's up close and personal.  People around but even when your children are around in work it gets even more detailed and more personal.  Sometimes it's just too much information.  I'm your father, live your life because both of them live on their own and that's a wonderful thing they don't live here and they bring their issues along with--their baggage along with the wonderful things that they do.  So that's sort of the part of their life that's--when they have trauma, they bring it to work and work is us.  So it's good and it's bad.  I recommend it on occasion.  Would I like to see them do this business for their life's work, speak, write, publish directories, put on the conference?  Yeah I think it would be good, I think there is something there for them.  Will they, that is to be determined, I don't really know the answer to that.  They're too young in their own decision making process and career development process for me to decide that for them.  Have they decided that this is what they want to do?  I don't think so, I think they're sort of--they don't really know.  Do they want to fill these shoes?  Sometimes they say boy dad, I don't think we could ever do this, I don't think we could ever be where you are at what you're doing and speak and write, I've got to find my own way.  Then sometimes they say man this-see the cheer of the crowd so it's a very emotional and very volcanic kind of ride that we're on so it is to be determined.
Story_ID: 120671
Speaker 1: What are their names do you think they'll mind me putting this on the record?
Speaker 2: Oh no Kyle [George C. Fraser II] is the oldest very charismatic, very handsome young man, dynamic and is really trying to follow his own path and that's a good thing he's at that stage, twenty-eight in life you know, and he wants his own identity.  I think and I'm sure that I wanted that when I was that age and my son Scott [Fraser] who is still in college living with his fiancee, a very beautiful young lady and she too works in the business by the way, Maya works in the business with us and her fiancee, and then Kyle's girlfriend, Karen who is a graduate of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta Georgia] and an M.B.A. from Boston College [Boston, Massachusetts], she also works in the business.  So she handles the public relations very, very talented young lady, a little bit older than Kyle.  So it really is a family affair and all of the good stuff that goes with that and all of the sticky stuff that goes with that.  So whether this will all work out with this incredibly interesting stew that we have created here, it has enormous potential to be wonderful and it has enormous potential to be a train wreck too.  So we'll see if we do this again and ten years from now we'll have some different perspectives and answers.
Story_ID: 120672
Speaker 1: It sounds like the family is certainly success oriented already but are you optimistic about the ability of African American people to really look inwardly and to do the things that you're suggesting?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm very, very optimistic.  I don't think I could sustain this level of commitment to the community if I didn't believe that we are going to get where we're going.  I just think it's going to take a hundred years, I think it's going to take three to five generations to get where we're going.  I think we have to be patient and I think we have to understand that it's a process and it's not a program that these are generational issues and that the only responsibility that we have at this moment in time, our generation, is to begin to lay the tracks in which this mighty train must run on for centuries to come and then we have to pass the baton but we have to set the course, we have to set the agenda, we have to help the next generations understand what the unifying purpose is for our people.  Why are we here, what are we doing, what are we united around as we were united around the fight for freedom which took 250 years, so if you are black in America between 1619 and 1864 you were down with the freedom thing.  Although if we think about this deeply, there were black people that didn't want to be free that's why Harriet Tubman had to carry a gun you know live free or die.  So yeah I'm optimistic but at the same time I know that we must be patient and that we must now apply the concept of personal leadership, personal leadership.  To be a leader I believe that you must be awake and alert and be dissatisfied at all times.  Yes we've come a long way but we have a lot further to go.  So I'm not happy quite frankly but I'm motivated by a positive anger directed towards positive change.  That change is to help black folk understand that we must come together, that we must unite, we must network, and we must leverage what we currently have.  That's a lifelong message and again the key to learning is repetition and that must said fifty different ways on fifty different days and by the way I don't think I'm saying anything new, I think this was said by [W.E.B.] Du Bois, I think it was said by Booker T. Washington, I think it was said by Malcolm X, I think it was said by [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], it was said by Harriet Tubman.  We just now have a different purpose and that purpose is not freedom, we've got that, that purpose is not civil rights, voting rights and public access, we got that, that purpose is economic development, wealth creation and we must achieve it the same way we achieved everything else through networking and leveraging resources.  So I've been anointed in a sense to say that the way that I say that and I say it differently than [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson says it, I say it differently than Farrakhan [HM Minister Louis Farrakhan] says it but they say it.  I say it differently than [HM Reverend] Al Sharpton says it, I say it differently than other leaders have chosen to say it.  I choose to say it by modeling it, by doing it, in fact that's the only power that I really bring to the podium of leadership and that I'm doing everything I'm talking about, I'm actually building networks.  The 22,000 black professionals, business owners and community leaders interface with that network.  I'm building the network and you can access that network through Frasernet.com, you can read about the power of networking and how to do it from a morally grounded spiritually rooted strategic and tactical way in the books that I write.  You can see it in directories that I still produce, Success Guide worldwide and you can come to our conference that we put on each year where we spend five days of training on networking.  So I'm acting on this idea, I'm not just espousing it but we have bishops and ministers who in the more progressive churches are acting on it in their own way.  They have coalesced their congregation and in some cases their aggregation because when you have 15 or 20 thousand members, that's not a congregation, that's an aggregation. And I've visited churches where they are building communities, they are building housing and they're building and they're building schools and so forth.  So I think that would be my legacy that I made a difference, that I spoke the truth, I kept it real and made it plain and that I acted on my beliefs and I encouraged and educated and inspired and in some cases empowered people to act on what they knew to be true and what they knew to be important.
Story_ID: 120673
Speaker 1: Well Mr. Fraser I'm really anxious to share with the viewers also some of the photographs of Jean [Nora Jean Fraser] and Scott [Fraser] and Kyle [George C. Fraser II] and some of the other folks who have been part of your success story as a HistoryMaker but before we wrap up this section is there anything else that you want to say as part of your HistoryMakers' story before we finish the formal part of the interview?
Speaker 2: I think that black people must come together, that we must chart a good and righteous course and we must stay that course.  That we have all the resources that we need at this moment in time and we have just wonderful models and it is important that we complete this assignment.  This assignment of this new unifying purpose of economic development and wealth creation and I think that it is important that we understand that everything begins with the word and from the word comes consciousness and from consciousness comes passion from passion comes action from action comes change.  That this is evolutionary not revolutionary we didn't get this way overnight and we're not going to solve these insidious issues that still remain in the context of our community overnight that these are generational issues and I think it's important that we understand that in 2005, 35 million black people will not understand what we are talking about here and that we don't need 35 million black people to get us to the promised land.  That we can actually get there with one if we just had to but we can certainly get there with three or four percent of good and righteous thinking people because that's how it's always been throughout our history.  A few have led the masses to the promised land.  Harriet Tubman said it best when she said I have freed a thousand slaves but I could have freed a thousand more if they had only known they were slaves.  Not everybody will understand this idea of networking, leveraging resources but we don't need everyone.  Jesus changed the world with just twelve people.  So I'm encouraging our people to think about it from a micro standpoint, what is it that I can do to move my family and our people and our community in this country forward.  How can I love, give, serve and add value to someone or something, how can I George Cylie Fraser be a servant leader because that's what it's got to be about.  We must in the 21st century as black people put service above self.  We all must become servant leaders and serve our community and that's has to come before self and I think that more and more of us understand the power of service to each other and that's the key to networking, serving others.
Story_ID: 120674
Speaker 1: Well I thank you again for sharing your story with the HistoryMakers and now let's look at some photographs.
Speaker 2: Could you describe this photo?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah this photograph is forty years old.  It was taken on a rooftop as part of a promotional campaign for a disco that my brothers and I started in Brooklyn, New York.  The first person there with a cigarette in his mouth is my oldest brother, Walter [Fraser], I'm right behind Walter then Joseph [Fraser] is right behind me, he's the one with the gray pinstripe suit, Joseph is deceased. Then right in between Joseph and me is Edward [Fraser] who lives here in Cleveland, Ohio and then right in the corner there, right over my right shoulder is Scotland and he lives in New York City.  That's one of our favorite pictures.  Everybody in our family has that picture on the wall actually that's the original.  The others are sort of a sepia version.
Speaker 2: That's the same day different pose and we look like the Temptations there I think.  I think we got the Temptations strut or Temptations pose but beginning to the left of the picture that's Joseph, that's myself next to Joseph, in the middle is Scott [Fraser] and then there's Edward and then there's Walter.  I love that picture, I'm going to have that one actually blown up and taken to a studio and sort of work on and have it blown up but those are great memories.
Speaker 1: The tallest one is-- the short, light-skinned one is Scott and the middle one is Kyle [George C. Fraser II] and then that is my best friend Donald Williams.  That's his son Ian.
Speaker 2: That's Jean [Nora Jean Fraser] and I thirty-two years ago cutting our cake at our wedding. We got married at our best friend's home in Pecker Pike, Dr. and Mrs. Jones.
Speaker 1: We were in Acapulco [Mexico] vacationing with friends, I don't remember the year though.  That had to be twenty years ago because I had black hair and a gray mustache.  Now I have a black mustache and gray hair, how'd that happen?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my father Walter Frederick Fraser who was a cab driver for thirty five plus years in New York--Brooklyn, New York.  He was also--that was his vocation, his allocation was he was a jazz musician.  He played vibes and drums and we got our musical bent from dad and he made all of us study musical instruments and we had our own family band, it was wonderful.
Speaker 2: Ida Mae Baldwin Fraser, mom became mentally ill when I was about five years old and was institutionalized for the rest of her life and then because dad had to work fourteen hours a day he couldn't take care of all the children, there were actually eleven of us, eight boys and three girls.  But there were six of us that were by the same father.  The others were just the same mom.  So we were put into an orphanage and then put into foster homes.  We were broken up into three so we were raise separately and we came back together as I said earlier when we were of age.
Speaker 1: That's my mother there.
Speaker 2: My father is in the middle playing drums.  There he is there playing his drums and he was also a vibest.
Speaker 1: And then down there that's my sister Emma.  The one that I'm closets to she was in New York, that's her son. her sons are Ricky and David.
Speaker 2: Oh, the little boy?
Speaker 1: Yeah those are her sons and she lives in New York and she's fine.  We just loved to take these group shots there.
Speaker 2: That's Jean and Bandit, 2004.
Speaker 1: That's my son Kyle.
Speaker 2: And that's myself and Scott, all of these pictures are Christmas 2004.
