Story_ID: 7183
Speaker 1: My name is James Forman and the name is spelled F-O-R-M-A-N.  My date of birth is that what you--I was born October the 4th, 1928 in Chicago, Illinois at Cook County Hospital.
Speaker 2: And today's date is--just say April 26.
Speaker 1: April 26, 19--I mean 2001.
Speaker 2: And we're at, the Washington Hilton?
Speaker 1: Yes definitely.  We're at the Washington [D.C.] Hilton Hotel and I'm being interviewed by Julieanna Richardson.  And I'm very happy to be--to participate in this interview.
Story_ID: 7184
Speaker 1: Can you say also what your profession is?
Speaker 2: Right.  Right now--I mean I have--and that's--I'm a professional writer.  I've written seven books.  But I'm also an organizer, an organizer of individuals, of people, of groups.  And I have been doing that since 1961 when I left Chicago [Illinois].  And I left Chicago very consciously in order to go south to begin registering voters and to fight segregation in the United States.  And that has led me to Washington D.C., in 2001, because here the people in Washington D.C. do not have the right to have voting members in the United States Senate and the United States House of Representatives.  And in the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC], of which I was executive director, we had a program, and I'm attempting to carry it out.  The program was that we would attempt to get the right to vote for everybody throughout the South--and throughout the country but especially in the southern states where we--African American people and poor white people were basically denied the right to vote.  And that--once we obtain the right to vote throughout the South, and every other state, we would try to concentrate on Washington D.C. which was a federal enclave.  At the same time, that we were doing this, it's not that we were--we didn't do work in Washington D.C., because we started working in Washington D.C. in 1961, when I became executive secretary.  I insisted, you know, in a very cooperative manner, but that we had to have a base in Washington D.C. because we were going to be in the Deep South where there were hardly any black elected officials, and that our lives would be in great danger.  And we needed to have some one in Washington D.C. who would go to some of the liberal congresspeople and say such and such of thing is happening to the people in Mississippi, in Georgia and in Alabama, and they needed help.  And so we had an organization here called the Nonviolent Action Group, which was very, very responsive to cause from the Deep South.
Story_ID: 7185
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: What is my favorite food? My favorite food is shrimps.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorites what?
Speaker 1: Time of year.
Speaker 2: Time of year? Oh I love the spring and the summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite--do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yeah, blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?  Do you have that?
Speaker 2: Well yes I do. I do have a favorite place.  You want me to say it? Puerto Rico is my--is the place that I love to visit.
Speaker 1: Okay great.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, "Victory is certain and the future is bright."
Story_ID: 7186
Speaker 1: State who your mother's name was and if you could tell me about what you know about her and her background.  Her family.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Ok--well my mother's name was Octavia Rufus. The name before she married was Octavia Allen--Octavia Allen [Forman] Rufus.  She's one of the daughters of Edmond Allen and Jane Doris Allen, who lived in Mississippi.  My grandfather, Edmond Allen, died at the time of World War I.  There was a massive flu epidemic [1918] in the United States, which killed millions of people.  And unfortunately, he was one of those people. He was a fighter for human rights in his own way.  He considered himself a worker and, he was a carpenter and a bricklayer. That's my grandfather--and on my mother's side.  And you know I was raised somewhat at various times by my grandmother although I was born in Chicago [Illinois]. I was born October the 4th, 1928 at Cook County Hospital in the city of Chicago.  And at the--my mother was an activist in the sense that, you know, she was--various, seniors--well as later on in life, a various senior citizens' organizations.  She was president of a couple, and that--you know she was active.
Speaker 1: And your father.
Speaker 2: My father's name was Jackson Forman in nineteen--my mother and he separated when I was very young.  And she married a person named John Rufus and that's how the Rufus got attached to my name.  A lot of people in Chicago would know me as James Rufus, without any doubt that they would do that.  On the other hand, I attempted to correct my records.  My name is James Forman and there's no question about that.  And that the--you know it's--when you're in school because there was not an official adoption, I didn't understand the difficulty.  But it's not something that happens to a lot of children.  You know I had the name of James Rufus which was the name of my stepfather and that was for many, many years.
Story_ID: 7187
Speaker 1: Now my stepfather according to his sister [Fannie Montero], was a Choctaw Indian that, the--his family were Choctaw Indians.  I knew nothing about that growing up.  And that the--since that time, of course, I've tried to research the Indians in the United States of America and I found out that there are a lot of Indian people who are living inside the African American community and because of the persecution that they faced, you know in terms of, the early American history, it's very, very rich in history, I mean in terms of the history of the United States. Unfortunately people are not taught, you know, early history of the United States, the conquest of various Indian nations by people in the United States.  The Choctaw Nation for instance surrendered in 1819 [sic, Choctaws ceded land to the Alabama Territorial Legislature in 1818]--were--and I've seen the marker in Alabama--I forget the name of the town in Alabama, but right in front of the courthouse, there's a marker, which says that the Choctaw Indians surrendered to the United States at this particular location.  Now a lot of people who are in the African American population may not understand a lot of the Indian ancestry, but it exists.  And it's nothing to be, ashamed of in any kind of way, because the--a lot of--a lot of the Indian nations gave refuge to some of the African American people who were attempting to escape slavery.  Now currently, you know, we give refuge to a lot of Indian people inside the African American community.  There are over--I mean I've been to various Indian nations including the Seminole Nation in Florida, you know, investigating this question of Indians in the United States and the relationship to the African American people.  And there's a close bond in that the--a lot of Indian people have found refuge in the African American population because they were being persecuted also.
Speaker 2: So you're saying--I mean I, you know, I want to go back to--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Sure.
Speaker 2: You and your family.  But you're saying that--'cause most black people if you talk to them, they will say that, they're Cherokee. They have Cherokee in their family.  And I did a little experiment in the office the other day, and I said, you know, 'cause some one said--piped up and said they had Indian, and I said, "You're Cherokee."  And then I said, "Go and ask everyone around here."  And everyone said they were Cherokee--so you know had part Cherokee.  But I--there's a relationship that's not talked about.  And I'm wondering what your research found.
Speaker 1: Well, there is a definite relationship.  First of all, the Cherokee Nation is a very large nation and it's very active in a sense.  But it was one of the nations that was defeated.  There were basically five what they called civilized tribe nations, but these were nations of Indian people.  There was the Cherokee, there was the Choctaw, there was the Creek, there was the Seminole and there was the Chickasaw Nation and that those nations were forced to move into sections of Oklahoma.  Now a lot--in this--in the Washington D.C. area, and along the East Coast, you may find a lot of people who will identify themselves as Cherokee Indians or come out of the Cherokee experience, and that's no doubt true.  I mean, I don't argue with people about that.  But the--yet in other areas of the country, you will find other representatives of these other nations that I talked about.  And there are other nations including the Mohawk Nation, which is basically located in New York.  Some parts of it has split.  Some parts are in New York, some parts are in Canada.  I've been to that particular nation.  And at the--and I have talked to the chief and some of the clan mothers in the Mohawk Nation.  So that's the only thing--I mean it's true that a certain group of people may--they may be sort of like a voluminous recognition of the Cherokee heritage which is very important, there is no--especially in this area of the country on the eastern coast.  I'm just saying that there are other nations of Indians that were defeated okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  'Cause a friend of mine--you're right his family was very connected with, Trail of Tears of Indians [President Andrew Jackson's Indian removal policy, 1838-1839] and they ended up in, in Oklahoma and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And his--he's been trying to get his aunt to talk about--'cause she would refer to the stomp dances, you know--but in a negative way sort of.  You know as--but he's been trying to find out the relationship, and he also found that his family was listed on their, you know, on their--within their rolls, you know, their names.  So--so you're saying that the Indians owned slaves but they also--he said the Indians owned slaves.
Speaker 1: Well, I don't have any recollection of that.  I mean like in terms of, the--of Indians owning slaves.  My understanding of American history is that a lot of slaves, African slaves, found refuge in various Indian nations when they wanted to escape slavery, especially the Seminole Nation. I mean in Florida, I mean there's just a lot of evidence about that.  But the same thing is true with the other nations including the Choctaw Nation.  So that the--but what I'm also saying is that currently, in 2001, there exists inside the African American population, a lot of Indian people--people with Indian ancestry.  And that the--and they are able to operate.  Sometimes they don't even know who they are.  And that's one of the tragedies of American history.  And it has a very negative effect on everybody, including white people and people around the world.  And we're attempting to try to correct that as much as possible.
Story_ID: 7188
Speaker 1: In your family, how many kids were there and where were you in the pecking order?  Can you give me the names and--were there a lot of children?
Speaker 2: No, not in my personal family.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) But that's all I'm asking you first.
Speaker 2: No, yeah, no.  My mother [Octavia Allen Forman Rufus]--we had two children, had a younger brother and myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were the oldest.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay and your brother's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Bernard Rufus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you share with me some of the early memories growing up?
Speaker 2: My growing up? Sure.  I mean I--I'm happy to share with you some early memories. The first memory that I had well that I usually start with that--not the first memory I had.  But that, I was in Memphis, Tennessee.  And that I wanted to--and obviously I was--I was born in Chicago [Illinois].  And various time I would go and spend with my grandmother.  But at this particular day it was in Memphis, Tennessee.  I went to the counter and I wanted to buy I think maybe I asked for a fountain Coke [Coca-Cola].  And the lady, you know, she was white.  She looked at me and she didn't say anything, and she went back. And then this porter came up.  He was an African American person. And he said, "Come on back with me to get your Coke."  So we went back to the Coca-Cola machine up to this huge Coke--Coca-Cola box, you know which had ice in it at the time.  And so, you know, he gave me a bottle of Coke.  I said, "Well, why can't I sit at the counter?"  And he says, "Well, don't you know we're Negroes and we can't sit there."  So that was the first time I had heard something similar to that, you know. I, and so I put--I think I put the Coke down and I left the store.  And I was not terrorized, but I kept wondering, you know--I mean it was a very frightening experience as far as I'm concerned because I don't recall too many experiences of mine prior to that where I had been denied anything.  But I was told that I couldn't have this--I mean that I couldn't sit at the counter.  I had to have this Coke out of the machine. So I went back to my aunt's house and--who was living in Memphis and I asked her, "Who are Negroes?"  And so she said, "Well, that's who we are.  We are Negroes."  And so then I, you know, I left the house and went out into the--into the yard.  There was a little passageway.  So I saw this young man coming, you know, he looked like me. I said, "Are you a Negro?"  (laughs) He said, "Boy, get away from me." And as he--it occurred to me then as I grew up, you know, there was something about being a Negro, which meant that you were denied some certain things and that, that was my first consciousness.  And as I grew up, I mean I grew up in the city of Chicago. I grew up at 6108 Prairie Avenue.  And I grew up in a neighborhood in transition.  There was a lot of African American people moving into what I think was a former Greek neighborhood 'cause a lot of the stores were owned by the Greek people.  And two blocks from us, there was a Roman Catholic church and there was, on one side 61st and Michigan [Avenue].  On the other side there was a Greek Orthodox Church. And that--but as a child growing up, we were restricted from crossing South Park [Avenue].  I mean people from Chicago would be clearly on--there is Prairie Avenue and then I think there's Calumet [Avenue] and there's South Park [Avenue].  And at the--we had a lot of fights. I mean like our janitor was--our first janitor was a German I think.  And he had two children.  And when I stepped in the yard, they said, "Well, we're gonna fight.  You have--you have to get out of the yard."  They were white,  they were young kids.  You know it was my first or second day in the city of Chicago consciously, I mean I, you know, that I could be aware of.  And I grew up with this whole, with the--and I still have it in the sense that there are certain things that the African American people are not supposed to do, and I don't agree with that.  And I didn't agree with it then when I was a little kid.  You know we fought to cross South Park Avenue, which is only two blocks from my house, and we won those fights.  And we've been fighting, you know since then.
Story_ID: 7189
Speaker 1: I used to be a 'Chicago Defender' [newspaper] paper boy in the city of Chicago [Illinois].  I paid ten cents for the paper--I paid six cents for the paper and sold it for a dime.  I made four cents profit.  But in the paper--and I would read the 'Chicago Defender' very consciously each week almost.  And I was horrified at always--you know, the numbers of lynchings that were taking place.  And I felt that as a child when I grew up and even not, not, not--I didn't want to wait til I was grown but what could I do now to try to stop these lynchings?  And that this was a goal that I always had in mind.  You know, "What could I do as a person to help mobilize other people not, not by myself to help stop these lynchings?"  Because these lynchings were taking place.  They were very horrible.  Over 10,000 black people had been lynched in the United States of America since the Civil War.  And that the--of course that kind of consciousness led me to become very, very involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  The original question, "What will I do?" I mean, I am a civil rights organizer.  There's just no question about that.  My whole record, you know, speaks to that.
Speaker 2: Now, how old were you when you were, you know, a 'Defender' newspaper boy and how old were you when you were in Memphis [Tennessee] and that [racial] incident happened?
Speaker 1: Well I must have been about six or seven years old in Memphis, possibly eight.  I'm not sure but I know--but as far as the, selling the 'Defender,' was for about several years, you know, when I--'cause I went to work and when--the socio-economic conditions at the time--we were living in during the [Great] Depression. You know.  And--but you know I sold papers because I wanted to, you know, earn funds. I mean not only did I sell papers, you know, but I use to, go around and clean peoples' houses.  I mean I would charge I think it was ten cents to scrub the kitchen or fifteen cents for the bathroom, maybe reversed.  Ten cents for the bathroom and fifteen cents for the kitchen.  And I say that because I think one of the problems today is that a lot of young people, a lot of African American people don't understand and we have to try to encourage them to appreciate the value of work and earning funds yourself and trying to find creative ways that you can earn some funds. And that's what I was attempting to do at that time.  And I--as I see you know the enormous numbers of people who were probably trying to do, you know, earn money through various means but that, you know they don't want to work, you know.  And at the--and I would encourage young people today to try to--to try to find methods of employment, even if it's creating little jobs for yourself. That's what we did and--that's what I did selling the newspaper.  I was, you know, the--well I guess I did that up until maybe about the sixth or the seventh grade.  But I also used to work--you know.  You know, I used to work various cleaning jobs, delivery boy for grocery stores and so forth.  So the spirit of working and earning income, you know, was a part of my reality.
Story_ID: 7190
Speaker 1: Any other memories growing up?  Where did you go to school?  What were the schools in, you know, like elementary schools?
Speaker 2: Sure. There are tremendous memories.  I went to St--I'm sorry. The first school I went to was St. Anselm's Catholic School, which is located at 61st [Street] and Indiana Avenue in Chicago [Illinois].  And that I--that was my choice to go to a Catholic--I'm not a Catholic.  And at the--but I wanted to go to this particular school.  And I went to this school for about from the second grade up until the sixth grade.  So I transferred out and went to Betsy Ross School [Chicago, IL] and graduated from Betsy Ross, which was at 61st [Street] and Wabash Avenue in the city of Chicago.  In the Catholic School I was a Protestant.  And I was constantly reminded that I was a Protestant, that I was different from the rest of the students who were Catholics.  And that the--this question of being a Protestant, you know, was a very serious question because it meant that certain things we--I studied religion for one hour a day for about four or five years.  And I you know, got a lot of information in terms of the Catholic experience.  But the--I guess the thing that--I transferred out of St. Anselm's in the--about a couple of months before the seventh grade because there had been some--well, we used to have to carry punch cards in the fall and in the spring.  And a flood of us would always hit the community, you know, with the punch cards.  And I got, you know--my punch card was late.  And I mean, you know, I got tired of just asking people to take these punch cards, or to fill out a punch card.  And I was late and the sister put me out of the class because I didn't have my fees on time.  And at the--you know, I went back home, and then she--she said "Stay at home until you get your funds."  And so my mother [Octavia Allen Forman Rufus] came up to the school.  We talked to the Mother Superior, and at the, you know, what were my options.  And one of my options I could certainly transfer out, but I wanted to take that option, you know.  She was concerned that well it was only two months before the seventh grade.  Would I be able to pass, you know.  But I went to--I transferred out to Betsy Ross School.  And there were some very important memories, which were relevant to everybody throughout the world in terms of this particular experience.  Not only in the Catholic school was I told that I was a Protestant.  You know it was constantly beating of the hands and so forth.  And at one point, you know, the sister would say, "Well, the Communists are killing the Catholics and you must grow up--"she was talking to the members of the class--"You must grow up to kill the Communists."  Now I think that--I don't know how prevalent that was.  I know that happened in my school and it happened in my class.  It very well may be that throughout the Catholic world that similar things were taught people, which is one of the reasons we have a lot of hatred in the world today.  But these--we were constantly told that the Communists were killing the Catholics and you had to grow up to kill the Communists.  And that--you know, at one point I spoke up.  I said, "Well that's not what I'm hearing.  You know, I, I hear things differently."  But--that the--you know, it was like during World War II or near World War II, the Communists were trying to help save the lives of Catholics.  You know.  Well that resort, (slaps his hand) you know, hold out your hands, bring the rulers.  It's that type of behavior that I was tired of in the Roman Catholic school and was eager to transfer out.
Speaker 1: Now you but you, you chose that school you said--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah that was my choice, not my mother's choice.
Speaker 1: Now how did--how did some one who is going into second grade choose the school they were going--
Speaker 2: Well I saw the, I saw the students coming out of the school.  I saw the girls marching and I was certainly attracted to the girls that were marching in their uniform.  And that the--I decided that that's the school that I wanted to go to.  And I was happy.  I mean I learned a lot in the school.  But I was a Protestant, and I was constantly reminded of that.  I knew that I was different and that it was--it was very bad because it had a lot of psychological effects.  In the second grade a friend of mine who is now deceased, his name was Marion Bowden.  He was the president of the Blacks in Government, which is a nationwide organization.  But he and I in the second grade were the only two Protestants.  So Father Eckert came in, you know, said "We have a tie position for, for the smartest boy in the class."  Won--and that we won a--we had a little tie pin. "We're going to give the, give the award to Marion Bowden because he's going to become a Catholic and James [Forman] Rufus has no plans to become a Catholic." And this was in the classroom and I turned to a friend of mine--well the girl behind me and I said, "that's not right." So that had a very negative effect, you know, in terms of my learning ability.  But I studied hard, you know, the night (laughs)--well not just the night before an exam but when we had final exams all throughout the Catholic school. And that, you know, I felt that you know, this was not right to say well he's going to give it to someone whose going to become a Catholic and not to you because you're not going to become one.
Story_ID: 7191
Speaker 1: You think you were naturally smart?
Speaker 2: No I don't think I was naturally smart, I mean I think that my grandmother had instilled some of the basics, that is reading, writing and arithmetic and that the--you know, I did--the question of being smart or not being smart, you know, didn't enter my mind.  I mean I tried to do my schoolwork.  I was placed in the second grade when I enrolled in the Catholic school [St. Anselm's Catholic School, Chicago, IL].  That meant that obviously my placement, you know, that I wasn't in kindergarten or first grade but you know, they said that I should be in the second grade.  And that the--I had--I had a habit, you know, which probably early in life, which I really think that a lot of the youth today should have.  And that is that I learned how to go to the library very, very early.  And I would go to the library a lot and get books, and some of the stacks were open, which is a big thing, you know, for college students, you know to be able to get to the stacks.  Well the libraries that I--well the library that I went to, you know, you could look around and see what it is you wanted to read.  And I think that, that was a tremendous asset in my development and in my education.  And in my, learning to deal with life.  You know, that there was a problem, you know, that even now I suggest people go to the library sometimes and research that particular problem. That grew out of the habit from a very young kid, you know, going to the library as well as the--I consider myself, you know, you know, just, as a part of a group of people who were denied things.  That's just a fact.
Story_ID: 7192
Speaker 1: You know, Chicago [Illinois]. There's Prairie Avenue, there's Calumet Avenue and there's South Park [Avenue].  We had to fight if we went across the line in South Park.  And so--and that the--now the other aspect to this is that I didn't grow up with any kind of racial hatred.  I mean I was very upset because when white people would come through our neighborhood, you know there would be a call out and sometimes people would jump on those white people.  And I was very concerned about that.  I was very concerned to the point of being "What can I as a person do?"  And so--and I felt I had a--I had a responsibility 'cause I, I knew it wasn't right, you know, for what we were doing.  So once, you know, I mean one incident occurred.  You know, I said, "Well, this is the time when I have to try to make a move to try to stop this particular procedure."  You know, and I tried to run up to the front of the line and try to get the--and we did.  We were able to successfully, you know, stop the attack on this particular white person. And so that, you know, I've always fought in terms of the unity of people.  I fought against racism and at the--when I transferred incidentally out of the Catholic school [St. Anselm's Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois], to the Protestant school, I--in my class, you know, there was a problem. The teacher was white and so some of the people, gang leaders in the school, I presume, you know, took a position that they had to jump the teacher.  I was the person who had to jump the teacher because she was the white or there was going to be a fight with the teacher.  So I went up to my teacher.  Her name was Mrs. MacGregor.  She was my seventh grade teacher at Betsy Ross Public School [Chicago, Illinois].  And I said to her, just as I'm talking to you that, "I may not be able to stop people from hitting you, you know, but I will attempt to do that if some one attacks you."  'Cause I mean I was not going to attack the teacher because she was white.  And I was prepared to defend her, you know, if members of the class--if any member of the class, you know, would attempt to attack her.  It was supposed to be on a certain day--attack the--you know jump the teacher because she's white.  Well I didn't do that.  And so consequently, a lot of--some of the people, not many, but some of the people--I was a patrol boy at 61st [Street] and Indiana [Avenue].  And day after day after day there would be fights because people were fighting me because I was not willing to jump the teacher.  Which meant that they were trying to make an example of myself, you know, and that we had--it was conscious fights.  There's just no question about what I'm telling you. And that it was that kind of an attitude, it was very negative.  But that the--you know, I grew up with that kind of consciousness. And a lot of that no doubt came from my early experience.  You know, came from not being trained in any kind of hatred.  But that did occur.
Story_ID: 7193
Speaker 1: I went to Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: And that was. Wasn't that the time that people went to Englewood or DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Well yeah, you know, the high schools were organized along district lines. I mean like, the high school that you attend, the public school, was based upon your residence. And that I was within the Englewood school district, and not the DuSable school district.  And so I enrolled at Englewood High School. But there are some very, very serious problems attached to my enrollment which I would like to point out. Mainly that, when I was in about the seventh or eighth grade, I had decided that I wanted to earn a Ph.D., doctor of philosophy degree.  And that the minister's wife--I mean I went to Coppin AME Chapel--African Methodist Episcopal Church and the minister was Reverend Lawrence Roberts. And one day I delivered the newspaper, the 'Chicago Defender', to his house. And his wife was suggesting that I might want to study some black history. And she introduced me to this concept--well not to the concept, but to the Hall Library, which was at 48th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue].  And I started going down to that library.  And I began to read a lot of black history.  And that including the conflict between Dr. [W.E.B.] Dubois and Booker T. Washington.  And I felt at this--at a very early age that I wanted if possible to earn a doctor of philosophy degree.  And when I went to high school, I wanted to study what was called a college preparatory track. I wanted to study Greek and Latin in high school in order to prepare me for studying other languages, you know.  And that the--but in my household with my mother [Octavia Allen Forman Rufus], there was a--and I presumed with my stepfather [John Rufus], although he didn't say very much but--on this issue.  But my mother insisted that I should not go--I should not take what's called a college preparatory course in Chicago at that time.  And all this is relevant even today,  I mean like it has a lot of impact.  In Chicago at that particular time, you could--at Englewood High School, I'm not--I'm not sure about other high schools.  But there was a two-track system where you can study to go to college--in fact it was probably all over the city, you know?  That in order to go to college, you had to have certain preparatory courses.  The other track was the shop course.  I mean now--but once you graduated from Englewood, in the--in the crafts, in the--it was a shop course, it meant that you were not able to go to college because you would not have had the previous background.  Now some of that could have been avoided or could be avoided.  You know, at probably community colleges, which I didn't know very much about at that time.  So in my household--well not my household, but in my mother's household, there was this tremendous struggle with me to go into the college--into the high school into the--
Speaker 2: Vocational?
Speaker 1: Vocational, yeah the vocational track and not the college preparatory track.  And so at one point--I had a--my mother-in-law was Mrs. Dawson. Her name will come to me.  I want to make sure that the--I'm spelling it right.  But that the--you know she also joined in the course.  At which point I capitulated, you know, and just decided I would just take the college--the shop course.  But there were a lot of problems--I mean, you know, a lot of problems.  And so much so that I was put out of high school. And even though I was later voted with honors students. But in the shop curriculum, I was--there were a lot of fights and stuff like that, you know.  Even with one of the teachers.  And there's some relevance.  I mean I say to parents today that they should not--they should let the children, you know, make certain decisions about their lives.  Because I worked for Cuneo Press [publishing company]. You know, we--a friend of mine was a fighter and I would put these one thousand pound rolls of paper up to the press and they would run the press off, you know.  And at the--he kept urging me to go back to school.  He said, "James we can do this.  I mean you need to be back in school."  And I said, "Okay I'm willing to go back to school.  But if I go back to school, I'm gonna take what--I'm gonna study what I want to study, which is the courses to go to college."  Necessary to enter any particular college.  And I had to go to night school.  I had to go to summer school in order to make up for the time that I had lost by taking the shop course. Now from an objective point of view, I have had sort of like a multicultural--not just a multicultural but multi-track. I mean that is in terms of the tracked course. I mean the shop courses.  There's a lot of things I learned in, in that experience I see myself doing right today.  But at the same time, as I said--I mean I really, you know, I wanted--'cause these were also my classmates, you know, and I was able to rejoin them when I went into the college preparatory courses.  And they selected me as their honor student. I was selected as the 'Chicago Tribune' Honor Student for the class of February--of 1947.  I don't know if you know about that award, but each year, the 'Chicago Tribune' has what they call the honor students.  My classmates elected me to that particular position--to that particular position.  And at the--you know, and I got back--you know I was able to--I went to Wilson Junior College [later Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois].  I'm saying this because there's some relevance.  You know, I try to get parents today to stop beating their children so much and try to beat them in the track, "Well, you do what I want you to do, not necessarily what you want to do."  Because children may not be able to explain this, but they have ideas of their own, you know.  And as long as those ideas are not societal damaging, then I think that, you know, that they should be encouraged to explore and to develop, you know, their potentials along routes that are not harmful to the society.  You know, and that--and parents shouldn't attempt to try to force their children in ways that, that are harmful to them.
Speaker 2: Now so you were out of school for how long?  Just how long?
Speaker 1: Oh about two or three months or something like that.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh.  Okay.
Speaker 1: That was all.  Two or three--it's just that--but on the other hand, the assistant principal said, "Well, you know if I can expel you for good, I would do that."
Speaker 2: But you have to understand what Englewood was like.  Englewood was a very, very racist school at that point.  So much so that we could not even have a prom I mean, together.  And the principal, Mr. Thompson said well he's not gonna have black children dancing with white children and so forth.  And so that there was no prom.  Now a lady came along in the sororities and said "Well I'm gonna make it possible for you all to have a prom," that is the African American students.  Now a lot of the white kids, you know, would come.  Several of them came to say how tragic it was.  And here we were all friends in school and yet we couldn't have a prom together, you know, a high school prom.  Now these kinds of racist situations, you know, had a big impact and still have an impact upon me. That's one of the reasons why, you know, I decided to work full time, you know, in trying to eliminate segregation, you know, and combating racism in the society. And I don't regret having done that, okay. I mean in high school, I had a choice, you know, of, of trying to organize my life so I could earn a lot of money, or organizing my life so I could help people.  I chose the latter.  And I don't regret that, you know.  And I don't--I mean I had to leave--I left Chicago.  I didn't have to leave Chicago, but I left Chicago going South to work on these greatest disparity.  Which is the lack of vote.
Story_ID: 7194
Speaker 1: You finish Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.  In January of 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay in '47 [1947].  And then--you know just a question.  Were there other people that, you know, names that we might know that were, you know that were your friends or that attended Englewood when you did?
Speaker 2: Well two men. Well now Marion Bowden was from high school.  He was the head of this massive organization Blacks in Government.  And at the--but he went off into seminary.  I think he gave that up and came back into the--you know, in a non-seminary mode. But I'm not sure but at Englewood today, you know I have been--we--one of the sad things about my life, you know, is that I had to leave Chicago and that you know, I had lost--I didn't lose contact, but my class recently had its fiftieth anniversary reunion.  Had a reunion, a fiftieth anniversary reunion of Englewood.  And that--it has erected a Hall of Fame and I'm a part of the Englewood Hall of Fame.  Even the late president--Well the former President [William Jefferson] Clinton I think spoke at Englewood High School within the last two years.
Story_ID: 7195
Speaker 1: You're bound and determined to go to college.
Speaker 2: Yeah but there was--I mean there was a friend of mine, you know, Lorraine Hansberry [playwright], was a student at Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  She was not in the same grade that I was, but I knew her in high school and my Aunt Fannie Montero--this is the aunt who said that they were Choctaw Indians--said that Lorraine and I used to play together in her beauty shop.  I don't have any recollections of that, it must have been when I was very, you know, very early.  But I mean--'cause that happens in the lives of people.  You know there are certain things that you will do from the time you're born up until some point where you begin to raise consciousness.  But Lorraine and I were very, very good friends.  And at the--you know, I don't know if you want to fast forward but--to the point where, you know, when I went into the armed forces, which we can get back to.  But I was home on leave, and she was telling me that, you know, that they had planned to run me for mayor of the city of Chicago.  Her mother was a Democratic Party precinct captain. And that the--she was very upset.  Now this will get into a lot of trauma in my life.  I mean you know it wasn't so much that--it wasn't traumatic to me but it was traumatic in terms of the experience, you know.  I mean when, you know, my stepfather John Rufus put me out of the house.  And then I had to have a place to live--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Now when did that happen?
Speaker 2: That happened in, in '47 [1947].  For the second time I mean he did that. And he had done it early when I was fourteen years old.  And but this last time I was--after graduating at Englewood High School, where--and my classmates awarded me with a lot of tributes.  And I love them dearly, you know, and I regret, you know, the separation and--with the class.  But I did consciously go South to organize and to register voters.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.  I just want real quickly just to--so you leave--I mean you graduate from Englewood--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In January '47 [1947].  I go to Wilson Junior College [later Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois].  That was the name at that time.  A community college.  And I wanted to go to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] but I didn't have any money.  And I wanted to go to Roosevelt University because it was saying, it's an open-door policy with no restrictions on black people, or Jews or whatsoever, you know.  And I was very, very impressed by that, you know, and I felt that that was the school that I wanted to go to--eventually I did.  But I didn't have any money to, to pay for the tuition and I didn't have any money to go to say like the black colleges in the South.  One of my teachers fortunately came up and asked me what were my plans, and suggested that I go to one of the community colleges.  And you have to keep in mind at that particular time in '47 [1947], the Chicago Teacher's College [now known as Chicago State University] as I explained had a quota for negroes. Only 2 percent of the entering class I mean could be black.  I mean that was in '47 [1947] in the city of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois okay.  So that the Roosevelt University experience of saying, you know, "Jews, non-Jews, can all come here," was very important. I mean all throughout the United States because the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] had a quota system for Jews.  I mean only 5 or 10 percent could be entered into class.  The same was true with Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].  And so that Roosevelt University helped to open up the doors for everybody to go into these higher education without restrictions.
Speaker 1: So you went to Wilson [Junior College] how long?
Speaker 2: I went to Wilson only for a semester in the fall of 1947.  My stepfather and I got--I don't know some kind of an altercation and he had a shop.  He had a shop a gasoline station at which I worked in. And that the results was of course, he said I had to leave the house.  And you know, I mean I took it seriously and I did leave the house.  But I had to have someplace to stay.  I had to have someplace to live.  And I decided that well the thing to do would be to enter into the armed forces of the United States.
Story_ID: 7196
Speaker 1: And I entered into the armed forces.  I mean the--first I wanted to volunteer for the [U.S.] Army, the Army Infantry.  But they said "The quota for Negroes is filled." I mean they couldn't take any more Negroes into the United States Armed Forces, not--the United States Infantry in the city of Chicago.  But they felt that the quota for Negroes in the [U.S.] Air Force was still open.  And so they--you know, I should probably go over there posthaste and see if I could enter into the Air Force.  And I did.  I mean I joined the Air Force, the United States Air Force.  It was a segregated outfit okay, in 1947--in the fall of 1947.  And that was--I had to interrupt my college education [at Wilson Junior College, later Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], but I felt I had to have a place to live. I mean I wasn't gonna be out on the streets.  And one of the places that I could--all but--would be the armed forces.  But also I felt that given the way that the country was being organized, in a matter of three or four years, there was gonna be another draft.  And that I would probably be--you know, forced into the draft.  And that the thing to do would be just to go ahead on and get the military experience over with.  And so I mean that was--that, that also happened in the sense that a lot of people--that the draft came, the Korean War, you know.  And my prediction was that, you know, there would be some type of a war given what was the balance of forces and so forth and so on.
Speaker 2: So you--so you--you were stationed where and how long were you (unclear)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well I was in--I was stationed in Lackland Air Force Base. That was the first place was the Air Force basic training was three months.  And I went to Lackland Air Force Base, which is in San Antonio, Texas or right outside of San Antonio, Texas.  I was in Flight 3001 and I became the Assistant Flightmaster of that.  I mean like the--I'd be the--the sergeant in charge of the flight, you know, asked me at one point to--well he asked--wanted to know who wanted to march the flights?  And I had been--had some military experience at Englewood [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I was the second lieutenant in the Reserve Officer Training Corps [ROTC].  And I learned a lot, you know, in that particular experience.  But you know I did volunteer and I became the assistant flight--it wasn't a paid position but it was just an honorary position.  But it was one that involved a lot of work.  And I didn't mind doing it, you know, I mean I was the assistant flight marcher for the--for that particular flight.  And that was a three-month basic training experience, which was very, very important.  And that a lot of things I learned, you know, I'm applying today even.
Speaker 2: So you--you were in the service how long?
Speaker 1: I was in the service for four years.  I was in the service--I had enlisted for three years.  In the Air Force--the infantry--in the United States infantry you could enlist for two years.  But the Air Force enlistment was three years.  And that--during those three years the Korean War started, and everybody's enlistment was automatically extended for one year.  So I was due to get out in September of I think it was '50 [1950].  But the--we were extended for a year.  And so I spent four years in the United States Air Force.  I was a Personnel Classification Specialist.  I went overseas to Okinawa [Japan] for fifteen months and there again, you know, I wanted to try to travel as much as I possibly could, and you know, while I was young and while it was possible to do that.  And I did that in the Air Force, you know.  And it was a great experience, you know.
Story_ID: 7197
Speaker 1: So you come back to Chicago [Illinois] and you're determined--you have the G.I.--Did they have the G.I. Bill at that time?
Speaker 2: No I--yeah there was a--there was a definitely a--yeah but I came--but (chuckling).  But there are some steps though, you know. I mean I spent four years in the [U.S.] Air Force.  And at the--I was--I have an honorable discharge.  As I said I was a personnel classification specialist.  In fact I'm even a disabled American Veteran and I'll show you my card in just a minute. The--which is something related to my experiences in the Air Force, and here's my card.  I'm a lifetime member of the Disabled American Veterans.  The--but I was--I did--I enrolled at the University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California].  And it is here which is very, very important that you know, we try to concentrate in terms of my development and the lives of black people in this country.  Because I was at the University of Southern California.  I was a summa cum laude student, which is 2.9 [grade point average] out of 3.  And then I was arrested one night in--on the charges of suspicion of robbery.  And I was brutally overhauled. I mean brutally beaten by--taken down to the police station.  And went through an excruciating experience in California.  And I'm happy to be here, you know.  And at the--It was in--I guess I was arrested right after [Dwight D.] Eisenhower was elected [U.S.] President in 1952.  So this would be '53 [1953].  And that the--I talk about this experience even in my book, 'The Making of Black Revolutionaries'.  But I don't--you know, since that time I've learned more about what happened.  See what happens in California, they have this--they have these laws where they can give you electrical shock treatment against your will.  In Illinois at that time you couldn't do that.  I hope it's not in place now in Illinois. I mean at that time it was illegal to do that to a patient.  But what they--they were doing that and they're still doing that in California, which is a form of genocide.  And it's a form of destroying black people.  And then, of course, I got--first I got assigned to the Camarillo State Hospital [Camarillo, Ventura County, California].  And I got assigned, I got, I got into this veteran's hospital.  And there was one doctor--and this experience is very important.  He said, "Look I'm an Arab.  I'm here to get you out of this hospital.  You have no business here whatsoever.  We don't have no business keeping you in this hospital."  One young white man came across the campus.  I saw him--this is at Brentwood Neuropsychological Hospital [Los Angeles, California].  I had been taken out of the University of Southern California, you know--I mean, arrested when I was there falsely, you know, on some charge of suspicion of robbery.  He pointed to his face.  He said, "Look at me, look at me very carefully."  And he said, "This is what they've done to me--," this was in the veterans' hospital, you know.  And that they--"and don't let them do that to you.  You know they've given me a lobotomy.  They're after your brain.  We're trying to stop them."  You know he was white, you know.  And I say this because of all this racial hatred, you know.  And it's very important we accentuate these things as a way of trying to overcome some of the racial hatred.  He said, "But we're trying to get you out of this hospital, 'cause they're trying to destroy your brain. We're trying to stop them from doing it.  But whatever happens, you know, break out.  Do whatever you possibly can, do not let them give you a lobotomy.  This is what they've done to me."  And he showed me, you know.  And that the--you know fortunately I was able to get out of this hospital.  But it's kind of like an imprisonment, which goes on in this country.  Especially in terms of black people.  This question of what they call what is it when police are identifying it I forget what--,
Speaker 1: Racial profiling.
Speaker 2: Yeah, racial profiling in terms of police officers.  It's a real question.  There's just no question about that.  But it's also done in other areas including these mental hospital, arresting people.  And now it's a question of letting them out of the hospital.  I mean here in the city it's horrible if you just go around in the city of Washington D.C. and see the enormous numbers of people who are homeless, sleeping on grates, sleeping at the bus stops and so forth and so on. So that the fight to, to make the world a better place goes on, you know.
Story_ID: 7198
Speaker 1: You got out of the hospital [Camarillo State Hospital, Camarillo, Ventura County, California] and came back?
Speaker 2: Yeah I came back to Chicago [Illinois].  I wanted to get back to Chicago and I was--and I enrolled in Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois].  And there at Roosevelt I found a lot of peace and love and friendship.  I was elected as President of the Student Government.  I served for one year from 1955 to 1956. And a lot of this is a part of history because what happened and this is a very important part of history.  See we--I think his name was Wright who was NAACP, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People's representative at the 1956 Democratic Party Convention [in Chicago.]  I happened to have attended that convention, you know, as a president of the student government, I would go down there, you know.  And, you know, I sat in caucuses with Walter Ruther who was head of the United Automobile Workers [International Union].  I sat in--Mr. [John W.] McCormack from Massachusetts who was the Speaker of the [U.S.] House [of Representatives].  And, and other people and the plan was to advance the cause of civil rights at the Democratic Convention in 1956.  Well, it didn't happen.  As the president of the student government at Roosevelt University, you know, I took the platform of the NAACP, organized some friends of mine and we were able to go to the 1956 convention of the National Student Association which was held at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And some very world-shaking events took place there.  One was--one of the--one of--planks in the platform was a just--Civil Rights Division in the United States Justice Department, the creation of the Civil Rights Commission on--these things didn't exist at that time.  But even now, I mean a lot of young people are going into them and I'm happy that they are going into the Civil Rights Division and Justice Department.  They're getting jobs.  The same is true say like the Civil Rights Commission.  But what we have to try to help people understand is that these things have a historical roots to them which is why I'm happy to participate in this program, you know, of, you know, the making of history.  Because these things are very, you know, earth shaking and they are very important historical markers, which made it possible.  I mean at that time, there weren't any elected officials--well, maybe a few in the South.  And in 1964, there was--there were less than 400.  Now there are over 8,000.  Well those people have to understand their roots and their relationship to other people who went on before them.  And that the--otherwise, you know, we're gonna be all running around, you know, with our chicken head cuts off.
Speaker 1: Now you--so you came back.  Now what was your major at Roosevelt?
Speaker 2: I was in Public Administration.  And I wanted to study Journalism. But as a veteran and as someone going under the G.I. Bill--well under the veterans' payment--Disabled American Veterans' payment, the counselor said, "Well we can't guarantee you a job. When we put you through school, we have to be able to guarantee you a job.  We won't be able to do that if you study journalism.  But if you study public administration--," which was similar to--which was a continuation of the work that I did in the [U.S.] Air Force, you know as a Personnel Classification Specialist, you know, "--then we have to give you a job.  You know and if you--." And so you know, that was my major, Public Administration.
Speaker 1: So you, you, you did very well there right?
Speaker 2: At Roosevelt?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah I, I enjoyed the experience at Roosevelt very much.
Story_ID: 7199
Speaker 1: Well after I graduated [from Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois], I mean I decided, I mean I had wanted to be a writer, okay?  So I decided I would learn to write.  And that's what I did after graduation for about from January of 1947 up until September of 1947.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No it's not '47 [1947]--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) right.
Speaker 1: We're talking about.  I'm sorry, my mistake.  January '57 [1957] up until September, you know, I began to write.  I began to visit places.  I wrote up--and writing up stories and so forth and so on.  One of my professors, St. Clair Drake, who's passed away, wanted me to go to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  He wanted me to enroll in the African Studies Program there.  He felt that I would be the second black person in the United States of America who would study African affairs.  Well at first I didn't want to do that.  I mean that the--but he kept urging me to do it. And the reason I didn't want to do it, because that I didn't want to interrupt my writing experience.  But in thinking about it, I said, "Okay well--I mean I'll go and--but I would--you know I got to--but I would go to continue my writing also."  You know, and that's what I really did at Boston.  That's not the only thing that I did.  I was--I had a job as a Teaching Assistant in the graduate department and in the government department.  I was a graduate teaching assistant. I also got a little small stipend from the Ford Foundation.  It wasn't much, $500 I think.  The--to help me in the African Studies Program at Boston University .  So I stayed there for a year.  That's from September '57 [1957] up until June of '58 [1958].  And, you know, there, you know, as I said I was a Teaching Assistant in the government department.  A graduate student, teaching in the--helping with the teaching in the government department.  Now what happened there, and this is very relevant to my life.  I mean I--one of my professors was Andrew [Szent] Gyorgi [later, Andrew St. George] who used to come.  And he said he would travel every week to Washington D.C., to Fort McNair, which is the highest training school for the United States Armed Forces.  And he would fly down there and train admirals and generals and other officers in the armed forces.  And, of course, he was teaching them in counterinsurgency.  You know how to really destroy, you know, various organizations and so forth.  And at Boston University, you did not have to attend classes, but you had to write your paper.  June of 1958 comes and I--and I have arrived back to Chicago.  I didn't have any money, but I wanted to get back to Chicago. So I approached Professor Gyorgi and said, "Well Professor Gyorgi I would like to know how can I get my paper--." "Get away from me you black motherfucker!"  That's exactly what he said to me.  And I--you know, I said, "Well look--." I said, "Professor Gyorgi I'm not--I've had some experience and I'm not going to be provoked, you know, and that all I want to know is how can I turn in my term paper?"  Now remember this is a man who trained generals and admirals okay.  He would fly from Boston University to Washington D.C. every week in order to conduct classes with them.  And now as I said at Boston University, you were not obligated to attend classes.  And it was in--it was written material.  You don't have to attend classes as a graduate student.  You do have to turn in your paper.  You know, turn in a paper, you know, at the end of the class.  In fact they encourage you in graduate school--branch out, go around, visit places, you know.  You don't have to just stay in one place. And so that the--that altercation, you know.  I mean I was--you know, left amused.  And he was just--he went on rambling about something about how, "They said you were gonna hit me," and stuff like that.  I said, "That's--none of that's true.  But I'm not here to, you know, quibble.  All I want to do is find out how I can turn my paper."  So I left.  My ride was coming that afternoon.  I could have stayed there and fought it out.  But I didn't want to miss my ride back to Chicago.  And so I just dropped it.  And when I went to--but after--you know say like at Boston University there's a time limit.  You know, and if you have to enroll.  So around about August, I felt that I needed my master's degree.  At that time you could practically teach anywhere with a master's degree.  And I wrote back to the department and the chairman of the department said, "Of course, you can come back."  You know.  "You're welcome," you know.  And I mean Professor Gyorgi wrote in my slip, "He will never be readmitted as long as I'm here."  So that the--I went to about 1960 when I began to officially, you know, work in the [Civil Rights] Movement.  I mean I went up to Boston University and talked to the president. The president of Boston University, "You're welcome back if you want to come back."  You know, Professor Gyorgi, I don't think was there.  I think that he had gone somewhere else.  He used to teach at George Washington University [Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 7200
Speaker 1: Well St. Clair Drake--well to me he was a very wonderful person.  And I--he taught at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] and I was--I wrote an article for the 'Roosevelt Torch' I think--I believe it was the 'Torch' the name of our school newspaper. Where I interviewed him and that the--he was you know quite a dynamic person.  He had spent a lot of time in Ghana and studied under [Kwame] Nkrumah. For me I think he was the second or third black professor that I had in the whole--my whole educational experience.  But he and I became very, very good friends and that he, we talked a lot.  And you know I took some of his courses in anthropology and I was very impressed with the--with, you know, the knowledge that he had. He had been in Ghana, and he taught at the University of Ghana.  I think it was in Accra--Accra, Ghana.  And you know he was a very motivating type of person. And you know, so that, you know, I really became a very good friend of his, or he became a very good friend of mine.  He would do various things including--once he asked me to travel to chauffeur Julius Nyerere who was in the United States.  He was the secretary of the Tanganyika African National Union, I think that was the name of it.  And, you know, I--he wanted me to show him the black community of Chicago, which I did.  And we sat down--took him to my house, sat down at the table.  And we had a discussion.  We had a discussion about South Africa.  He felt that the people in South Africa should not move militarily, you know, in the uprising until independence was granted to Tanzania.  Because it would be--you could lock 'em off and then they--they wouldn't be able to, to get out and it could be a massacre.  And that the--of course that's really true to some extent.  I mean that the--but Tanzania got its independence.  First, it was Tanganyika and the merger with Zanzibar.  After that it was called Tanzania.  So that, the question was the liberation of Southern Africa is a very, very important question, you know.  And I'm happy to have had the opportunity to talk to, Julius Nyerere.  Which was made possible through my relationship with St. Clair Drake.
Story_ID: 7201
Speaker 1: Now let's go back to how you got involved, or why you got involved in the [Civil Rights] Movement.
Speaker 2: Okay, because that's very important.  I mean, that's the--what happened a lot of this begins with my grandmother when I was very, very young, urging me to study Aesop.  To try to study reading, writing and arithmetic as the basics, you know, for understanding and so forth and so on.  And then, you know, the misery you know, which she had to live.  I mean she lived--the house was--didn't have any electric lights. You know, I would try to emulate radio sometime when I would go to visit her.  And I knew some of the hardship that she was going through.  But I also knew some of the hardship that other women and men were going through.  And that the--reading the 'Chicago Defender' [newspaper] was a big, big, impetus for me. Because I would read about these writings, this brutality.  And that I was living even some of them.  I mean I told you about the Coke [Coca-Cola] experience [as a child in Memphis, Forman was refused service at a lunch counter because of his skin color], which should not be underestimated.  Even in my grandmother's [Jane Doris Allen] house, you know, one night you know, somebody knocked on the door, and she asked me to go the door.  And you know, I closed the door, and she said, "What's the matter?"  I said, "Well it was a man that looked like a ghost."  He said--she said, "Go back and see what he wants."  I went back, you know, he was hungry, you know, that he was trying to--he was on the run.  So my grandmother--I related this. "Well, I--tell him I have two pieces of bread.  I'll give him one and I will keep one."  And she did that.  You know, he said, "Well, to nobody to--please don't tell anybody that the--'cause there are people that are after me."  The next day we heard that a white man in Slayton, Mississippi had been lynched.  You know, we don't know--I don't know if he was the same man or not.  But it occurred the next day, you know.  That a crowd of white people had grabbed this white man and had lynched him, you know. Now these lynchings played a very critical part of my life.  You know, in terms of the--as well as the, the experience of racial segregation.  Not being able to cross South Park [Avenue] without fighting.  You know the kinds of incidents were occurring in Chicago [Illinois].  All these things were cumulative, you know.  And the question is what to do about them. I mean it was always on my mind, you know.  How to marshal forces to--in order to solve some of these problems.  And as I went into high school, it became even more accentuated.  I was living during World War II.  But the real--I mean like the test was about--round about the 1950s.  As I came out of the experience [Forman was committed to a mental institution because of his skin color] in Los Angeles [California].  You know, which was quite earth-shaking as far as I'm concerned.  You know, what to do with my life?  I mean how am I gonna organize my life?  You know?  About 1956, you know, I was getting ready to graduate, you know.  I mean I felt that I had to try to figure out something now.  Writing was one thing, you know, writing about these experiences.  And--but also in, in the--felt that we needed an organization.  You know, that the--somehow we had to go back South.  And you know, even today I still think this. Because a brain drain occurred.  You know, people had pulled out of the South, going into the northern areas and even overseas.  And they never come back and they leave people helpless.  So that the--I mean I understood that.  And that the--but segregation was the main thing I guess that the--you know I'm happy to be alive, you know, because I did some things as a youth which I don't advise people to do.  But you know I talk about this in my book.  You know, on one of the trips, you know the conductor didn't want to let me on the train because I was black, you know.  And in the middle of the train he was gonna haul off and hit me.  And I had my bag, you know.  And I was, you know--was planning on retaliating, you know, if he had hit me, you know.  But then I felt that a lot of these things were not wise, you know, in the individual approach to the solution of the problem.  You know it needed some type of collectivity.  We needed an organization in the United States of America, you know, that would fight against that.  Sure we had the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], we had CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and so forth.  But that was not the kind of organization that I was talking about.  And at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], I studied the western educated elite.  How did they do it in Africa?  I studied Mahatma Gandhi, you know.  I studied 'Moral Man and Immoral Society' by Reinhold Niebuhr. How to do it? What to do? How to organize? How to go back into the South.  And why the South?  Because there the segregation was most blatant.  We had a denial of the right to vote.  People couldn't register to vote and you had segregated facilities.  Those things had to be broken down. I wrote a novel called 'The Thin White Line'.  It's 452 pages double-space. I sent it off to various publishers where the main character was going South to try to organize a movement.  And of course it was truly wish extension, you know, in terms of my reality.  But I felt that--I mean I didn't want to leave Chicago.  There was--there was no question I had to leave Chicago.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And why did you have to leave Chicago and why was it?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Because I had to go South.  That's where the problem was--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) But you said something bad happened to you in Chicago was that not true?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I thought you said that the first day.
Speaker 2: What, when--.
Speaker 1: When I met you.  You said, "I had to leave."
Speaker 2: Oh, I may have been talking about when my stepfather [John Rufus] put me out of the house.
Story_ID: 7202
Speaker 1: Is SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] in existence at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well what happened was I was beginning to--yeah SNCC was--SNCC started in 1960.  During the freedom rides, I was a teacher in Chicago [Illinois].  I was a substitute teacher.  We tracked the freedom rides.  I--we even wrote letters, my class and I wrote letters to the freedom riders.  One of the freedom riders said that, you know, my letter got through the--they read it to them, you know.  Now what happened was that SNCC was in existence.  But I was talking about an organization--and this is rather important--where the people would work full time.  Not part-time volunteers, okay?  The people would devote their lives to this particular cause. And that be--when I--when the freedom rides started in 1961, I met some of the freedom riders, and I discussed the kind of organization that I felt was needed.  And, you know, some of them asked me to come and--we went, you know we investigated SNCC.  It was--it was not--there was only one staff person.  It was a collection of individuals who were very important.  Don't misunderstand me.  I'm not at all downing the organization.  But it didn't have a staff.  It didn't have--it had one full-time person.  And my analysis was that you had to have a full time cadre of people who would be available tewnty-four hours a day if necessary.  And that that was the kind of organization that I wanted to build.  And the investigation of SNCC, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, was simply to see what was possible there.  But in 1961, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee according to my friend, decided that they would--you know, they wanted to--form--we got a call that said, "We want to form, or we're forming the kind of organization that you've been talking about.  We would like for you to join us.  You know, we're gonna live with the people.  We're not gonna try to do it for money.  We're paying ourselves forty dollars a week, you know.  I--but we will be working full-time. There are fifteen of us. You know, we're willing to come out of school, quit our jobs or whatever things must--you know come out of school and we want you to join us."  So I said, "Well, you know I'm married, you know and that--I'd be happy to join you but could you give me sixty dollars a week? 'Cause I'm married,  I mean I've got a wife to take care of.  I don't know if we could do it on forty dollars a week."  And so he said, "Well, I'll go back and talk to them about that, you know."  And so they said, "Yeah, okay we can give the married people--married people would get sixty dollars a week. The single people would get forty dollars a week."  So I was teaching--I was a schoolteacher in Chicago.  And I decided, you know, okay well I would go.  I mean I would, you know--I quit my job and went South.  I went to Atlanta [Georgia], joined ranks with those people in the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.  There were sixteen of us.
Speaker 1: So tell me who those people were.
Speaker 2: Well I--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Some of them.  You don't have to mention all of them.  But who were the sort of key players and who recruited you down there?
Speaker 2: Well the person that recruited me was Paul Brooks, but he's no longer alive.  At the time--he didn't recruit--he's the one--I mean the whole group of them--they, they knew I'm--what I was attempting to do on a personal level.  I was--and then the time had come, "Okay I'm very serious about this."  The time had come for me to break all relationships off from the City of Chicago.  And to go south and to try to form this organization which would work full time combating racial segregation and attempting to register to vote.  But since other people were willing to do that too, I mean that, you know I mean, I was certainly willing to join forces with them.  Now, what--again what was your question?
Speaker 1: I was just asking who were the people who called you and were involved? You know who were some of the sixteen?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well I don't want to get into all the--I mean Paul Brooks is--he's no longer alive.  Sure, but Robert Moses was one of the people. I mean he was one of the people involved with the discussion. And that--you know other people--there were a lot of people who originally decided the original cadres, the sixteen people including Charles Sherrod--I mean but--I don't know, Charles McDew was the chairman of the organization at the time.  And there were--there were sixteen of us.  But what's also important about that though is that one of the people--there was a question of a white field secretary named Robert Zellner.  And this is one of the reasons why the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee has had a hard--difficult time.  Because you know, we had a principal of freedom of association.  There were certain principals that we believed in.  One was that we articulated and began to believe in, you know, believed in and articulated freedom of association.  Also that we were--we were challenging the value system of the country.  The value--the dominant value system was profit.  Make money.  Do things to make as much money as you possibly can.  And we were opposed to that.  You know, and that--and that we tried to structure an organization so that the profit motive would not become a part of it. You know.  And we were fighting against that, you know, consciously.  It's not in saying--you know constantly just fighting against the dominant value system, which was of course in the South was also segregation as well as the question of making money.  And so, we were very successful.
Speaker 1: Now so the base of operation was out of Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's the--I had--The national headquarters was in Atlanta, Georgia.  And that's where I was stationed.
Speaker 1: Was Julian Bond involved at that time or was he--you helped recruit--I mean--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I helped--I mean what happened was I was the executive director of the organization okay, and we--I had to try to build a central staff at the organization. We had a very important person, to work on a day-to-day basis.  And we needed someone to do public relations.  And so that--since Julian was a reporter, you know.  I mean I tried to explain to people how important it would be for him to, to come on board.  And he did eventually become a full time person working as the director of communications.
Speaker 1: And who were--because you know what, what--and understand that a lot of what I know today which is not, you know, that much.  So--
Speaker 2: Well that's--when you finish five thousand interviews you'll know a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'll know a lot. But, what I know is that--I mean--what I've been--just by the small amount of reading that I've done, I've been impressed with the organization that was put together.  You know, the--what this organization accomplished.  'Cause you--what--How old were you at this point?
Speaker 2: How old was I? I think I was about let me see--Maybe thirty-three, I think when I went South.
Speaker 1: You were--okay.
Speaker 2: I think I was thirty-three.
Speaker 1: So you were older than the others.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was usually about ten years older--.
Speaker 1: Okay. But still the fact that the organization that got put together was a little--you know, it was--the fact that you would know you needed a, you know, a director of communications.  I mean that's not, you know.  People may not necessarily think that way is what I'm saying.  So you--And your wife [Mildred Page Forman] is totally in supportive of this too?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 7203
Speaker 1: How are you finding though the South? Your experience to date has been really a northern experience.  And I'm just--you know, and the South is a whole different animal.  And you had had your one experience in Memphis [Tennesee].  But people took to you fine and all of that?  They didn't consider you this sort of, you know, northerner? And, and one other question I have is--you're in Boston [Massachusetts] and Chicago [Illinois] or wherever.  And how--I mean even though you've had this plan and idea--you know, I interviewed Julian [Bond] you know.  He said ours was a southern--you know, he says, "I'm an expert in Southern civil rights."  You know, so I'm just, you know.
Speaker 2: Well I can--two things about this is that it's true what you're saying.  You know, the essence of it. What I did was when I went to Atlanta, Georgia, I began to condition myself to living into a segregated city.  And I would consciously, I would call, go around and see and, you know, I would try to, you know, sit in a restaurant. They'd tell me I couldn't sit there.  Went to the theater and they said, "Well you--you have to sit in the balcony."  I was trying to acclimate myself.  I'm trying to get used to living in a Southern segregated city.  Because those experiences were new to me. There's just no question about it.  But I also knew that I had to find a way, you know, I had to find an adjustment within myself to this reality.  And so as I said, I would go around acclimating myself to getting used to consciously being in a segregated city.  And conditioning myself, you know, in nonviolence and so forth and so on.  So that's what happened to me. It's true that that my experience came out of Chicago.  But also because of my roots, my grandmother [Jane Doris Allen] in Mississippi, you know I had--I knew something about the South and I knew something about the conditions.  I will not--I was not happy with those conditions, and that's one of the things that sort of like propelled me to try to work full time to change them.
Story_ID: 7204
Speaker 1: My other question was acceptance.  Finding acceptance there in the South.  You know the southern blacks are different and Atlanta blacks are different.  But they were--I--how did you make the connection in the first place?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well I don't, I'm not sure that I agree with all of that.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You don't.  Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In the sense--I mean that, that there was all these different--it is true that, you know, we try to accentuate the southern youth primarily because we felt that, that there was a lack of organizational opportunities for people from the South and that what we had to try to do was create more opportunities.  It is true that--but I, I was not raised in a segregated fashion, which is very, very important.  I mean it was not--I mean like you know living under this segregated system, as I said was some--not something that I had to do.  It was not something that I felt was--was admirable in any way.  And I'm happy to be alive in a lot of ways because the--you know I've been in so many experiences, you know, where, coming out of Chicago [Illinois], you know I just was not acclimated to that and, and didn't agree with it.  That's the other aspect of--about it. Is that, you know, my training, you know, even as a child wa-, on the farm of my grandmother [Jane Doris Allen] was not one to make me timid but to increase the ability to struggle.  You know, I mean she would encourage me to read the fables of Aesop, you know.  I mean it was trying to encourage people how to deal with slavery. Plus you know, in northern experiences, you know, I mean there was a lot of love in my life.  I mean it was not, not, not a lot of hatred.  I mean my stepfather [John Rufus] was a very brutal person, don't misunderstand me.  And I didn't appreciate a lot of things that he did including putting me out.  But my friends all throughout Chicago were very, very good and that the--but that the question of making a choice, you know, and I encouraged people.  I mean even in Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] I studied a lot of existentialism.
Story_ID: 7205
Speaker 1: First of all you have to understand that, that the--as I look back over my life, okay, there are a lot of leadership opportunities that I had and I usually don't say these kinds of things.  But, you know, I can understand what it is--some of the things that you maybe trying to understand is that--but you have to understand that I did not agree with segregation.  I did not agree--I mean I was always for one world.  And I'm for one world now where there is no racism, where there is no hatred of people.  But I also know that those people are not gonna change until you have people who are willing to work to try to help change them.  Which is why I'm making history.  You're trying to shape history.  It's very, very important.  Now I have--I went through a lot of training.  My--first of all, you have to understand I was a--in the Army [sic, U.S. Air Force] for four years.  I was a personnel classification specialist.  I assigned people to work in different places.  And as a personnel classification specialist, you know, that was--that was my function, that was my job.  And that the--you know, I had training for that.  So that's independently of any training that I had in school.  Secondly I mean I majored in public administration.
Speaker 2: Right but this is my--we've covered that.  I'm trying to figure out how you ended up--what was the connection with the South?  You know 'cause you're--.
Speaker 1: I'm going to--I'm trying to do that but you try to be a little patient with me.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) These things are all links--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And they can't you know--
Speaker 2: And it's not just that all of a sudden this happened.  You know, including--I mean I didn't go into a lot of details of what I studied in Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] in the government department and that I studied the Western educated elite to try to figure out what did they do in countries in Africa?  How did [Kwame] Nkrumah do it [first Prime Minister of Ghana]?  How did the other people lead liberation movements in Africa?  And so consequently, you know, the idea of working full-time was something, you know, that I felt was--would be needed in order to help resolve the problem including reversing the brain drain.  You know a lot of people forced out of the South and into the cities.  Now the connection--I mean like who recruited me, it's not, it's not just--I mean I was--I had planned to help develop a kind of organization where people would work full-time.  When I met people from the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, some of whom were on the freedom rides, we talked and I explained to them what it was that I was planning on doing. And at which point, you know, they decided, you know, for whatever reasons that led them to decide, fifteen of them would jump--would, would come out of school.  And they wanted--this is--"we wanted you to join us."  I mean that's not--there's nothing secret about that.  And so, you know, I decided that I would do that.  I would--I mean it was not, you know, it was not--it was not a difficult decision, because I had been preparing to do that for almost about five years, certainly since 1956.  And that my experiences in Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], remember I'm now chairman of the delegation that went to the National Students' Association in '56 [1956]. And won positions that there should be a Civil Rights Department in the justice.  But that didn't exist.  Okay I mean that's not unimportant.  And there should be a Civil Rights Commission. That didn't--these were students from all over the country, you know, who had assembled.
Speaker 1: So you, you get there and what are--you--but you didn't participate in the freedom rides.
Speaker 2: No I, not, not, not--no I didn't--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Alright.  That's okay.
Speaker 2: I mean but we, we, we clocked it.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean since it--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what--so this is 1961, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you're, you're in Atlanta [Georgia] and this is the home base.  And you're building an organization.
Speaker 2: Helping to build one.
Speaker 1: You're helping to build.  But who were the critical people?  Is this fifteen--group of fifteen?  Of which you recruit--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We were all critical.  We were all critical.  We all had a bond and we knew that we might not be alive the next day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is not unimportant.  Okay and we talked about that.  That we could all be killed.  And that we were dedicating our lives, you know, to the struggle.  And so there was a bond between us and there still is.
Story_ID: 7206
Speaker 1: What was identified as important to do then?  I mean what were the key--map out for me--okay you have the Atlanta [Georgia] thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You have the Greensboro [North Carolina] thing that happened [sit-ins at segregated lunch counters].  But that's more spontaneous.  Right?
Speaker 2: Well that was the sit-in at--
Speaker 1: The sit-in at Greensboro was spontaneous.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well no I don't think it was so spontaneous. I mean I think that the people, you know, decided, you know, that they had had enough of segregation.  And they were gonna go down and sit-in. And that was in '61 [1961].  And that kicked off a massive movement all throughout the country, especially in the South.  Now a lot of it may have had to do with communication of people saying what, you know.  And that that led to this formation of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC] on Easter Weekend. Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, then so what, what are you deciding are important--things important to do? Is your focus turned to Mississippi at that point?  Is it--Is it Atlanta? Is it Nashville [Tennessee]?  Nashville became sort of--
Speaker 2: Well Nashville--yeah Nashville was the central point for the freedom rides.  I mean that the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee directed most of the activity on the freedom ride from Nashville.  What we decided in the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee was a question of Operation MOM--'Move on Mississippi'.  We had a program Operation MOM, Move on Mississippi.  Claude--I forget his name.  But he wrote an article in the periscope for the 'Newsweek' [magazine].  You know, about how we had planned to move on Mississippi.  Which we did and was a success.  A lot of people were killed, you know, including [Andrew] Goodman, [James] Cheney, and [Michael] Schwerner [civil rights workers].  But the overall effect has been very positive.  You know, I'm extremely sorry about the murders that have taken place in Mississippi.  But we were attempting to get the right to vote.  I mean now a lot of people vote today.  We have 8,000 black elected officials; people have black mayors. You must really try to understand what it meant to be in the south in the '60s [1960s] and '61 [1960] with no elected officials, nowhere to go basically to, to say, "Well, you know, try to help us from a political point of view."  And we all were fighting for--to get the right to get the vote.  Now that may seem inconsequential to a lot of people today.  But that's something that we're trying to combat.  To see--get people to see what this means.
Speaker 1: I don't think it seems--to me it doesn't seem inconsequential.  I mean but--this, this is--so this Move on Mississippi, how long a period did it take to really move on Mississippi?  What?  It took, it took so--'cause Mississippi was known as one of the worst states, right?  How about Alabama?  Was Alabama as bad as Mississippi?  Why did you choose Mississippi versus Alabama?
Speaker 2: Well you know we had--we had started out with, with the freedom rides in Mississippi.  Where people were denied the right to enter--it was very segregated and there was a project in McComb, Mississippi.  You know, which had been a beach they had made, you know, in not--'cause really that was before you know, I became full-time.  In fact the--I was asked to go to Atlanta.  The staff was still meeting the other--the other people who decided to form, to come out and work with SNCC full-time were--most; most of them were in McComb, Mississippi.  And so I went to Atlanta. And there, there the--you know, waiting for them to arrive.  And people did arrive and we had you know, a reorganization meeting in Atlanta Georgia.  You know the organization was basically split between direct action and voter registration.  And that the--but the, you know, my position was that that would soon disappear.  Those--and they did, you know.  Because the, you know, engaging voter registration in the South at that time was a form of direct action. But the--I'm, I'm not sure what it is that might be bothering--I, I think part of the problem might be that people don't really understand, you know, the motivation that some people had about working full time to do this, to end this kind of situation.
Story_ID: 7207
Speaker 1: We were testing--the United States Government issued an order that segregation in interstate travel was illegal.  And that order took effect November the 1st, 1961.  Five minutes after--You know, we decided to test that, whether or not that was true. And whether these places were gonna desegregate.  And first we tested it.  The people in Atlanta [Georgia] tested it.  And we went to jail.  'Cause the guy said, "You have to leave," you know.  You know we asked him well we said, "Well the lawyers that, you know--these places will be desegregated."  So a group of us were arrested.  At the same time, a group of people went toward Albany, Georgia to test that situation out.  And they were arrested.  And then we had another group in which I was involved.  You know, we went to Albany, Georgia and we were arrested.  And there was this--started this big massive movement in Albany, Georgia.  And it was a very, very powerful movement.  You know Vernon Jordan at that time was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Field Secretary, you know, in Albany, Georgia.  So that the Albany Movement was a reaction of adults and youth coming together challenging, you know, the power of the Albany Government and what have you.  Now as I said, while this was going on, you still have developing in Mississippi, you have Operation MOM [Move On Mississippi].  We had people working on that.  You have other people preparing Coleon--[Dr.] Bernard LaFayette [Jr.]. You know, they were in my book on 'The Making of Black Revolutionaries' going--willing to go into Alabama and open up a project there.  And, you know, I spoke at the first mass meeting in Alabama.  And at the--Jim Clark was the sheriff.  He had posses.  He had mounted horses all around the church.  You know.  And they--so (unclear)--the church was--we were asking the people to remain calm and stay still.  We tried to get people in Washington [D.C.] on the phone to do--to help disperse this posse that was around the church.  And it was--they eventually disappeared.  So we asked if it was safe to go home.  Well these are the kinds of things that we lived under.  You know.  And then--And don't misunderstand me now.  Some people were killed.  But we were trying to minimize the lives, the loss of life.  You know.  And that--that's  (unclear) obviously what may be the criticisms.  And I think it's the hallmark of our organization that is why it was pointed out that we had more staff people doing this than they had, you know.  And of course the work in Alba-, in, in, in, in Mon-, in, in Alabama led basically to the passage of the 1965 voting rights law.  Which was different from the 1964 Civil Rights Act. The Civil Rights Act you know, abolished segregation in the United States.  But it didn't--But there were some problems with people having to register to vote. They still had this literacy test requirement.  So the '65 [1965] voting rights law, which grew out of activity in Alabama basically, you know, helped to solve that problem.  Now--But that law was not permanent.  That law was only for seven years and (unclear) and we had to go back and extend it. And like it was a nightmare situation (chuckling) because the voting rights law was not a permanent thing.  Now eventually it became that with the 1995 Voting Rights Act.  Which was signed by President [William Jefferson] Clinton.  I was in the White House when that occurred.  And I helped to organize the reception, you know, for that particular event.  So that people outside of Washington, D.C. now have the right to vote.  All people.  They're all equal politically except for those of us in the--in the--in the District of Columbia.  You know we now can elect sen-, I was the first person to run for senator.  File papers that is. That is to file papers to become a senator from the District of Columbia, you know. But we can now elect those senators.  But they don't have the right to vote.  Okay?  So that's where we are now.  And that's what some of us--you know that's where we, we, li-, the basic reason why I'm still in Washington.  Because we're trying to carry out the plan of making this country very Democratic.  At least a political democracy.  And that it's--We're almost there 90 percent, you know.  If we can get the right to vote for the elected officials in Washington, D.C., we'll have completed the task.  You will have a political democracy.  I mean problems.  But right now you can't really say that there's a political democracy in the United States.  Because we need the help of all the people we possibly can.  You know, to help solve this problem.
Story_ID: 7208
Speaker 1: 1963 and '65 [1965] were critical years.  You know they were victorious years. Right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All that work leading up to that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then the organization [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, SNCC] starts--Or maybe it was--had always been along, some--There were some troubling things that start effecting the organization.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I'd like you to talk about the things that really you feel from your viewpoint that hurt--you know helped in its demise.
Speaker 2: Well I think that the--there are a lot of factors.  I mean like--The first factor that we haven't uncovered--I mean my hypothesis would be that a lot of the people who were displaced from power, you know, have banded together in different forms and sort--I don't have any proof of this, you know.  But I, I do know that when I left Chicago [Illinois], you know, I told my friends you know, "Look I'm quitting my job.  My wife [Mildred Page Forman] is quitting her job.  You know, we're going South and that I'll probably never be able to get another job."  I was teaching school in, in Chicago, you know.  And would always be dependent upon the good will of the people.  Now what happened in, in response to your question I think that the--One of the, one of the main criticism was the development of the theory that it was just racial conflict.  You know race war theory.  There were groups of people--there may still be groups of people who believe in race war.  That it's a--it's a war between blacks and whites and other ethnic groups.  And that there are no class factors involved.  Well I don't agree with that.  And that--I mean it's not that the--we took the leadership.  I hope I took some of the leadership, you know, in combating this. But this particular thing--This--One of the factors that I think caused the disintegration of the organization was this concept of race war.  The race war analysis.  You know, and that the problems are simply racial.  And that there are no class factors involved.  Because we had to struggle against that. And it was a very brutal struggle on many different fronts.
Speaker 1: And then you also felt that the government had its, its hand applied to it in a way.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well I do.  I, I believe that too.  I believe--I also believed that a lot of--You know I don't have any proof, you know.  But as I said a lot of people who were displaced from power, you know, have been very involved in trying to destroy these organizations.  You have--you have to go back to the Civil War in the United States, where some of the Confederate [States of America] generals and officers didn't accept the defeat of the confederacy.  And they formed the Ku Klux Klan, which was a very progressive organization.  That didn't just come from some poor white people.  These were Confederate generals.  Confederate officers who fought against the Union Forces and fought against the (unclear) people in Illinois and so forth, and so forth against Abraham Lincoln.  Okay?
Speaker 1: So--Okay so you, you would put--well Joh-.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Take your time.
Speaker 1: You would put John Louis in that cat-, I mean he was displaced from power right?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, but he would--Yeah, John Louis would be--John Louis was, was the chairman of the organization.  You know, he was elected to be the chairman.  He served as the chairman.  I wouldn't, I wouldn't put him in the same kind of, of, of, analysis you just made.  I don't--I'm not sure if--.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay. Okay.  Then let me ask you this. There was also the whole thing of whites.  Middle class whites coming into the organization.  And that causing some tension with it. And in some cases it was a patronizing standpoint of they knew more. And then there were people who felt that that fought against the whole concept of self-determination.
Speaker 2: Well that maybe true.  I mean I don't--I mean I'm--You know I wasn't--But I think the overriding thing was that, the concept of that the problem was simply a question of race.  And the attitudes that a lot of people took, you know, in terms of trying to, to make the organization an all-black organization.  I mean that's--It's very difficult to speak about a lot of these things.  Especially on tape and, and--but, you know, we went through some very, very, very hard experiences.  You know, with people arguing that, you know, white should not be in the organization.  Whites should be expelled from the organization and I didn't agree with that.  I mean that the--the problem is not--the problems are not just racial problems.  I mean there are class factors involved.  And I wrote an article called high tide of black resistance.  You know, in which I, you know, talked about that, you know.  And you know, you know, we're trying to combat that.  And we still have some ethnic cleansing is going on.  And that's also a part of what it is. Look at, look at Eastern Europe.  Look at some of the things in Africa where people are saying this ethnic group is, is superior to others.  That's--Yeah go ahead.
Speaker 1: Now okay so, so you, are no longer with SNCC as of 1969.  You stepped down and you are--.
Speaker 2: Well it's not that I'm going to give you (chuckling) some of the most precious information that's you are probably gonna get from this series okay?  But what happened was that in terms of--A lot of people began to leave the organization for various reasons. I mean--You know, one of the struggles always was, you know, try to get people to stay full time.  And, I mean, I came for life okay.  A lot of people didn't do that.  They came to spend a year.  They came to spend two years.  But you know, I came for life.  I left Chicago.  It was not just a one-week vacation or one-year vacation.  You know, I decided to throw my entire life into this situation.  And I did that.  I'm still doing that.
Story_ID: 7209
Speaker 1: I didn't leave [SNCC, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]--what happened was--What happened was that the internal fights in the organization, you know, were also very serious.  And that at one point, you know, I was at a friend's house.  You know, I was sleeping and I was resting.  And a note was placed by my bed.  The note said that, "You're no longer the International Affairs Director of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.  That the organization has been disbanded and we will now be called the Student National Coordinating Committee."  And it was signed, "Mohammad Hunt."  And that he was now the Supreme Commander (chuckling) of the organization or something like that.  So I talked to him about this, you know.  And then I said, "Well--," But I decided, you know, that there was no point at that particular point, that it didn't--it wasn't worth making a big fight.  You know.  And I explained this to him.  I said, "I'm not going to do that.  You know I don't agree with what you've written, you know.  I mean I know I could change--probably could change it if I wanted to make a fight over it, you know."  I said, "But it's--" At that particular time, the organization had been through so many battles.  You know, especially around the race question you know, that I didn't feel that it was--it was worth it, you know.  And I had even let this man stay at my house, he and his wife previously you know.  So that the, the question then is that, "Okay, well what happened?"  I mean, there are organized groups of people in this country who do not believe that the problems are race and class.  They see the problem simply as racial.  You have the Ku Klux Klan on the one hand.  But you also have various black organizations, you know, that believe that you probably have Chicano organizations or who believe it's La Raza [Spanish for "the race"].  This is a serious ideological question.  It's quite similar to what I said about ethnic cleansing.  You know you have this ethnic group saying that it should dominate.  And if you're part of another ethnic group, you do not belong you know.  And that's one of the tragedies.  And that's one of the things that we have to overcome in the future.  And we have to keep some--We, we've made a lot of advances on that.  You know we've overcome a lot of different things in terms of that.  Now race and class is basically accepted as a--as a fundamental analysis.  It's not just that people see it as race.  But although that concept, okay was there.  And it was very, very destructive, you know.  It caused a lot of problems, you know, throughout the world you know.
Speaker 2: Now what do you think when you--Okay, so after SNCC, what, what--What have you been doing since that time?
Speaker 1: (Chuckling) well I've been continuing my dedication to helping them make the world a better place to live for everybody.  You know I began to help orga-, I mean I you know, I relate to the SNCC people today.  I mean I-- A lot of those people you know, are very, very good people.  A lot of what I'm telling you they were not around.  They left for various reasons earlier. You know.  But again you can't fault them.  I mean because like a lot of people did not come for life.  I came for life.  Okay?
Story_ID: 7210
Speaker 1: What do you consider yourself?
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: I mean I know you say, "I'm an organizer."
Speaker 2: What?  Yes.
Speaker 1: But you want to make a real difference in this world.  And there're certain things that you set out to do, you know, whatever thirty, forty years ago.  That you've seen some of those happen.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But the other thing, you know.  You look at statehood.  But these things are progressions.  And that they are the things necessary to make the world a better place.
Speaker 2: Right. Well I mean I--What are some of the things that are left undone (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I'd like to know what are some of the things left undone?  And what you would--What are your hopes for the black community?  Because--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well I'm--I mean I think the black community is going to be alright.  I think that we've made tremendous advances.  You know.  I think that the people in the south are beginning to further mobilize.  You know I think that the unity--What I--my overall objective is to try to build a world free of racial conflict, free of sexual conflict, and that the and where people have sufficient food and clothing and medical care.  You know, and that they have jobs.  I--we have an organization called the Unemployment Poverty Action Committee.  We fight for people to have jobs on a--on a macro level and not just on an individual basis.  And you know, I, I say at my--I--my seventieth birthday party, I had said to people, "What we have to do--one of the things I think we should do is to see what have we done?  What have we accomplished?  What's been our lives?"  You know, I mean--And that for me, you know, I, I constantly try to assess "Well okay what have I helped to--How have I helped people to live in a better world since I left Chicago [Illinois]?"  And I did leave.  I was teaching.  I was teaching--I was a teacher in the city of Chicago.  But that was also preparatory to, to making sure that I had some kind of outlet.  It's not that I decided to quit my job all of a sudden.  You know, but you know, trying to open up different alternatives.  If this didn't work, would this work, you know.  And if I had, you know--I mean I have twenty-eight hours in French.  I can teach French, you know, in the public school system as well as my other degrees.  You know.  And I now have a Doctor of Philosophy Degree.  I have a master's degree from Cornell University [Ithaca].  I mean I feel very good about my life.  But I also think that it's important to say, "Well what have we done?"  That's what I'm--And so the people don't get discouraged.  So that we're all able to go onto the next step.  That victory is certain, you know, "the future is bright" becomes very meaningful to all of us, you know.  And I'm very serious about this.  I mean I think we go ahead.
Speaker 1: But as some one who fought and put their life on the line that a lot of like people like myself, you know, to go to schools and sort of reap benefits.  Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: No I don't have any--,
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) When you see, see what is--what has transpired since then?
Speaker 2: No I don't have any regrets.  I mean I-- You know I don't--the--,
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Do you have any hopes then for the black community? (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Of course I have--,
Speaker 1: Well tell me what those hopes are, and what you think is still important to be done.
Speaker 2: Well I think--I mean I think that we have to really fight through this question of political inequality.  You know, I think that black people throughout the United States--We should have to be mobilized, or we should attempt to mobilize.  As many black people in the city of Chicago and New York and San Francisco [California] and elsewhere to really recognize that the people in Washington, D.C. do not have the same rights we have. That's wrong.  And to begin to try to organize and to do some more about this.  You know, contact the senators.  Have demonstrations.  It's quite similar to what--how we were able to pass the 1964 civil rights act.  You know.  Have demonstrations in front of this building and so forth.  Around the question that the people in Washington, D.C. regardless of their color, deserve the same rights that we have.  And, and [President] George [W.] Bush just came out two three days ago in the 'Washington Post' [newspaper] saying that he didn't agree that, you know, that senators should have the right to vote from the District of Columbia.  Nor should the people in the [U.S.] House of Representatives.  Well I mean why shouldn't we have the--Why shouldn't our people have the same rights?  As long as we don't have the same rights, our country is really not a democracy.  And we're still living under degrees of feudalism and fascism.  And we're trying to fight that through.
Speaker 1: Okay are there other things that you think are still yet to be done?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I think that the question of equality is you know, has an economic aspect to it.  You know, not just a political aspect.  But we have to try to work to solve the political question first.  I mean (unclear) you can work on economic equality if you want to.  But I--you know, I think that that's a part of the problem.  I mean that--and you have to try to find more ways that people can become equ-, equal economically, you know.  And that they have sufficient economic assets.  You know, that they can live from cradle up until whenever they, they, they die.  And I think we should attempt to extend life for everybody.
Story_ID: 7211
Speaker 1: When you saw the riot that appeared--you know, that occurred in Cincinnati [Ohio] recently [April, 2001].  Did you think that they were just a bunch of hoodlums or did you think that this was something that was, you know.  An issue--that may keep--be repeated around the country? And is or--I mean what did you think about it?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't think very much because I was working on something else.  I mean I knew it occurred.  Okay I try not to do too much.  You know, I mean like--I mean like I work for the election.  And after the election we've been working on, say like contemporary events and that the--so I didn't have very much time to devote to the question of Cincinnati.  But I think that what happened is that when you have--we were working on Mississippi.  We were trying to, to, to get the people to vote against the Confederate [States of America] Flag in Mississippi.  And we're still doing that.  I mean I--That's a very important struggle.  So I didn't have much time to devote to the Cincinnati Question.  'Cause you--You know, I've learned over the years, you know that it's a mistake to try to take on too many legislative issues, too many lobbying issues.  And that, you know, 'cause things can become bungled.  So we're working on the Mississippi Question following the election.  You know I think that what happened in Cincinnati may occur again.  I think that it's very important that we try to win over every police officer in this country regardless of their color.  And we try to get them to understand that they should represent the people, help the people, not hurt the people.  You know.  The people have to see them and we pay their salaries.  You know that's really true.  We pay the salaries of all police officers.  You know, we try to have good relationships.  We should seek to have good relationships.  But they also should say, "Well I'm here to serve the people.  And I'm not here to hurt the people." You know.
Story_ID: 7212
Speaker 1: When we started out, you know, we had a philosophy, which I've tried to live by.  And the philosophy is, is that we're not doing this.  We're not doing people favors.  We don't expect for you to do anything for us.  We're doing these things because they're, they're, they're right.  You know.  At the same time, we have helped to open up employment.  As I explained to you very briefly the other day, you know, for millions and millions of people.  We've help to, to elect a lot of elected officials.  Not only black elected officials, a lot of white elected officials and so forth.  The thing that I'm very concerned with is not gratitude maybe, you know.  But like Ron Brown used to say, "Reciprocity is the first law of politics."  That I'm very concerned about this question of my having to get out here each month and to try to hustle my rent.  I mean I've gone through a lot of medical problems.  You know.  Which (unclear)--But I think that the, the thing that concerns me the most is how some people can get resources and then other people can't.  Now one of the things in the black community, which we have to fight against, is this whole attitude "Well I got mine, you get yours.  Fuck you."  And so forth and so on and so on. You know.  And that the--I think that that's wrong.  I mean that those kinds of capitalistic values, you know, that can come about in the community, you know are wrong.  And I think that the--Even with the white politicians, you know, that the, the, the greed that exists in society can get translated "Well we're not gonna help anybody whose not greedy as we are." And that's one of the things that I'm very, very concerned with. Because there are people, you know,  who do devote their lives.  And I'm one of those.  And those people should not want for anything, you know.  I'm very serious about this.  I mean this is what--And that you know--so we--But now I also know that you have to organize that.  It's not gonna happen spontaneously.  People are not gonna come and drop you down manna from heaven.  You know, if you want to resolve the question of rent and food and clothing, you're gonna have to get out here and do something about it.  It's not gonna happen spontaneously.  And that I think was a lesson in the Civil Rights Movement.  And we were very clear that these things are not going to happen spontaneously.  But you have to have people working on them.  And the same thing is true with what I'm just now saying. What I'm trying to say, you know, in terms of my concern.  My concern is that we--Certainly we African American people and the whole population, not just the African American, not get so intertwined with these capitalistic virtues where we are willing to hurt people for the sake of us making more money.  You know for me being able to will to my children a million dollars or something like that.  You know I think those things can be very destructive to the society.  And we have to organize against that. And that the--and we have to try to educate people that those things are not right.  You know we have to explain to them now. This is  (unclear) one of the reasons why I'm happy to do this interview.  It has a lot to do with the fact that you come out of Chicago [Illinois].  Which is going to be the major, metropolitan city in this country.  But also you know, it's a--it's a place you know.  I mean I like Chicago very much.  Don't misunderstand me, you know.  But I also knew that, you know, things were gonna change.  People had to work on it.  And it's not gonna happen spontaneously.
Story_ID: 7213
Speaker 1: I think that an organizer--First of all you have to--you know people should strive to learn how to write as much as possible.  Learn how to read and write, you know.  And to try to--Because without that, it's gonna be very difficult for you to organize, you know.  People are gonna take advantage of you.  The other thing is the question of commitment. You know, have--what, what goal do you want to work on? What is the goal?  And, you know, and to try to devote as much time to that as possible.  And try to stay on course, you know.  I mean like stay--You know--If you have an objective, s--work on that objective.  Don't try to do too much.  You know, just try to stay on course.  Whatever it is that you're working on.  You know, try to get as many people involved in that.  Try to develop coalitions around that, or joint coalitions.  And those are the kinds of things that will lea--I mean also you know, try to resolve as you move along this question of food, clothing, shelter and how you're gonna live.  And that the second question was--
Speaker 2: The second question is wha-. How would you define a movement?
Speaker 1: Well I mean I think the movement is, you know, when people decide to--lot of--One of the things we decide on issues and then we begin to work around and try to get more people, and get more publicity about it and what have you.  And that's of course what happened inside this country.  I mean Muhammad Ali for instance, said we helped to save his life.  He told me that less than three years ago.  You know, (unclear). Maybe it might have been a little bit more than three.  But it was in a store downtown.  You know. Like during the time that he was being persecuted, you know.  We came to his defense.  He said, "You helped to save my life."  Well that's very important, you know.  And that we have to keep on trying to help save people's lives regardless of their color.  But I think that this--there are a lot of problems, you know, that we have to overcome, you know. And that a good organizer is a person who tries to bring in more and more people.  And that the--and it's not acrimonious toward anybody.
Story_ID: 7214
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: (Laughing) Well my legacy is already being written.  I mean I, I've written seven books.  I explain these things, you know.  I've participated in a lot of movements including the reparations movement.  I'm very happy, you know, with my life and that as I say to my friends, "What we should do is think of what have we done?"  You know, "What have we helped to accomplish?"  And we've helped to do a lot of things. We've helped to end segregation in this country for everybody.  (Clapping hands). You know, we've helped to get--We obtain the right to vote for people, for everyone except the uh, senatorial representation in, in the District of Columbia.  You know we've, we've we fought through a lot of the period of McCarthyism [extreme anti-Communist political movement].  You know, the concept of freedom of association, which I explained to you earlier, was one of our values.  And I don't think that those things have hurt us.  I think they've helped.  I think that the--we can now participate and we have now over 8,000 black elected officials.  In 1964, there were less than 400.  And those black-elected official grew out of the movement of people working for change. But I also think that they have to begin to think about "Well, okay well what, what are my obligations to some of the people?"  Not that we--keep in mind now.  We're not doing any favors.  We did not expect for people to do anything for us.  You know.  At the same time, you know, there, there was no obligation involved.  You know.  But I think that as people begin to accumulate, that they should begin to think about those other people less fortunate.  Including some of the organizers.
