Story_ID: 634989
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers today.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Florence Therese--Florence Therese Saunders Farley [HistoryMaker Florence Farley], F-L-O-R-E-N-C-E, T-H-E-R-E-S-E, S-A-U-N-D-E-R-S, F-A-R-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 28, 1928, Roanoke, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired college professor of psychology.
Speaker 1: And you were also the mayor of Petersburg?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're also a visual artist, too, I think, right?
Speaker 2: A what?
Speaker 1: A visual artist.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, what is a visual artist (laughter)?  I do needlework.
Speaker 1: Needlework.  Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes, I do needlework.  Those--needlework that--I've done portraits of my family.  I've been--needle and stitchery, and I have about a hundred pieces of needlework, cross stitch, needle point and crewel, all framed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?  February 10, 2012.  What is today's date--?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: And where are at the present time?
Speaker 2: Petersburg, Virginia at my house on 18 South Little Church Street.
Story_ID: 634990
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as a warm up.  And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Pinto beans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Pink.  Pink.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall and spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Casinos.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Nah, because they mean something different to me every time I hear them.  Not really.
Story_ID: 634991
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side [Stacious Saunders].  But we're going to s- you know, ask about them separately so we don't get them mixed up.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Neoda Florence Ware Saunders [Neoda Ware Saunders].
Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: What?  Oh.  N-E-O-D-A, F-L-O-R-E-N-C-E, W-A-R-E, S-A-U-N-D-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh boy, I don't know her date of birth.  I have it somewhere and I meant to look it up, but I didn't.  But she was born in Danville, Virginia.  She lived until she was ninety-six years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what do you think that would--she was born around what year would you think?
Speaker 2: About 18--I think it was 1898.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really think--I think, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother, I knew her very, very well.  My grandmother died when I was fourteen years old.  She was a true matriarch.  She was supportive of her children.  She had, my mother was the only daughter, and she had three sons.  And my uncle [Fred Ware], one uncle, did not live in Roanoke [Virginia].  He lived in Norfolk, Virginia.  He was a business person.  The other two uncles lived in Roanoke.  One, the younger, the youngest uncle [Guy Ware], worked for the freight station in Norfolk Western railroad [Norfolk and Western Railway].  But my next uncle, Alfred [Alfred Ware], was a, worked for the railroad.  He was a steady employed person of the family, really.  And my grandmother--he married, but I think my grandmother interfered in that, so he divorced and they ended up living together.  And she kind of ruled where they lived and she kind of ruled where my mother lived and she kind of ruled where my younger uncle lived.   So she was a--and I mean ruled from the standpoint that she saw to it that we had what we needed, that we had the physical things that we needed and the home life that we needed and so forth.  So she was that.  She was an interesting, interesting woman.  And her house, where she and my uncle lived was a place where we could go.  For example, she wanted us to have music lessons, so she couldn't buy pianos for two houses so she bought the piano, they bought the piano, and put it in her house and then when we went there, we'd have to go down there and practice music.  And soon as telephones came out, we were able to go down there and use the telephone.  It was just, her house was our house too.  That was an extension of their home.  So that was my grandmother.  I don't know my grandfather [Israel Ware] on my mother's side, but my mother described him as being quite a pleasant man, and I think that he was kind of under my grandmother's thumb, because she was such a strong person.  And so that's the--. I had one, my mother didn't have any sisters.  So there was one aunt and that was an aunt-in-law, but we thought of her as being my real aunt, and she was married to my mother's youngest brother.  And she, my grandmother, taught them both how to cook.  She taught them because they were young.  They married young, sixteen years old.  And so she taught them to cook, she taught them how to keep house, how to do everything, how to become mothers and wives, so they both were very much alike.  So my aunt and my mother were--looked liked sisters and acted like sisters, because they had the influence of my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Lula [Lula Ware].  Suludie, her name really was Suludie.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Suludie, S-, S-U-L-U-D-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--Suludie.
Speaker 1: Now is there--and they called her Lula.
Speaker 2: They called her Lula.
Story_ID: 634992
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about where--in fact, where the names Neoda [Farley's mother, Neoda Ware Saunders] and Suludie [Farley's maternal grandmother, Lula Ware] come from (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Neoda, they were, from my understanding they were Indian [Native American] names.  The origin of both of their names were Indians.  And my grandmother was born in Charlotte Court House, Virginia.  And my understanding is that there was quite a, well shall I say, there is a mixture of some Indian blood in the family.  But there were evidently close relationships, because those names are Indian in origin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Charlotte Court House, Virginia?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Is that near Roanoke [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: No.  Charlotte Court House is close to Danville [Virginia], down this way.  Charlotte Court House is down this way.  My mother's family, they all left Danville, and came to Roanoke.  Roanoke was a very young place, city.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your grandmother have stories about growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Not really.  She, we would ask her things like, you know, "When was your birthday?" And she basically said, "I was born about pea time" (laughter).  We never figured out what kind of peas, you know.  Were the peas being planted?  Were they being picked or whatever?  But that was when she would tell us that was her birthday.  So she really didn't, she lived very much in the present, and she kind of, she dealt with us that way, you know.  She dealt with us that way.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know when she was born?
Speaker 2: No, I have no idea--pea time.  I don't know what year, no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother was born in 1898?
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: Now were there any stories in your family of slavery or the Reconstruction years or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no.   Nothing, you know, that's very interesting because I didn't really get into slavery and plantations and that kind of thing until I came to Petersburg [Virginia], until I was older.  See, growing up, we were, I'm a hillbilly.  I'm strictly, I mean, when I came to Petersburg I didn't realize that so many, the parts of Virginia were so different from each other, you know.  And so I had never been down here, down this way.  In fact, I had been to Radford [Virginia], I had been to the west, see.  So, I came from the hills, I came from the mountains.  And there were not many black people in the mountains.  I don't know about, I don't know where the slaves were in the mountains, because they were just not part of our life, our history.  We didn't talk, we didn't have slave stories and people on plantations.  And I didn't know anything about growing cotton and all that kind of stuff.  I just didn't know anything about it.  And then as a youngster, my mother never told us any stories like that.  Mostly my mother's stories were about her living in Roanoke, you know, things, incidences and things that happened there.  So, I'm in a county not from this kind of--when I came to Petersburg I was startled.  I mean, it's just like opening up a whole new world for me.
Story_ID: 634993
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] say about growing up?  You know, she's--
Speaker 2: Oh, she was, she told us many stories about growing up.  But they were just of a happy girl, little girl.  And I said, she was the only girl, and she was protected by her brothers who dearly loved her.  And my mother oddly enough was never called by her name.  My grandmother [Lula Ware] called her Daughter.  My uncles called her Sister (laughter).  When we came along we called her Mama and so we never heard nobody call my mama's name.  And if they tried to call it, they mispronounced it, so she said that was all right.  But she talked, my mother talked about just happy times and my mother evidently was a very bright--intellectually bright, because she went to all the public schools.  I guess they went to the eighth grade, seventh or eighth grade.  And she finished the public schools that was available, the level of public school education that was available to her.  And she was supposed to go to some little church school for one year to become a teacher, but she ran away and married my daddy [Stacious Saunders].  And so that's the way that happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was the end of her childhood.  We--she never told us too many details about how they ran away.  We never did get that story out of her, but we think that's what happened.
Story_ID: 634994
Speaker 1: Did your grandmother [Lula Ware] and your mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] own their own land?  I mean, did they, I mean did your grandmother own the land that she--?
Speaker 2: Oh, when my grandmother, as I said, she moved to Roanoke [Virginia], and she brought the family to Roanoke.  So my mother grew up in Danville [Virginia] until she was I guess maybe ten or twelve years old, and then she came to Roanoke--okay, my mother moved to Roanoke.  And my grandmother bought--and my uncle [Alfred Ware], see, and my grandmother lived together.  So, my uncle worked full time for the railroad [Norfolk and Western Railway].  So he bought his home, he bought the home, and that's where my grandmother and he lived.  And then right around the, on the next block--well, her house was on the corner, and if you go around the block, that was where my--she bought another house, and in that house she put my mother on the first floor and my aunt and uncle on the upstairs.  So, she had her two families there, and she was right on the corner.  She could watch the house, you know.  We could as we--as my mother had more children and all, but my mother, after she married my father [Stacious Saunders], they moved to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And so my older brothers and sisters, some of my older brothers and sisters, were born in Pittsburgh.  My grandmother, of course, was very unhappy, but she just couldn't get her back to Roanoke.  And so my mother and father had a home in Pittsburgh and it caught fire and it burned all of their possessions.  So that gave my grandmother an opportunity to get her hands back on my mother.  So she brought her back, it was supposed to be temporary, to Roanoke, and they came back to Roanoke and stayed, and that's where the rest of us were born, and that's where we lived.  So she bought this house and as I said before, initially the two families lived in it.  As the family started expanding, my grandmother bought another house, and my uncle and his wife and children moved from the second floor of that house into the second house that my grandmother--it was the third house then--that she bought, which was again right there in the neighborhood.  But, you know, my mother and father finished paying for the house, but she was the, she was the one who started both of those houses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so we always lived in a house that was owned by us.
Story_ID: 634995
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Stacious Thaddeus Saunders [Stacious Saunders].   S-T-A-C-I-O-U-S, T-H-A-D-D-E-U-S, Thaddeus, Saunders, S-A-U-N-D-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And is there a story behind the name Stacious?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, again they say it was a, I guess, name that was kind of common during that time.  My daddy was six years older than my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] and he lived in New River, Virginia, so he lived further back in the hills than we did then, than in Roanoke [Virginia].  He lived in New River, Virginia, and New River was close to, would be close to, what you--I guess you would know about Blacksburg [Virginia], where VPI [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University] is, that area, Radford [Virginia].  It's right outside of Radford. And that's where my daddy was born, and so he was even further back in the woods, or in the mountains, than we were in Roanoke.
Speaker 1: Now what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's where he was born.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  What was your father's date of birth?
Speaker 2: I have no idea, but as I said before, he was six years older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, 1892 or something?
Speaker 2: Maybe something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can trace--my father had a number of stepmothers.  And I think they all were named Mary, because I know he used to call--it was Mary [Mary Saunders] number one, Mary [ph.] number two, or something like that.  But evidently these women, these grandmothers I guess I will call them, died young.  And my grandfather was a blacksmith and he worked for the Norfolk Western railroad [Norfolk and Western Railway], and he made, he made tools because we had hammers and, we had all kinds of artifacts that he made, you know, in the machine shop, they called it.  And he worked there in the machine shop and he worked in the one, in the branch office up in New River, up in that area, and then he moved down to Roanoke, and that's the way they came down to Roanoke.  My brother, my father was one of eight or nine boys.  And my father was the youngest and so he was, my understanding was that he was just babied by his older brothers and he was quite the dresser.  And some way or the other, my mother got tangled up with him against my [maternal] grandmother's [Lula Ware] wishes and she often made the statement that, you know, it wasn't going to be very much to him because he stayed dressed up all the time.  So, he didn't look like a worker to my grandmother.  But my grandfather died a few months before I was born in 1928.  I do know that, because they often told that story.
Speaker 1: What was his, what was his name?
Speaker 2: His first, his name was Henry and I don't know the rest of it.  He was Henry Saunders, H-E-N-R-Y--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --S-A-U-N-D-E-R-S.
Story_ID: 634996
Speaker 1: Are there any stories in your father's [Stacious Saunders] family that they tell about his father [Henry Saunders] or, or--?
Speaker 2: Basically, as I said before, he was supposed to be quite a creative kind of person, a skilled kind of person.  As I said, he made all kinds of tools that they used on the railroad and it was basically these sons he had.  And many of them left that area of Virginia and went to Pennsylvania, and so they were--they went to the steel mills.  And I guess that was part of my grandfather's influence, you know, being around all the kinds of skilled kind of work that they did.  So they went to the steel mills to work and they were--they kind of settled in Homestead, Pennsylvania.  So--
Speaker 1: Homestead, that's the place that the Homestead Grays baseball team was named for.
Speaker 2: Oh really?
Speaker 1: Near Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh, yeah, right outside of Homestead. Yeah, we used to visit.  So that's--my father took the family to Pittsburgh because his brothers were in Homestead and Pittsburgh, and that's the way he went there.  And my father was a very--my father hated the South, and he hated the South because of the way he felt the South treated black men.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how he was treated that he tells?
Speaker 2: Well, he didn't tell us, it was the whole atmosphere.  He just, he was angry, he was angry.  My father was a follower of Marcus Garvey.  And Marcus--we had, I can remember as a child he had postcards, and they would be of, what's that ship, the Black Star [Black Star Line]?
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and we had those, those pictures were in my father's possession.  He always had his things together, and that was one of the things I remember that he always had, and he always talked about, "I'm going back to Africa, that's what I need to do, I just need to go back to Africa."  And this uncle of mine, Uncle Alfred [Alfred Ware], the one I told you who was my mother's brother, you know, who lived with my [maternal] grandmother [Lula Ware], he was always on the other side, and they used to have terrific arguments.  "You never been to Africa."  I mean, I'm hearing this as a little girl, because I could hang with my daddy and my daddy was--.  My mother [Neoda Saunders Ware] was really religious.  I mean she participated in religion, she went to church and all of that, and my daddy was the opposite.  And so on Sundays, my uncle and my daddy would have their weekly discussions, and often I could stay home from Sunday school with my daddy and I would hear them arguing, and their discussions, you know.  And they would talk about, my daddy would say, you know, "The South is just no place for a black man, a Negro man."  And as he called it, colored man, all those terms they used back then.  And my--and he would just leave Roanoke [Virginia] and go to Pittsburgh and work in the steel mills.  And so then he would get restless for us because he loved all of us dearly and we loved him dearly.  And he'd come home and stay awhile and work around in any job he'd get, like you know in the, again, with Norfolk Western railroad [Norfolk and Western Railway].  And he would do that and then he would get restless again and he'd go back to Homestead or Pittsburgh and he'd go back to the steel mill.  So he just, he couldn't tolerate the South.  He just couldn't tolerate it.  And he really had no faith that anything was going to ever be any better.  He died in 1955, and he died in February 1955.  And that's right, okay, he was sixty-seven, I think it was.  But anyway I remember that the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision that come down, the 1954 decision that come down--
Speaker 1: Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Brown v. Board of Education.  He said, "It's not going to make any difference."  He said, "I'm not going to see anything change.  Nothing's going to happen."  And he said, "You may see it Florence [HistoryMaker Florence Farley], but I don't think, I know I'm not going to see it."  He said, "I'm not sure it's going to happen."  So, he was very different.  I had a very intact, intact family background, you know.  My home--my mother and father life were, but they were, they were very, their personalities were very different.
Story_ID: 634997
Speaker 1: Is there a story--now you said they eloped, but is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: No that was--as I said, we never got any detail.  We never did know that.  All we knew is that they kindly went off and got married, and that my [maternal] grandmother [Lula Ware] was not for it.  And that was about the size of it.  And my daddy [Stacious Saunders] loved my grandmother, but he walked softly around her, because she carried a big stick.  And it was well that he did, I'm sure (laughter), because she never did quite get over my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] getting married, period.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you consider your parents' personalities and their dispositions and their talents and their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I'm a blend, I'm a blend, very much so.  My mother was, my mother and father, they were bright.  I think I got some kind of intellectual power from them, very definitely so.  My daddy went to the third grade, but he could play with numbers like nobody--you know, he could deal with numbers.   He could do the calculations.  He could figure out--if he heard the algebraic concept, he could pick it up and carry it to another level.  He was well read in terms of current events.  My mother was extremely bright.  She had been taught by a woman named Miss Lucy Addison, and Lucy Addison was--the high school [Lucy Addison High School, Roanoke, Virginia] that I attended was named for Miss Addison.  And back in that day, if you studied with Miss Addison--this was public school--you had studied with one of the best.  And she, of course, is renown, you know, as an early educator of southern black woman.  And my mother would say--she read all the time, she was a reader, she loved history.  She was the person in the neighborhood--who with the neighbors--who knew what was going on, you know, could keep them up to date about things related to just any laws or any kind of things that they had to adhere to, you know--policies, when policies would change in the city [Roanoke, Virginia] and all that.  My mother knew all about that and people came to her for that information, because many times in the neighborhood there were people who were illiterate.  And she read for people, she read their insurance policies, and she read things--she was just, she just knew things, you know.  And she was a homemaker, she stayed at home, she didn't work out from home.  But she was a steady person in our little neighborhood, you know.  As I said before, my daddy was restless.  He was not satisfied because he did not believe that he could make a decent living in the South for his family.  And so as I said before, he would periodically leave and go to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  As we got older if he was there in the summer, my sisters, my younger sisters, would go to visit him in the summer.  He came home for Christmas, he came home for summer vacation and he came for Easter, you know.  He came home and all, but he did not like the South at all.  And my mother was more, she didn't give in to the South and its craziness with black people, but she didn't want to, to be out front with anything.  She wanted us to be quiet and to kindly do the best we could under the circumstances.
Story_ID: 634998
Speaker 1: I was just thinking that your [maternal] grandmother [Lula Ware] probably had as much influence on you as your parents [Neoda Ware Saunders and Stacious Saunders].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is that true?
Speaker 2: I would say that.  She, as I said, I was with my grandmother when she died.  I had been to Sunday school.  I must have been like twelve, thirteen years old.  I had on a dress and I knew it annoyed her for us to have on short dresses.  And so this dress had elastic in the waist.  I'll never forget it.  And I pulled it up to make it even shorter.  And she had been ill, and so she was in the bed, and she called me to the bed and she said, "I want you to go home and tell your mother to send me some chicken soup."  As I said, you know, we just lived around the corner.  So I said, "Okay."  And she said, "And when I see your mother, I'm going to tell her to take that hem out of that dress, because that dress is too short."  And when she said that, I pulled it up a little bit more and ran down the steps (laughter).  And I went home and got the soup, brought it back to her, and she said, "No, I want the homemade chicken soup.  This is canned chicken soup."  And so I had to go back, and when I came back I put the tray up on the bed and all, and she fell over, had a heart attack and died right there.  And she, I always disobeyed her.  She was the one I could try what I wanted, my will against her will.  She wanted me to, she would say, "Come scrub the floor for me, come do my kitchen floor."  My mother would send me down there just to scrub the kitchen floor.  I get down there and my uncle got magazines and newspapers and all.  He had his bedroom, he had all these magazines.  I'd go upstairs and get on his bed, read all the Life magazines and all.  She'd be hollering downstairs, "Come down and scrub the floor, I told you.  I'm going to tell your mama on you if you don't come down here and scrub this floor."  She was always telling me she was going to tell my mama on me, so I would go down.  She would have the water fixed.  She made soap, and the soap I think must have had lye in it.  And I told her I wasn't using that soap.  And she said, "I want my floor washed with this soap."  And I would say, "Nah, I'm not going to put that soap, I'm not going to put that lye on my hands, it's going to eat my hands up."  So she, so I would run up to the corner.  My uncle would get off from work, and I knew he would get off the bus, and I would get up on the corner, go to the corner.  And he'd see me out there, and I'd say, "Uncle Alfred [Alfred Ware], Grandma wants me to wash the floor in lye."  I said, "Can you buy me some soap powder?"  And it was a store right on the corner.  He said yeah he would buy me the soap powder.  And I'd go back and wash--make a pail of water, put soap powder in it.  She'd just be fussing and fussing and fussing, and I'd scrub the floor, and that was it.  So, we had those kind of tussles, but she was just so good to us and she just loved us to death.  But, so you know, when the whole atmosphere is warm and loving and everything, those little things don't mean a lot, but they do--they do something to your character.  It strengthens you.  So, yeah she, she had an influence.  And I knew I could take her on, and I sometime- and I won.  I could figure out how to get around her.  So that was good training (laughter).
Story_ID: 634999
Speaker 1: Oh okay.  Now we always ask this question: what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I stayed in Roanoke [Virginia], so Roanoke was my, was really if you like the real sight, okay.  The neighborhood, I lived in Northwest [Roanoke, Virginia].  And the school, my little school [Harrison School, Roanoke Virginia] was in Northwest, and the high school [Lucy Addison High School, Roanoke, Virginia] was in Northwest.  So throughout my childhood, the Northwest was my primary arena.  My mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] went to church in the West End [Roanoke, Virginia].  Her church was in the West End, so periodically I would go to the West End with my mother to something special at her church.  But basically I would go to church in Northwest because my sister, an older sister, went to church in Northwest.  So I knew that little kind of neighborhood.  We could also go downtown.  We could walk.  Where I lived was close enough that we could walk downtown.  And so downtown was where you shopped and so forth, so I would go there.  So basically--and the other place that I could walk to out of Northwest would be to the Northeast [Roanoke, Virginia], and I could go down there to the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association].  So that was kind of my arena.  I didn't go out of that.  We stayed in our neighborhood and we knew where we lived.  On Saturdays, we had public transportation in Roanoke, and on Saturday people who did domestic work used to, they used to ride the bus to the sections of town where the whites lived, you know, where they worked.  And they had to have a pass.  So the pass would be a weekly pass.  And so at the end of Saturday, they get off from work on Saturday about twelve o'clock, and the pass was still good until about eight o'clock at night, or to twelve o'clock at night, I think.  But anyhow, these people would give us passes.  And my mother would let me go bus riding and I would, you know, I had those passes so I'm riding free.  So I, that's the way I was able to go into, quote, the white neighborhoods.  And so I went to South Roanoke [Roanoke, Virginia] and any other part of Roanoke that just was not part of where we lived.  It was not part of--if you want to talk about it in the sights that we saw.  But I did see that other part, because as I said before, we could ride the bus and look out the window and see some other kind of houses and some other kinds of things, you know.  It was in a different kind of neighborhood.  So, we were kind of confined, and yet not confined, but it was always secure.  You always felt good.  I did.  I had what I would call just a lovely childhood.  It was productive.  People were good to me.  People were encouraging to me in my neighborhood.  As I said, my mother was so helpful to everybody, and then she kind of passed that on me, because even when I was a little girl, eight years old, on Sunday afternoon, I did the letter writing for all the older people in the neighborhood.  I'm sure some of them were not all that old, they were maybe illiterate.  But I would, they would be writing back to their families in the country.  And so I would write the letters and my mother would, before I could put them in the mailbox, she would look at them to see that the spelling was all right and so forth.  So I got a chance to, you know, develop writing and spelling, and some of the people, what they were telling me to write in the letters didn't sound right to me, so I kind of wrote it another way, and all that.  And I made pennies.  They paid me, you know, two or three pennies for a letter.  And so some Sundays, I had ten or fifteen cents, and that was big money, because I could go to the movies for ten cents, and that was about all I wanted to do.  So I always had change, as my older brother said.  He said, "We were borrowing money from Florence [HistoryMaker Florence Saunders] when she was a little girl" (laughter).  So I was a little banker.  But that's the way I made the money, you know, but it was a, it was good.  I just remember just things being okay.
Story_ID: 635000
Speaker 1: Now where did--what was the name of the school you started?
Speaker 2: Harrison.
Speaker 1: Harrison.
Speaker 2: Harrison School [Roanoke, Virginia]. And I got put out the first day because I, my birthday is in May.  School started in September, and my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] did not know it, but Virginia had passed a law that you had to be six and a half to go to school, to enter school.  So she sent me to school and I was what, six years and maybe five months.  I was missing about a month or so.  And so they sent me home and my baby sister [Ludie Saunders Sims], I'm next to the baby, and my baby sister had started.  There was a lady who had a little kindergarten, so she was off in this little kindergarten, my mother sent her there.  And there I was at home with my mother.  So my mother taught me to read, taught me to write, she taught me my numbers.  So in January, I was eligible to go to school.  So I went to first grade and my [maternal] uncle [Alfred Ware] gave me money to buy a fountain pen and a bottle of ink.  So I entered first grade knowing how to read and knowing how to write, how to count, and I was writing with green ink with the fountain pen.  And so the teachers spent most of--I spent most of that first semester just sitting around writing and putting things up on the bulletin board, and just doing everything, because what they were teaching, I already knew.  And then I could help the other children, and that's when I started teaching, and that's something I did all the way through school, was help other students in the class.
Speaker 1: Now how big was your school, Harrison?
Speaker 2: Harrison elementary school?  How large?  What, well we had was all the grades, and that's--remember I told you we had the sections, so that's where the Northwest [Roanoke, Virginia] children went.  All the Northwest black children went to that school, Harrison School.  And then we had one other elementary school in Roanoke [Virginia] that was in the Northeast [Roanoke, Virginia].  And that school was where the Northeast children went.  And the Southwest [Southwest Historic District, Roanoke, Virginia] children didn't have an elementary school, so they came to our school.  So Harrison elementary school was kind of large.
Speaker 1: At Harrison, did every grade have its own classroom?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yeah, we had all that.  We had top flight schools.  Because see, in Roanoke black people were not 10 percent of the population, so we were not a threat.  I always considered that black people in Roanoke were not a threat because we had no majority, you know.  We weren't even close to a majority, so we didn't have any numbers.  And so you know if we acted out, you know, it wasn't enough of us to really do very much, kind of.  They kind of left us alone.
Speaker 1: Now you're making an interesting kind of observation here, that the more black people in a community, the harder the white segregation system would have to hold them back in terms of keeping them out of the schools or--
Speaker 2: I made the observation based upon experience.  Because once I came to Petersburg [Virginia] and Petersburg's population was this whole area.  This whole area is heavily black populated.  It was very different, even the kinds of things that I found there.  As I said before, my husband [Richard Farley] tells tales about the kind of--that they had books that were brought over from the white school.  We had our own books.  You know, we didn't have any hand me down books, you know.  We had people in our community who saw to it that we were kind of treated right.  So I'm not saying that we had all we should have had, or what all the white children had, but we didn't see the disparity like the children in Petersburg did, from the stories they told us.  And as far as education was concerned, the grades were there.  Our high school was quite a high school.  Our teachers had, my teachers had master's degrees who taught me, you know, courses and all.  It was just a real difference.
Story_ID: 635001
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite subject in school [Harrison School, Roanoke, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: You know, I just was such a good student, really, I just loved school.  I just loved, loved school.  I went to school every day, got my lessons.  I made all A's.  I made the first grade below an A when I got into high school [Lucy Addison High School, Roanoke Virginia].  And that was in a physics class, and that day the teacher was out of the room and we were in the science class and the kids started beating on the desk, you know, like they were drumming on the desk, and they started doing that, and for some reason I jumped up on the desk and I started dancing to the beat.  And the teacher came in the room (laughter) and there I was standing up there dancing, and he gave me an F.  I never made an F in my life.
Speaker 1: This is in high school?
Speaker 2: This is in high school.  I never made an F.  I never made anything but--in our school system we had E's.  Our grade was excellent and that was something else that was very different.   We got E's--and we got E's, and G was good and F was fair, and P was poor.  And so we, he gave me this low grade and I went home when the report card out and, well, I went home that day and I told my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] about it.  So she said--and I said, "And he says that I'm going to get a poor grade."  So she sought him out.  We didn't have any telephone at the time, but she sought him out, and she told him not to ever do that again, because all he had to do was to tell her that I was dancing on the table.  And she told him, she said, "I can't teach physics, but I can stop her from dancing on tables" (laughter), "so you should have turned that over to me."  And so when I got ready to finish high school--I was the salutatorian of my class, and because I danced on the table, that brought my grades down.  And my mother was even more furious at that time that he had done that.  But I just loved school, I've always loved school.  I thought it was just the best place in the world to be in life.  And I still do, I still--I miss school tremendously.
Story_ID: 635002
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you started off at Harrison School [Roanoke, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you, and you went there for how many years?
Speaker 2: Seven years--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then I took eighth grade.  And we took eighth grade in what we called Harrison annex, and that was just one wing of Harrison where they had the eighth grade.  And then we left Harrison elementary school, eighth grade, and Harrison annex, and we went to Lucy Addison High School [Roanoke, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, Lucy Addison High School?
Speaker 2: High school.
Speaker 1: You were telling us before that Lucy Addison is a famous educator.
Speaker 2: Yes she was the principal of that school, first woman.  And that was the other thing.  All my life I had all this--I thought the only people who taught school were women, because that's all I had were women teachers.  I never had a male teacher until I went to, got in high school.  And I never had a teacher who was married, because in Virginia it was against the law for teachers to marry, so all of my teachers were spinsters, as they call them, and they usually were sisters.  Sisters often went to school, and as I said before, they were just dedicated to being teachers.  And it wasn't until I got to high school that I had a male teacher.  And it wasn't until I got to high school that the law changed and--well, no, this teacher got married and her sister told it, and we spread the word all through the high school that she'd gotten married, and the word got back to the superintendent and they fired her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we, so we never had a married teacher.
Speaker 1: I'm going to just backtrack.  So you started grade school around 1934, would that be right?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: I guess I'm trying to add them up.  My math is all right.
Speaker 2: Okay, whatever.  But I know I--
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-four [1934], now 1934, that would be when you're six.
Speaker 2: Six, yeah, six and a half.
Speaker 1: And in eighth grade, you were thirteen, perhaps?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And I went to high school and I finished.  See, I finished high school in three and a half years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what year was that when you came out of high school?
Speaker 2: I finished high school in 1946.
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-six [1946], okay.
Speaker 2: And see, I, because again, I didn't go to school until I was six and a half, you remember?  So in order to make up that half year, we always considered, I always considered myself a half year behind.  So in order to finish in May rather than waiting until January to finish high school, I took five subjects every semester and then went to summer school and took one subject and that gave me my credits.  You had to have sixteen units, and that I--they gave them to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I finished, I finished high school in three and a half years.
Story_ID: 635003
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Before we get you out of high school [Lucy Addison High School, Roanoke, Virginia], I want to ask you some other questions about teenage life.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And you said you liked to go to the movies, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so would you go often to the movies, I mean--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had one movie place that was not segregated, I mean that was black.  And we had another movie place that was--blacks sat in the balconies and whites sat on the floor.  And that was the Roanoke Theatre [Roanoke, Virginia].  The Virginia Theatre [Roanoke, Virginia] was the black theater.  And our family was considered a movie going family, because my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] went to the movie every Monday.  My dad [Stacious Saunders] went to the movie every Saturday.  And the children went to the movie, you know, sometimes during the week we could go to the movie.  So it was routine, and when we would go to the movie and you'd pay your money, again, this is a small little community, you see, everybody knew--even the girl who took your money at the movie was a black girl--because a black movie, a black owned movie.  And she would say, "Your brother just left here."  Or, "Your sister is sitting down there."  So everybody knew that the Saunders were going to be there when the movies changed.  So, the, let's see, the movies changed on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday.  Then there was Thursday, Friday, then Saturday.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they changed that often?  You'd have the movies just play for a couple of days (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, a couple of days.  They would run for a couple of days and then they'd change.  And sometimes, as I said, when I made my money with writing the letters and all of that, I had good little money, so I could go to the movies.  It cost ten cents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were going to the movies then in the golden age of Hollywood, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  And even--we were such moviegoers that--I went to school every day, there was no doubt about it as I told you, but 'Gone with the Wind'--my mother let me stay out of school [Harrison School, Roanoke, Virginia] to see 'Gone with the Wind.'  And she packed my lunch, packed these little sandwiches, and I stayed out of school and went to see it, because you know it was real long, and I--
Speaker 1: Did you go by yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It was safe, the community was safe.  I'd just walk right down, walk to the movies.  It was down on what we called Henry Street, it was about, I would say about five blocks.
Story_ID: 635004
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what did you think of 'Gone with the Wind'? I just want to know, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved it.
Speaker 1: I never talked to anybody that went to see it when it came out.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was, I was a little girl.  I saw 'Gone with the Wind.'  I stayed out of school [Harrison School, Roanoke, Virginia] that day (laughter).  And it was known that--well, see I was given privileges because I got my lessons.  See, if you were--
Speaker 1: So you were about ten years old, ten or eleven when that came out?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.  But see I was always, they call it frisky.  And so I stayed out of school that day.  I stayed out of school another day because nylon stockings came out and my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] sent me, we had to stand in line to get them, and I stayed out of school.  And they were going to start selling them, I guess at ten o'clock.  And she got me ready very early so I could go and stand in line to get her a pair of nylon stockings, and I did.  So I was given big responsibility, you know, in the family early.  I could go downtown [Roanoke, Virginia] and pay insurances and all, and it was all right.
Speaker 1: But, what did you think of 'Gone with the Wind'?  It had so many implications for black people growing up in the South.  Well, what did you think of it?
Speaker 2: I never thought about that.  I don't think I ever thought about any black and any white.  I don't remember--I went to every Shirley Temple movie.  I never thought about Shirley Temple being white, she was just a little girl.  And I had Shirley Temple dolls.  I never thought about them being anything other than my Shirley Temple dolls, paper dolls.  And I would cut out the dresses and put them on.  I could see the clothes now that she had.  And I just thought she was just a little girl, and I didn't think anything about it.  And the movie, I just thought it was just a movie.  And I never heard anybody talk about it differently.  I think I maybe heard the adults talk about it--Hattie McDaniel being so funny, and they would mock that little McQueen girl and, you know--
Speaker 1: Butterfly [Butterfly McQueen]?
Speaker 2: Butterfly, yeah.  They would talk like she talked and laugh about it, and it was just a movie and it was long and it was, it wasn't negative nor positive, it was as we used to say, it was a good movie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And people liked Clark Gable, so you know it was all right.  We didn't think about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know there were several different Alfred Hitchcock movies that would be considered psychological thrillers or something.  Did you--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't see them.  I never liked any of that.  I never liked any of the--and still don't.  I never liked any gruesome kind of things.  I l- I liked things that had a story.
Story_ID: 635005
Speaker 1: I read, I read, read, read, read.  But it was always a story.  When I was a little girl, when I may have been about eight years old in elementary school [Harrison School, Roanoke, Virginia], I got a prize for reading the most books of any child that summer, from the public library.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I went to the library every day and got a book and read it and took it back.  Read it, took it back (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What were some of your favorite books?
Speaker 1: Oh, boy, I can't remember.  It was one that dealt with this family.  I can't remember the name of it now, but I read all of those books.  In fact I read all the books in the children's section of the library, and the librarian called my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] and told her that she found me over in the adult section, and to tell me not to go over there.  So my mother said, "Well why not?"  So she said, "Well, I can't let her check those books out."  So Mama said, "Why not?"  She said, "They're grown books, and she won't know what she's reading."  And so Mama said, "Well, then let her read it.  She won't know, but it'll be all right for her to read them.  Just let her read them, it'll be all right."  And so I did.  And my mother read--what, true story and all that.  And I didn't read those, I had to get the books from the library, the hardback.   But my mother was an avid reader, even down to that kind of stuff.  And I never did--but she couldn't wait until she got--in fact, she says my middle name was named for a heroine in a series of books that she used to buy, Therese, and that she named me for her.  And I have dishes now that my mother gave me, she collected when she was pregnant with me, because she got a dish and a book at the same time.  I don't know how they merchandised things.  But anyway, she was a reader, and I was connected with books that way, you know.
Speaker 2: You describe your [maternal] uncle [Alfred Ware] having the magazines, Life magazines, and then your father [Stacious Saunders] keeping up with current events and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  And when my father would get the newspaper, the first thing he did was sit right on that front porch and read that newspaper.  And I would say, "Daddy, what's in the paper, what's in the paper, Daddy?"  And he would tell me.
Speaker 2: Did he get the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Pittsburgh, oh you know we got the Pittsburgh Courier.  We got that every week, and the Journal and Guide Afro [Norfolk Journal and Guide; New Journal and Guide]--but the Pittsburgh Courier, and she--and the way he stay- hung out in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], oh yeah, yeah, we got that.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Every week.
Story_ID: 635006
Speaker 1: So in high school [Lucy Addison High School, Roanoke, Virginia], now had, do you remember when you first heard of psychology?
Speaker 2: Not in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never heard of psychology until I--I heard of psychiatry, but I never heard of psychology until I came to Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So when you were in high school, did you have a vocational aspiration?
Speaker 2: I knew I was coming to college.  I knew I would go to college, and so that was something I pursued.  And I knew that there was no Pell Grant, there was no money really, and so I knew I had to get scholarships.  And so my whole purpose was to make good grades, because we were told if you make good grades, you get a scholarship, and so I said okay, then I'm going to get good grades.  So I was not, I didn't get involved in a lot of the social stuff in high school.  Dances were not anything I particularly wanted to do, and I wasn't too much into sports.  I would hang out a little bit, you know, with the team, because some of the guys were kids in the neighborhood, things like that.  But I was not all caught up on that.  But I, like I was editor of the yearbook, and I did whatever it was that was going to enhance me so I could go to college.  And I just always knew I was going to go to college, and that I had to work to go, and the only way to get to college was to get some money and to get the scholarships.  And so that was my destiny.  So I was not too interested in--I said, oh I can be a lawyer if I want to be.  I liked science.  I made to study--I finally decided I was going to pick biology.  But I'm--it was more about going to college.
Story_ID: 635007
Speaker 1: Who were some of your, the key teachers and mentors that you had along the way?
Speaker 2: Oh boy.  Well I, as I said, I had just outstanding teachers.  They told me after I got older that we were outstanding students and that in my high school [Lucy Addison High School, Roanoke, Virginia]--we stayed in high school, we stayed with the same teacher two years.  And I really, I still believe in that.  I still believe in kids in elementary school spending as much time with the same teacher as possible.  And all of this moving around from all of these different people and all of that, I just don't, have never bought it and still don't buy it.  But anyway, we stayed two years.  And we knew, you knew, that if you went to Miss Brown [ph.], you knew that the next teacher was Miss Hackley [ph.], and the next teacher--so right off the bat you knew your teachers, okay.  When I got to seventh grade [at Harrison School, Roanoke, Virginia], I had this teacher, Miss Shaw [ph.], and Miss Shaw had just come back from Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], had just gotten her degree, and they hired her.  And so they let her teach us, and we were seventh graders.  Well, we just fell in love with her.  The first thing, she smelled good (laughter).  She dressed pretty, and she was young.  And she was a music major and she tells a story now that she was scared to death because she had no idea--but they had told her that we were so smart, and she said she soon learned that I could teach the class.  And so she kind of had me as the co-teacher, and we forged a relationship that we kept all the way up until she died.  But she would let me do--we had plays and she brought in a part, the arts, into our lives, and we had not had that before.  Those other teachers were just science and math and history and geography, you know.  And she brought the arts into our life, and that was nice.  And then we went to eighth grade and we started hearing the story that if you're going to college, you're going to have to learn, you will have to be prepared.  So most of our teachers had gone to Virginia State, since that was the only state school for black people basically.  So many of--they all had learned from these teachers down here.  And so they--like the English teacher--"We're going to get a notebook together.  When you get to Virginia State, you're going to have Miss So and So, or you're going to have Mr. So and So, and you're going to have to know this, so you may as well learn it now, because they're going to expect you to know it."  And so we would keep these notebooks.  And history, I had a history notebook.  I had an English notebook, history notebook and a math notebook.  And when we came--and I decided to come to Virginia State because at that time the State of Virginia was giving scholarships, tuition scholarships, to the first two high ranking students in the, from every high school in Virginia.  And so I was the salutatorian, so I got that scholarship, and that was, you know a big help, to Virginia State.  And the--I guess it's something, like, you know, how they spot kids early now.  And they talk about, you know, if you do what you have to do--
Story_ID: 635008
Speaker 1: So all right.  High school [Lucy Addison High School, Roanoke, Virginia]--so, we- you know, when you think about it, you're getting ready to go to--you're focused on Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  You don't know exactly what you're going to be, but you're going to go to college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Go to college.
Speaker 1: So, now, was graduation a big deal?  Did everybody come to your graduation, you know, in your family?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  See, I was the salutatorian.  I got the program in there, you can take a picture of my program.  I was the salutatorian, I gave the address.  We had to write our speeches, and I made the title, the theme was making choices.  That was our theme, making choices.  And I had to speak on Florence Nightingale made a choice.  See, she made a choice to do what she did.  And that was the whole theme.  And each one of us had somebody, and we had to write the speech and then we had to stand up and give it and all, and they said I did a beautiful job, you know.  And I was just enthralled with it all.  And so then I took a, I was a senior and I still needed, I knew I needed money, as I said before, everywhere I could get it.  And they decided, the Burrell Memorial Hospital, that was a black hospital in Roanoke [Virginia], and they needed someone to work as a nurse's aide to work there.  And they recommended me, and that was the first time I ever heard of a letter of reference, that I had to have a letter of reference to get a job.  And anyway, I got the, the principal gave me a letter of reference.  And see, in my high school, as I said, the high school was named for a woman.  Most of the teachers were women, and my principal was Sadie V. Lawson, and she was a woman.  And so I just, when I heard later in life that, you know, women were second class citizens, I didn't know anything about that, because they'd been first class as far as my life was concerned, you know.  I guess the same way I heard, when I heard the black people were second class citizens, they'd always been first class in my life, so I didn't, that never dawned on me until later.
Story_ID: 635009
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have any national heroes then? I mean on the national level (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, Alice, Miss Alice Turner [Alice L. Turner] was our history teacher.  She'd come to Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and Miss Alice Turner had studied with Luther Foster.  And maybe you know that he was one of Carter G. Woodson's, quote, boys. And Miss Alice Turner had studied with Foster, and Carter G. Woodson had written this history book.  And at that time, I took Negro history in high school as an elective, and the whole course.  And she taught it, and as I said before, she was a student of Luther Jackson, Luther Foster Jackson [sic. Luther Porter Jackson, Sr.], and he was one of Carter G. Woodson's boys.  And so we just had a direct line to him.  And she would, taught from that book.  She said this is the only history book written, and we used it for our textbook.
Speaker 1: This is 'The Negro in Our History' [Carter G. Woodson], right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: By Carter G. Woodson.
Speaker 2: That's it, Carter Woodson's book.  And so that was that book, and I used that, we took that, and I took that course as an elective.  And it was a full course and we--Negro History Week [Black History Month] in Roanoke [Virginia] was a big week at that high school, Lucy Addison High School [Roanoke, Virginia].  They had programs all during the week, and your parents, people--everybody came to that for a twelve o'clock session.  So you'd have speakers in and all, and I remember that my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] would come over. And it was a little candy store on the corner, and they would buy homemade candy, make homemade candy, and they would buy this homemade candy.  And so at night we would have during Negro History Week, we had the candy from the candy store for our dessert.  And I used to just--all--as far as I was concerned, all that was sweet (laughter) just sweet times and sweet candy and all of that stuff.  So it was just a very warm, pleasant kind of experience for us with that.  But we had direct connection, so, yeah, the few women that were in history books, as I said before--national--I got it and we got it from that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we got it directly from that.
Story_ID: 635010
Speaker 1: So you're working at the hosp- the--
Speaker 2: Burrell Memorial Hospital [Roanoke, Virginia].
Speaker 1: --Burrell Memorial Hospital during the summer.
Speaker 2: Well, no, after school [Lucy Addison High School, Roanoke, Virginia].
Speaker 1: After school, okay.
Speaker 2: After school, that last semester I worked at the Burrell Memorial Hospital after school.  I got that little job, made all of twelve dollars a week, and saved all of that money, so I had that money.  I'm working now hard to try to get this money for college.  My brother [Earl Saunders], little brother, my baby brother, he was next, I was under him.  He was the eighth child, I was the ninth child.  And my brother went in the [U.S.] Army.  He was drafted right after he was eighteen, and he and I had a spat, we had a spat before he went in, and he was still young enough, and I'm young enough--we both hurt because we had this breakup with each other.  And so he wrote me a letter and told me that he was so sorry, but he was going to make up for it and he was going to help me to go to college.  And so he said, "I'm going to send you an allotment every month."  And so he sent me ten dollars out of his twenty-one dollars.  He gave me ten dollars a month.  And I had read, you know, in the Depression [Great Depression], how the banks failed.  I read that in some--I learned that in some class, so I decided that I couldn't put my money in the bank, and I bought postal certificates, postal stamps.  And I had a little book, and I could go to the post office and I'd give them my ten dollars and they'd give me a stamp, and I stamped it in this book.  And so when I got ready to go to college I turned all my stamps in.
Speaker 1: Was it similar to savings bonds or something like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, similar to savings bonds, they were postal stamps.
Speaker 1: And now your brother was sending you money while he was--
Speaker 2: That money--that money would come from the government (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was he in the war, World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was World War II.
Speaker 1: So this is like really in the--
Speaker 2: Forties [1940s].
Speaker 1: You graduated in '46 [1946].
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is like '44 [1944] and '45 [1945], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I had all that money when I got ready to go.  I was kind of wealthy there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was your [maternal] grandmother [Lula Ware] still alive when you graduated?
Speaker 2: No, my grandmother died, she died.  My grandmother died--
Speaker 1: How old were you when your grandmother died?
Speaker 2: For some reason I thought I was about ten or twelve, wasn't I, I think?  I think--yeah, because she, my sister had gone to nursing school.  She died like '37 [1937], '39 [1939], something around there, in the late '30s [1930s], yeah.  Yeah, she didn't know much about me except the elementary school [Harrison School, Roanoke, Virginia].  She wasn't living when I went to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, I forgot to ask about what the timing was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the timing, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right. So, over the summer did you continue to work at the hospital after you graduated?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, yes, yes, yeah, I did, I did.  I continued that job because I worked on the shift from three to eleven.  So I would go to class in high school.  That was the second semester, that's right.  And my brother--the hospital was close to the high school, but kind of far where I lived, and so I got, I didn't get off work until eleven o'clock.  And so my older brother, who was older than I, would have to come and pick me up and walk me back home.  So that his job.  Wherever he was, my brother, he knew, he stopped and he came and got me and took me home.  And if he wanted to go back wherever he had been or going, he knew it was okay, but he would have to stop and do that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It sounds like you had a lot of people around you that were protecting you and helping you.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, this is just, that's the way it was.  It was closely knit.  Everybody--and that's just the way it was.  I thought everybody had it, but I know they didn't. Looking back I know they didn't, but I, but I did.  I had just encouraging and loving and safe, and all of the things.
Story_ID: 635011
Speaker 1: How did you like Virginia State?  Now, you come across to this, you said it was kind of a cultural shock or a difference when you left (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the first thing to happen to me with Virginia State--when--you know you didn't come down and you didn't waste any money coming down to see about the college, okay.  So, you got admitted, everything was done by paper, and you got admitted.  So I applied, and I applied for a job, so I got the job and they wrote and told me that I had my job making twenty-five cents an hour, and I would be working in the infirmary.  And they told me where I would live and so forth.  In the meantime, my daddy [Stacious Saunders] one morning was reading his paper--no, my daddy brought the mail in, and he said, "Florence [HistoryMaker Florence Farley], you have some mail from the college."  And I said, "Oh really?"  He said, "Yeah, but I don't understand it."  He said, "It's moved, the college has moved."  And I said, "Oh?"  He said, "Yeah, the college is in Petersburg."  And I said, "Daddy, the college is in Ettrick, Virginia."  And he said, "No, it's in Petersburg.  It says right here on this letter, I don't know what that is."  And so I looked at it and I didn't know what it was, but sure enough the address had changed, and it said Virginia State College [Virginia State University].  And I got the old envelope, the one that I'd gotten before, and it said Virginia State College for Negroes, Ettrick, Virginia.  This one said Virginia State College, Petersburg, Virginia, so I was thoroughly confused, okay.  So he said--my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] said, "Well, are you--is she still going?"  And so he said, "Well I guess so, I don't know."  He said, "Maybe they'll tell us something about it later."  So we didn't talk about it anymore, but in the meantime, everything started coming from Petersburg, Virginia and told us where to come.  And the train station was the same, and also my daddy had friends on the railroad and they, the train came up and down the road, so they knew the school was still where it was before, and that the train station was still where it was, so they thought I'd be all right.  So anyway we came on down.  Now, to finish that story, one of my teachers, when we got here, told us that what happened.  The General Assembly [Virginia General Assembly] had dropped the name for Negroes from Virginia State, so it had become just Virginia State College, they dropped that name.  And see, in Virginia, July 1, all the new, all the General Assembly changes would become effective.  Also what happened was that Ettrick, Virginia was the mailing address, and Ettrick is in Chesterfield County [Virginia], which is where Virginia State is physically located.  However, they had a little post office in Ettrick, and because of the volume of mail that they got at Virginia State, the post office was going to be upgraded to a class one post office.  And so the business people at the college said, "Well if you're going to be upgraded because of the volume of mail that comes, you know, to us, that we pick up from you, then you need to hire a black, a Negro, a colored man, to work in the post office."  And they said, "No, we're not going to have that, not in Chesterfield County, we're not going to have that."  So they said okay.  So what they did was they came to the Petersburg post office and they said, "If we let you--."  They had black postmen in Petersburg, and so they said, "We'll let our mail come to you," and so they did that.  And so that was the quiet things that you just wouldn't know about that were going on as far as segregation was concerned, you know, and discrimination was concerned.  But there were all kinds of little battles, you know.  Something as seemly as trivial--I mean, something as trivial that wasn't trivial.
Story_ID: 635012
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm, I'm confused now, in a sense because I don't--now is Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University] actually in Petersburg [Virginia]? I thought it was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Petersburg.  Virginia State is in Chesterfield [Chesterfield County, Virginia].
Speaker 1: It's in Chesterfield?
Speaker 2: Always been in Chesterfield.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But they always say it's in Petersburg, but the post office--
Speaker 2: Petersburg is the post office, that's the post office box.  Our mailing address--so until just last year from 1946 until last year, the mailing address of Virginia State was Petersburg, Virginia, although it is physically, always has been physically in Chesterfield.  And the little post office that serves that part of Chesterfield is Ettrick [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, at any rate, so you--
Speaker 2: So I came down here and first thing that hit me was the train station.  I came down to Petersburg and got in the train station and I said--I just had a superior attitude about everything from Roanoke [Virginia], and when I saw the train station in Petersburg, I just thought it didn't meet my standards.  It wasn't as nice as the one we had in Petersburg.  Both of them were segregated.
Speaker 1: You mean in Roanoke.
Speaker 2: In Roanoke, you know.  But Roanoke was just, I just say everything in Roanoke was better to me than in Petersburg.  So when I seen that, I got on the phone and I called home.  It was six o'clock in the morning that the train would come down from Roanoke.  And I told my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders], I told her I didn't like it.  And she said, "Where are you?"  So I told her I was in the train station.  And she said, "Well, I didn't send you to the train station, but to school, so you go up on the campus and see what the school is like, and so then you let me know, hear?"  So I said, okay.  And so I did and I fell in love with the school, and that was the end of that.  And I'll always have that.
Story_ID: 635013
Speaker 1: What did you decide to major in?
Speaker 2: Well, the first semester I was a biology major, and I met this--I liked it and I didn't like it, but I didn't like the first semester of school because it was a repetition of high school [Lucy Addison High School, Roanoke, Virginia], and everything those teachers told us was true.  We had everything they were teaching us in those notebooks, see, that I had developed when I was in high school, and I was kind of bored.  And so I was kind of--I could do little, I didn't have to do much, and I didn't want to do very much.  I think I, I really think I was burnt out when I look back on it.  I would think that more than anything else, but I was also bored.  So I met this girl from Portsmouth, Virginia, and she told me that she was taking this class and she said it's a real good class.  She said, "You should come, you ought to come in this class," she said, "because it's really good."   And I said, "What is it?"  And she said, "Psychology." And I said, "Oh yeah?"  She said, "Yes it's a really good class."  She said, "Some biology is in it, and a whole lots of other things, but it's really good."  So she said, "You come by this room," and she said, "and you can hear the teachers, because he's real loud, and you can listen, you can hear what he's talking about."  So I did, and there was this guy, Walter Wrigley, Walter Wrigley.  And he was just carrying on, he was just teaching.  Oh, he had so much life, and what he was talking about I had never heard before and all.  And I just kept on listening and listening, and I would stand--so she said, "You going to change your major?"  And I said, "I don't know," I said, "I don't know, I've got to see."  So I did, I changed my major to psychology.  And she and I were the only two girls in the department, everybody else was male.  So that turned out well, too, because we became the darlings of the department and kept on getting up in psychology ever since, ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what was it about psychology that appealed to you?
Speaker 2: I can remember the discussions that we used to have about psychology, and because my roommate was a sociology major--and we compared the kinds of things we studied in psychology and the topics that we studied, and it was, I think it was more the whole perspective that they had of really, a positive kind of affect about a human being and that human beings were just, they just kind of taught us that they were just made to be this actualized organism, you know.  Whereas, with the biology we were just kind of studying the tangible parts, you know, the systems and so forth.  But here was this intangible thing that human beings could be, and could become, and you could help them to become all of this.  And at that time the mental health, mental illness part of it was not part of it.  It was just the healthy growth of a person.  And as I said, it was not just their physical body, and I had never heard that.  Nobody ever told me that anybody bothered with that, and maybe if I had listened to my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] a little bit more when she was in church, you know--they were talking about that kind of growth and all, maybe I would have listened.  But I was listening more to my daddy [Stacious Saunders] who didn't go to church, and so I didn't get the message and all about it.  So I was just fascinated with it, I was just fascinated that you could help a person to be so actualized, and so how they show their emotions and how they lived with each other and how they grew and developed, you know, from a psychological point of view.  It was just fascinating to me.  And I, until I guess about two years ago, from the time I took my first course in psychology, I never went to bed at night without reading something in psychology.  And it just stayed, what I wanted to do and what I wanted to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never veered from it.
Story_ID: 635014
Speaker 1: Now did you get, get a chance to--I mean were you close to Professor Wrigley [Walter Wrigley]?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, very, very close to him.  And he, he was a fascinating person.  He had gone to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], got his bachelor's [degree] and master's [degree] at Howard.  He went to Howard at the same time that Kenneth Clark and Mamie Clark [Mamie Phipps Clark] went to Howard.  So he knew them.
Speaker 1: Now this is the famous Dr. Kenneth Clark?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Kenneth Clark (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Whose experiments on psychology was using the--just explain who they are for the people.
Speaker 2: Oh I'm sorry.  Kenneth Clark who did the, and his wife who did the study on the dolls and children's attitudes towards race and themselves and that whole idea of self.  And their findings were cited in the [U.S.] Supreme Court's decision [of Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  It helped, it brought at least that point of view in that black children had lower self esteem as a result of the negative things about themselves as a result of discrimination, and all the poisonous kinds of effects of segregation and discrimination.  And they are the ones who started, who took the kids from Arkansas--no, where was it--Arkansas, no, wow, yeah, Arkansas.  They took those kids in at the clinic they have in New York [New York]--so he and Mamie Clark, yeah.   And they were students at Howard.  Howard was the place for psychology students to--for black people, black kids, to study psychology.  And Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] was the place also, because there was an exchange between Howard and Virginia State in terms of teachers.  Many people who taught at Howard came from Virginia State or Virginia State teachers went there.  So there was a close bond there.  Because my other mentor Dr. Keturah Whitehurst who got her Ph.D. from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and who was a clinical psychologist--Walter Wrigley was an educational psychologist, and Keturah Whitehurst was a clinical psychologist.  They all were classmates of Kenneth Clark and Mamie Clark.  And so there's a group of black psychologists who came out of that school and were trained by Sumner [Francis Sumner] who was one of the first black psychologists in the country, so that we have that kind of legacy.  Keturah Whitehurst, who as I said was a clinical psychologist, she went to Harvard, and she was taught by a guy named Boring [Edwin Boring].  Boring wrote the first history of psychology that was ever used, that was used in all the schools, and he wrote the history of psychology.  And Boring was taught by Titchener [Edward B. Titchener] and Titchener was taught by Wundt [Wilhelm Wundt].  So we all tell people that we are descendants, right, from Wundt, and Wundt was the father of psychology.  He set up the first laboratory in psychology in Leipzig, Germany.  And so we have a direct bloodline, and we used to say, "I got it from this one who got it from this one who got it--," and we could go right back to Wundt.
Story_ID: 635015
Speaker 1: So that's how small, that's how young psychology is, too, you see, and that's how small that whole circle was.  It wasn't a whole lot of people studying psychology, and I did it and didn't know what I was doing, because when I got out of college [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], after having studied psychology, I didn't have a job.  And I had no way of making a living, and there I had gone off and my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] thought I was going to be a teacher.  And everybody who came home from college, taught school.  And I had a sister, an older sister who was a nurse.  So she knew I hadn't gone to nursing school.  So they just assumed, you know, that I was going to teach.  And I don't know what I thought I was going to do, because I didn't know how anybody made any money off of psychology.  And so unfortunately, that was 1950 and things were as bad economically in 1950 as they are now.  And so I, there I was with a B.S. degree in psychology and no job.  And I wrote to every county and city in the State of Virginia and sent my application in to try to get a job and nobody hired me because they had people who had gone to school to study to be teachers, and I hadn't.  So I had what they called a temporary license to teach social science, but not a regular teaching certificate like the other kids had.  So I was just really sad (laughter) that summer.
Story_ID: 635016
Speaker 1: Before, well I want to go back to Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] for a little bit--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --just to ask you about--what other activities were you engaged in at Virginia State, and were there any other teachers or students that you remember that are (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I had, Virginia State was okay.  But as I said, I had done all the studious stuff in high school [Lucy Addison High School, Roanoke, Virginia] so that was not one of my things.  And so I, I discovered Petersburg [Virginia] and so I decided, oh my goodness, this is interesting, because Petersburg was just fun socially.  They had clubs and they had jam sessions and all the jazz you wanted to hear, you could come to Petersburg and you come hear it.  And Ruth Brown would come to Petersburg and Louis Armstrong would come to Petersburg.  And everything that came to Petersburg--I came, I became a friend to a person who lived in Petersburg.  And so Petersburg became a place where I visited often.  So I could come over here for weekends.  So I spent more time socially in Petersburg than I did on campus.  I joined the sorority, as folks did.  I belonged to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: What sorority?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What sorority?  Now don't skip past it, what's the name of it?
Speaker 2: Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Alpha Kappa Alpha, I joined that.  In fact I joined that my sophomore, I pledged my sophomore year and made the sorority.  And my [maternal] uncle Alfred [Alfred Ware], the same uncle, he was the one who footed the bill for that, so that was no financial problem for me getting into the sorority, paying my dues for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And went on line with the young ladies--they were very much like, we considered ourselves more mature than the children from the rural areas because we were from the city, and we kind of got in with the northern kids from the cities in the North and the few cities in Virginia, like Norfolk, Richmond, Roanoke and Petersburg.  We kind of, the children from the county, you know, we just thought they were another set of people, and so we were not, we had done so much.  You know, why should I be on the yearbook and I'd already been the editor of the yearbook?  Why should I be--I had done everything that they were doing.  They were just, it was just recycling, kind of.  Now, I was, I loved the music on campus.  You know, the choirs, and that was fascinating to me.  Again, I was not impressed with football and basketball so that was not part of my life.  I loved the plays, the drama club and things like that.  Anything that I had not experienced, I was for it.  But if I had already done it, I wasn't doing it again.  And so I told you, I hadn't done much socially, so I got involved and remember that this was a time when the veterans came to Virginia, I mean to school.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, see I hooked up with those guys (laughter).  They had a check every month, and they would take us and buy sandwiches, buy us sandwiches and sodas and so we didn't fool with the college boys.  So, I had friends, you know, in the class with the college boys, but we didn't date them.  So I went around with guys that were older than I.
Story_ID: 635017
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just talking about the--there is a difference in maturity level (laughter) at that age, you know, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: At any rate, well, so I just want to go back over, you know, college.  Who was the president of Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] in those days?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Luther Foster [Luther H. Foster, Sr.] was our president when I came to Virginia State.
Speaker 1: Well, that's the historian [Luther Porter Jackson, Sr.], that's the historian we were talking about.
Speaker 2: No, not that Foster.  This is Luther Foster, who was a businessman, and they made him president and so he was kind of like interim.  No, he died, he died in office.  And so Dr. Daniel, Robert Prentiss Daniel, became the president, and he was the one who gave us our diploma in 1950.  And he was the longest serving president, and he was an educational psychologist, also.  So he kind of favored our department and all, all through the years.  And he was, we always considered him one of us.  And after Dr. Daniel died, we had a string of presidents that didn't get along with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We'll get to that a little later, I guess (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 635018
Speaker 1: So you're trying to find a, you're teaching school after you graduate?
Speaker 2: After I've graduated.
Speaker 1: Back in Roanoke [Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: Back in Roanoke, I'm trying to get a job.  And as I said, economic times were rough.  My daddy [Stacious Saunders] had gone back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], it was one of his last trips to Pittsburgh.  He had gone back to Pittsburgh to work, and I'm looking for a job.  So I went to, I was in downtown Roanoke one day and saw one of my classmates from Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], Nadine [ph.].  And Nadine said--and I started chatting, and I said, "What are you doing?"  And so she said, oh, she said, "I'm working in a school for little children, like you ought to be working with."  And I said, "Oh?" And she said, "Yeah."  She said, "They are this--."  You know, she didn't know the language.  And she said, "But I work there, but I'm going to give it up."  She said, "Because I got a job."  She was from Rocky Mountain [Virginia], and she said, "I got a job over there teaching home economics, and I'm going to start that in September."  She said, "Oh, maybe you could take that job, because these little children, something's wrong with them, and that's what you studied, psychology."  So she said, "Let me tell Miss James [Leah Knoche James], let me tell the lady about you."  So I said, "Oh?" And she said, "Yeah, I'll call you."  So she did, and so she said--so she told me to go down, and it was right outside of Roanoke, and Miss James told me to come down, and I went down to this little school.  And this was Bellevue School in Hollins, Virginia.  And these were developmentally, what we would call today developmentally delayed children.  And they would be called severely--back in that day that were called severely mentally retarded children.  And they were white, and she, Miss James, was impressed that I had gone to college and had a degree in psychology.  And she had finished college, she had finished college in Ohio and--
Speaker 1: Okay, now the students were white, or the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the children were white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The children were white.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And so she told me, she said, "Oh, then you can be a teacher."
Speaker 1: And that was unusual in Virginia then, right, for a black person to teach white (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, she said I wasn't going to tell anybody I was a teacher.  See?  She said, "I'm going to give you these five little boys and they're yours and you're going to have to be their teacher."  She said, "But you can't tell anybody that you're their teacher because black people can't teach white people in Virginia."  So I said, "I don't care as long you pay me the money (laughter), you can call me anything you want to call me."  Really, I guess it was my attitude.  I was never so relieved in all my life.  So she paid $130 a month and I worked every day except Sunday, every day except Sunday, and I had five little boys who were severely mentally retarded, we thought, and discovered as I worked with them that one little boy, Butch [ph.] was autistic.  And I didn't know it, we didn't know anything about autism at the time, but I know that's what it was.  But anyway, I worked with them and stayed there a year.  And she and I fought like cats and dogs.  She was--I don't know why I thought I could take over that lady's school, but she would tell me what to do and I would tell her I wasn't going to do it, and we just kind of had--but we liked each other, we did.  She liked me and I liked her, Miss James.  And I liked them to the extent that they came to my wedding when I got married down here and that was quite something to see, all these retarded--because they, the kids were severely retarded so they had what we called the stigmata.  There was the microcephalic with the big head, the hydrocephalic, and cretin--and just children, they had the physical stigmata, so you could quote look at them and see that there was something going on.  And so that was quite something when they came to my wedding with all the gifts and things that they brought me.  But I loved them, and they loved me, and Miss James and I loved each other, too, and kept a good relationship for years.  Whenever I went home I would see her and all, and she watched my progression and was very--believed in me.  And it was another example of that, but I didn't have to give up myself, you know, for that to happen.  And I think maybe that's what happened to me all my life, is that I could be myself and forge good relationships with people.  You know, they didn't try to consume me and I didn't try to consume them.  And so it worked out well.
Story_ID: 635019
Speaker 1: But anyway, I did that for a year, and then I realized that what psychology--started realizing what psychology was about, I started reading more and seeing that people actually worked to be psychologists and that in order to do that you had to have a master's degree.  So, I saw a brochure about getting commissioned for the United States Army, and if you had a college degree you could, you know, go into the Army.  It was the women's army, Women's Army Auxiliary Corps [Women's Army Corps].  At that time it was called the WAAC.  So I applied and I got--was asked to come to Fort Lee, Maryland [sic. Fort Lee, Virginia] for an interview and I reported to that.  I had to take several examinations, several comprehensive tests, physical exam and everything.  And at the time they said I was too, I was underweight, I was too small.  And they said they would keep my application on file.  But I didn't meet the standards because I didn't have enough weight, so I came on back home and had my little job, I kept my job there.  And then out of the blue I got a notice to come to Fort Lee for a physical exam.  And I went down there and they told me to start eating candy bars (unclear), drinking milk shakes and all of that that I had to gain.  It was six pounds, I think, because I was under a hundred.  And so I had to get over a hundred pounds.  So I did all of that, and my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] started trying to feed me stuff and all, but the weight didn't come, I didn't gain the weight.  But I came on down to Fort Lee and took the physical and they let me in anyway, underweight and all.  But they let me in because I passed all the other tests.  And so I got in and got commissioned as second lieutenant (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this is in 1951?
Speaker 1: No, 1950.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950].
Speaker 1: No, '51 [1951], it was '51 [1951], because I finished college [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] in '50 [1950], and this is '51 [1951].
Speaker 2: You went in as a first lieutenant?
Speaker 1: Second lieutenant.
Speaker 2: Second lieutenant?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  I went in as a second lieutenant.  I came out as a first lieutenant.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And there I was--
Story_ID: 635020
Speaker 1: So what were your duties?
Speaker 2: Well, the first six months, I had to learn how to be a soldier.  And so it was not--was like officers training school.  And so after the first six months they said they would assign us and you had to have, you would have three choices of anywhere in the United States and Hawaii that you could go to ask for an assignment.  So my friend and I, Doris Carr [Doris Carr Waddell], she was from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  There were only ten blacks out of a hundred.  There were, yeah, ten of us.  They washed out five, so in that graduating class, I think there were five blacks left.  And so we had seen that Truman [President Harry S. Truman], of course, had ordered the integration of the [U.S.] military, so it was, quote, integrated.  But all the segregation was around Petersburg [Virginia] and on posts, and attitudes were still segregated and so forth.  So that was the WAAC [Women's Army Auxiliary Corps] training school.  So all--in order to--all the trainees, every eight weeks, new recruits came in, and they had to be trained for the Army, Women's Army Corps.  So my friend and I decided, Doris Carr and I, decided that there were no training officers, black training officers, at Fort Lee [Virginia].  So we were going to ask to stay at Fort Lee.  And so we put down Fort Lee for all three of our choices.  And so when the major came down to interview us, I know she could smell a rat (laughter), but she let us stay at Fort Lee, and all our friends went everywhere, all the nice places, California, you know, and all the places you could go, Hawaii and all.  We stayed at Fort Lee.  And so I became a basic training officer.  And so every eight weeks, I got a new group of recruits, and you had to take them through the routines again.  And I'm at this time--we were signed up, when we signed up, we signed up for twenty years, that was what it was.  But I guess after we were in for a year they changed the rule and said that we could get out, we could resign our commission, but we had signed up for twenty years.  So when I found out that I could get out--and I got tired of every eight weeks going out in the field and staying for a week, every eight weeks, sleeping in tents and eating out of metal dishes and all of that.  I said, you know I don't think this life is for me (laughter).  I don't think I'm going to stay out here twenty years.  So I stayed two and a half years and I resigned my commission, stayed at Fort Lee.  But I went off to training schools and I went off for recruiting, did a lot of stuff in between, but that was my base.  And so I left the [U.S.] Army on a Friday, and I was at graduate school at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] in psychology on Monday, so I had my money again.  And they also gave us a G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  So I had the G.I. Bill and I had saved my money, saved money, and I had stacked up on pencil and paper and all that kind of stuff, so I was ready for school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went up there to get my master's.
Story_ID: 635021
Speaker 1: And basically the, were the same teachers there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dr. Whitehurst [Keturah Whitehurst] and Dr. Wrigley [Walter Wrigley] were waiting for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he became my graduate advisor.  I was the only full time graduate student in the department.  So they tossed me around just like, I mean, they just took possession of me.  And both of them decided--as I told you, he was an educational psychologist, and she was a clinical psychologist, and both of them decided that that's what I was going to be.  So interestingly enough, I got the degree because, again, in the State of Virginia, Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] couldn't offer a clinical degree and they offered an ed. psych [educational psychology] degree and master's degree.  But she made arrangements for me to go to Maryland, to Crownsville State Hospital [Crownsville Hospital Center, Crownsville, Maryland] to do an internship.  So I got the degree in clinical--I went off with the internship that she kind of helped me to guide and development, and I went off and did the internship in clinical in Maryland, and then I was ready to be employed.  And that's when I got employed at Central State Hospital in Petersburg [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what year is this now?
Speaker 2: This is '50 [1950]--wait a minute, this is '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1955.  Before we leave the master's, what was your thesis about?
Speaker 2: Thesis, my thesis was, I called, always called my thesis an appendix to Dr. Wrigley's doctoral degree, doctor of dissertation.  He had gone to the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia].  He had done all of his work before at University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], but he became, his vision became poor, and he could not do what he had to do, read some microfiche, all the stuff he had to do.  So he didn't never get his degree from Minnesota, but he got his Ed.D.  He got an Ed.D. from the University of Virginia after all of those years of teaching at Virginia State and being head of the psych department and all, and he got this degree.  They claim that he was the first black to get a doctorate degree from the University of Virginia, but there's a little debate about that.  But anyway, he did, and he did his dissertation on predicting academic success in certain fields of black students.   And he decided that I should do my thesis on some additional fields, but following the same kind of paradigm that he did.  It was a very statistically oriented kind of study, and it was, it was a sound thesis, but he didn't give me any choice.  I had to kindly do what he wanted me to do, and I did.
Story_ID: 635022
Speaker 1: While I was at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] for my master's degree, I lived off campus, and I lived with Ms.--Mrs. Altona Johns [Altona Trent Johns].  She was a music teacher, and she was the wife of Dr. Vernon Johns.  And Dr. Vernon Johns, as you know, was a renowned, as I consider renowned minister.
Speaker 2: Now, yeah--
Speaker 1: He was at Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, go ahead.  Talk about it.
Speaker 1: Oh, Dr. Johns.  He went to Oberlin.  He tells a story of how when he first went to college, he went there, he was a janitor.  And he was back in the back of the room cleaning up doing his janitorial services.  And they were having this assembly, and they asked a question.  It was during a time when assemblies were basically question and answer periods.  And they would ask a question and whatever the question was, none of the students who were attending the college knew it.  But he, as I said, was a janitor and he raised his hand, and he did.  And he eventually was permitted to go to college there, and I forgot the school right now.  But Dr. Johns, it's a movie that was done, 'The Vernon Johns Story' ['The Vernon Johns Story: The Road to Freedom'], and he predated Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] at Dexter.
Speaker 2: Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Dexter Church--and he and I, every Wednesday, my husband [Richard Farley]--he was going to be my husband, he became my husband--I was engaged, I was dating him.  But my husband owned a restaurant in Petersburg [Virginia], and every Wednesday he would come over to the Johns house and bring dinner.  He would cook dinner and we would eat.  And Mr. Griffin [L. Francis Griffin] from Prince George school, Prince George's County [sic. Prince Edward County, Maryland], came down and we would have dinner and talk.  And Dr. Johns just taught me so much.  And I was just going through some papers the other day, and I think I have one of his unpublished papers he gave me to read over, and as he said, "Put that psychology in this paper."  I never did, but I'm going to do it now.  I really am, because I found out--I'm going to get with his daughter and see about doing it.  But that was the most exciting year.  Here I was going to graduate school [at Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] with Dr. Wrigley [Walter Wrigley] and Dr. Whitehurst [Keturah Whitehurst].  And then we go home--whenever he would come up from Prince Edward County [Virginia] we would sit and talk to him.  And he showed me the relationship between religion and psychology.  He and I explored that, we argued about it, we debated about it.  It was just a beautiful year of my life to have been able to just live in the house with Reverend Johns.
Speaker 2: Well, I have to ask you this.  What is the relationship between religion and psychology?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, he and I--I told him there wasn't any.  He would try to say that he had thought it was nothing but another form of religion and I--
Speaker 2: At the time, were you religious at all, at that point?
Speaker 1: Oh, I had tried everything.  I had been a Baptist, I'd been a Catholic, I'd gone back to being a Baptist.  Then I decided, right here in this house--I was married in a Catholic church and all, but I got, when schools were segregated and we were fighting trying to integrate--and they had the Catholic church here in Petersburg and all the white children went there.  And they had, didn't have, they had a little black Catholic church, and it was not, it was inadequate.  And I just kind of fell out with that, and I didn't understand why the Catholics had to follow this federal law--state laws, rather.  And so I think the priest and I, we fell out, and so I left the church, and haven't gone back.
Story_ID: 635023
Speaker 1: Now back to Vernon Johns though now, did, now this is in--this is between 1953 and '54 [1954] where you're in graduate school [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you, did you know his daughter, Barbara Johns, because she was a pioneer--
Speaker 2: Barbara was his niece.
Speaker 1: His niece, okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, yeah, Barbara, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right, his niece, you're right.  And she had pioneered school desegregation, I think.
Speaker 2: In Prince George [Prince George County, Virginia] and Prince Edward County [Virginia].  See, she was born in Prince Edward [sic. New York City].
Speaker 1: Yeah, so what was your understanding of that in those days?  I mean, were people talking about that, and what where they--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we were all, of course.  I was at his house, he and I--and I think he was down here, he was down here the day the decision came out, the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision came out.  And that day, I remember Walter Wrigley was--we lived on Lee Street and he came up, he said, "The Supreme Court decision is out, it's out.  Guess what, we won, we won."  It was like nothing you could imagine, just can't imagine.  Because as students we had followed it, we understood it, we knew what was going on.  We were close to Prince Edward County, you know, it was just right down the road, and--
Speaker 1: And Barbara Johns case, was that case included in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Barbara Johns?
Speaker 1: Was that case included in the Brown v. Board case, or was that part of it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was one of them, yeah.  The Barbara Johns story was one of the Brown v. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  And she--
Speaker 1: Oliver Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill].
Speaker 2: Oliver Hill was there and when the schools closed, when they closed those schools, Dr. Whitehurst [Keturah Whitehurst] and I went up and taught in the school.  We did all the psychological work for those children and pushed, did all we could to make sure that the teachers kept them going, kept them moving, you know.  So we did assessments on them, and I said, It's time now for them to get out of the sixth grade, they need to move on to seventh grade work," and that kind of stuff.  And she and I would go up there and just volunteer and work up there.
Speaker 1: Now don't speed through this, because I don't want you to speed through it, because you're saying things, you're alluding to things and moving past before anybody can understand what you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I understand some of it because I've been through this a million times, but a lot of people listening to this for the first time, if they're listening to your story they won't know what you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, so, I'm just going to slowly go through--okay, now, Brown versus Board.  All the characters you were talking about were associated with--
Speaker 2: Was involved with it, yes.
Speaker 1: And including--like your teachers who were the students, who were co-students of Kenneth Clark who was part of that case.
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, yes, all of us were involved in it, and all of us had the connection to it and gave our services and had services that we could give.  That was important with it.  And then we, I mean I was there living in the house with Reverend Johns, and Reverend Johns was just an extraordinary person.  He was so unconventional, and he was so non-conforming, and he was so brilliant, not only in terms of development of the thinking processes, but how he articulated and all.  And he had children, and he kind of was nearly innate to this.  He was a person who just believed that you were going to grow and it was just in your nature to be something, and that you didn't have to have a lot of formal anything, that you would just, if people would just leave you alone.  And so he and I just related to each other, and he cared so deeply and he thought I was kind of before my time, that I was different from what he called these educated people.  He said, "You're so different from them."  And so he spent a lot of time helping me to formulate ideas and so forth.  Now he--his spirit--like Barbara Johns, that was his niece, and he was a farmer.  He would farm and bring stuff and sell it out of his car, vegetables and everything, and he was close to nature, and believed in all of that.  But the spunk that she had came from those kinds of people, you know.  I didn't know his, her parents [Violet Johns and Robert Johns], but I knew him, and I knew Griffin [L. Francis Griffin], and Reverend Griffin was the one who really, they went, really went to, to negotiate for them, those--Barbara Johns, and that group of youngsters.
Story_ID: 635024
Speaker 1: Now what did Barbara Johns actually do (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They walked out of school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They walked out.
Speaker 1: Because of what?
Speaker 2: They boycotted.
Speaker 1: Because of what?
Speaker 2: Because of the seg- the fact that that school was inferior.  Their school was inferior to the white school in Prince Edward County [Virginia], and so they decided that they would just not tolerate it, so they walked out, and they boycotted school, and it caught on.  And they--then Virginia was involved with massive resistance, and Virginia of course took over the different school systems.  They were going to take over the school systems, they were going to close down, I mean, take over.  They were going to resist this whole idea of desegregating schools.  And so they did, and they continued, and schools in Norfolk [Virginia] and another--I can't think of the county now.  But there was another set of schools up near northern Virginia, and Arlington [Arlington County, Virginia], they had a lot of problems in Arlington.  There were other school systems, and I think this is where I was telling you earlier about the differences in Roanoke [Virginia], you know.  Because Roanoke eventually desegregated, but not quite with the rancor and so forth.  They did it nice nasty, if you like.  They handled the situation very different.  But Prince Edward, they finally had to close the schools, and they closed them for all black and white.  And then the whites got together with their money and they built a private academy.  And so the white kids started going to private academies and the black kids were still out of school, and they stayed out of school for years before public schools were again open for black kids in Prince Edward.  Then they were integrated.
Speaker 1: So when we talk about massive resistance in terms of Virginia, we're talking about the State of Virginia actually closing down or trying to take over the local school districts, and closing schools down because they didn't want to comply with the Brown versus Board?
Speaker 2: That's right, in order to resist, in order to resist Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they wanted to do it massively, if you like.  And they also came and they felt that the state had the right to, what they called impose-imposition--I'm leaving out a sound there--interposition, interposition, that's right.  They were going to interpose that right between these localities and the federal government and the State of Virginia because they threw me out of the cafeteria at Central State Hospital [Petersburg, Virginia] because they said that if they let me eat with white people that would weaken their interposition stand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's another story.
Story_ID: 635025
Speaker 1: Tell us about J. Lindsay Almond, the governor of Virginia there in those days.
Speaker 2: The one that's during that period?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: J. Lindsay Almond was a judge [sic. attorney general] in Roanoke [Virginia].  And he was considered in Roanoke, he was considered a fair judge.  And the blacks in Roanoke were pleased that he had become the governor of Virginia.  And so they were shocked.  He was torn, and I think there was--if you read, I think, some accounts of that time and all, it was, they would talk about how he did not go along with it wholeheartedly, but the Byrd machine was tight in Virginia and so powerful that when the White Citizens' Council and all of that came into being, he had to go along with them.
Speaker 1: And by Byrd you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Harry Byrd [Harry F. Byrd, Sr.], who was the senator and had been governor and just had owned the politics, the whole political structure in the State of Virginia (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now is this Robert Byrd's father or--
Speaker 2: No, not that Byrd.  Robert Byrd is from West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: This is Harry, this is Harry, Harry Jr. [Harry F. Byrd, Jr.], Harry Sr.  These are the Byrds, and you just say the Byrd machine.   And we finally years and years later, some of us got together, because he had control of the Democratic Party in the State of Virginia.  But some things happened politically and, quote, the Byrd machine eventually was broken.  But that was the machine in the State of Virginia that ran Virginia, yeah.  This pay as you go approach to economics, you know.  Virginia would never borrow money and never would go into debt, you pay as you go.  He was strict, Byrd.  He was from Winchester [Virginia], apple country.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that was the Byrd machine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were alluding to, I think earlier, that during the massive resistance and when the schools were closed, you and another psychologist would go and assess the black children and try to keep them getting, I guess, education that was not through the school system.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when they closed the schools in Prince Edward, a number of people kind of came together to try to give those kids--because see, many of them left the state, they left the area and went to school, but some of them did not.  So those that were left were taught in churches.  And so the churches started setting up schools.  So Dr. Whitehurst [Keturah Whitehurst] and I often would leave Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] in the afternoon and drive up, she would drive up to Prince Edward County [Virginia].  And we would assess the kids to make sure that academically they were progressing as they should, and that they were moving.  So we did the assessments so the teachers would know, "It's time now for them to move on to the next grade, it's time for them to be introduced to higher work," and so forth.  And we did that.  We kind of made that our contribution to try and help that system, and everybody was kind of zeroing in on Prince Edward because they stayed closed so long.  They kept those kids out of school for such a long period of time.
Story_ID: 635026
Speaker 1: Now during this time you were working for the Central State Hospital [Petersburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: During that--
Speaker 1: I mean, well during that time you were in grad school [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, during that time I was graduate school.  I was in graduate school, yeah, in graduate school.
Speaker 1: So, now--
Speaker 2: Then I left there and went to Crownsville State Hospital in Maryland [Crownsville Hospital Center, Crownsville, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, but right after grad school you went to Central State Hospital first?
Speaker 2: I went to Crownsville State Hospital for an internship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After graduate school.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And then in '55 [1955], I got a job at Central State Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a psychologist.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did you, what did you think of Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Baltimore?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, Crownsville [Maryland] is close to Baltimore--
Speaker 1: But it's not in Baltimore.
Speaker 2: No, not there, but Crownsville was an interesting--see this was, all these times get to be very interesting kind of times, because when the school desegregation, Brown v. Board of Education's decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] came down, then people started looking at everything, you know.  Because you know, the public accommodations, all of that kind of thing.  And so Crownsville was the only state hospital for blacks in the State of Maryland.  That was the place if you were mentally ill, you would want to be hospitalized.  And at that--you know, they were basically, that's where you would go if you became severely mentally ill, you had to go to a hospital.  There was no outpatient or nonresidential treatment for severely mentally ill people.  So, Crownsville was it.  Well, Crownsville decided, as so many institutions in the South did, they said, "We need to do some reforming, we need to put some money, the State of Maryland needs to put some money into Crownsville Hospital in order to make sure that they don't come after us and make us, quote, desegregate and make us integrate."  Okay, so they did put a lot of public schools, you know, they built schools, you remember, all over the South to try to ward off desegregation.  And so they were getting, they were doing the same thing in the hospitals.  So when I got into--at Crownsville, this was the heyday, because they were putting money into Crownsville like they had never done before.  And they hired RNs [registered nurses]--because my sister was hired there, they wanted registered nurses in the hospital.  Before they just had, quote, attendants okay.  And they decided that they wanted to do an internship program for psychologists, so I got in on that.  And I got to do an internship, because most internships in the country were given when you had a Ph.D.  See, I only had a master's degree, so I went there.  And they brought in some of the top psychologists from all over the country, came in, and taught us.  We had in-service training, it was just a beauty, it was a beauty.  I got the best training that you could have gotten.  I didn't need a Ph.D., because I got it right there and got it, if you like, from the experts.  And it was good living.  They gave us apartments on the grounds.  We went to the cafeteria and the food was inexpensive, so it was really beautiful living.  And they were able to attract a good cadre of people, and professional people.  So that hospital was just flourishing and doing well, and they were doing all of that to keep black folks away from white folks who were mentally ill.
Story_ID: 635027
Speaker 1: So, I came to Petersburg [Virginia].  I told you I had started dating my husband [Richard Farley], and so I was en- barely engaged.  And I came down here, came back to Petersburg, came down here for Easter.  And I saw this little notice in the paper that they were going to hire, they were looking for a psychologist.  So I decided I'd go out and apply.  And I went out and applied for the job and right away they told me how interested they were in me, and this that and the other.  And they said, "Let us know if you can get out of your internship," because I was supposed to stay until September and this was May, this was April, Easter--"Let us know if you're going to be able to come down, because we need someone immediately."  So I went back to Crownsville [Crownsville State Hospital; Crownsville Hospital Center, Crownsville, Maryland] and I told them the story.  So my, the chief psychologist said, "Well, we're going to let you go, but we'll let you know, if you don't like it, you come on back here to us."  So I said okay.  So I came down and got the job.  Well, when I got here I discovered that the hospital [Central State Hospital, Petersburg, Virginia] was under investigation.  So they had hired me again, they thought, as a token to try to show that they were going to get some black people in.  They didn't have, they considered me to be the first professional black that they had hired at the hospital.  None of that mattered to me, I just wanted--again, I wanted a job, and I wanted that particular job.  But what had happened was that there was a guy from the Coast Guards [U.S. Coast Guard] who had become psychotic in Norfolk [Virginia], and they had brought him to Petersburg.  He was black, they had brought him to Petersburg for hospitalization.  And when they got him here and saw the level of care, because they were paying a per diem for him there, they saw the level of care, it was like a snake pit, the hospital was.  That's just how backwards they still were, nothing like what Crownsville was showing me.  They hadn't gotten there.  But they smelt a rat, too, that they needed to bring up the standards and to ward off desegregation.  But also the federal government was on them, because this guy was not getting the proper kind of care.  And they went to court about it.  Well, Virginia started putting money in there, and that's the way I got the job.  The job became available for me.  And so I got the job and so they didn't quite know what to do with me.  They had some black nurses out there who were RNs [registered nurses], but they just considered them ward people, you know, and with the attendants and everybody else.  So they considered me the first professional person, but I was black.
Story_ID: 635028
Speaker 1: Now, when time came to eat and they're getting ready to go to the cafeteria [at Central State Hospital, Petersburg, Virginia], they said, "Well where is she going to eat?"  So they said, "Well, I guess she'll just have to eat where we eat, white people eat."  That was the clinical director, he said, "Well, you'll just eat with me." And I said okay.  So I went bouncing on up to the cafeteria and we ate, a beautiful little cafeteria, like on a plantation.  They had all the black workers there and the best food you ever want to eat.  They made homemade bread two times a day, pastries like you've never seen before, and quite inexpensive.  Oh, I was enjoying, I enjoyed that.  For about three days I ate there.  Word came down from the governor [Thomas B. Stanley], "She cannot eat there any longer.  We cannot, we believe in, we have gone on record with interposition and it will not permit her to eat there, because that means that we have desegregated, and that's a state facility and we can't have that on the record.  So she cannot eat there."  So they said, "Well, what should we do?"  So, in about two days, they had taken a room in that building and they turned it into a room for me--white tablecloths, brought little white furniture, yellow curtains at the window, just a beautiful place.  And they said, "You can eat there and you can have your guests, you can have guests to come and eat lunch or dinner or any meal you want, or your family members or what have you, but that's your dining room."  So I said, "Oh no."  I said, "I don't think I need you to fix a dining room for me, I'll just not eat here."  So I started--for lunch I would just go to Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] to eat lunch, and I ate my breakfast and dinner at home, and that was the end of that.  So I never used the room, and the room stayed there for a while.  And then eventually Virginia lost out on interposition and they built a dining hall out there in another building, and when that was built, it was integrated.  So we just had ups and downs there because it was not, they were not meeting the standards, they were not treating the patients as they should.  And, of course, I became a little warrior for a better practice and better care for the patients.
Story_ID: 635029
Speaker 1: These were the days when you could, you were committed to a hospital if you were supposed to be insane or something?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And just kind of talk about it a little--because people don't often understand that now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. This--basically, you know I forget that, I do.  I forget time.  It was, Central State [Central State Hospital, Petersburg, Virginia] was the only hospital in Virginia that blacks could go.  Usually in every state you would have a psychiatric facility or a hospital for the severely mentally ill in that region.  So we had Southwest Hospital [sic. Southwestern Virginia Mental Health Institute, Marion, Virginia], Western State Hospital [Staunton, Virginia], Eastern State Hospital [Williamsburg, Virginia].  So whites had, could go to a hospital that more or less was close in their region, which meant that their relatives could come and visit them and so forth.   Blacks all had to come to Central State.  So no matter where you lived, if you lived far west, southwest Virginia, you had to come all the way down to Petersburg [Virginia] if you had a relative who was committed to the hospital.  When I was there, the last day I was there, the patient population was about forty-five hundred.  It was, at the time before, this is the time before tranquilizers.  I was working at Central, Crownsville State Hospital [Crownsville Hospital Center, Crownsville, Maryland] when the first drugs came.  There were no drugs for mental illness.  The patients were given electroshock therapy, they were given lobotomies--it was like if you ever saw the movie 'Snake Pit' ['The Snake Pit'], it was 'Snake Pit', okay.  And we worked, we were there, we worked.  The odors--like it was not clean, they were not clean.  Patients were hurdled into rooms and just seated, just there all day long, very few things going on.  I will say this: before I left, I had some of the newsletters.  We'd even gotten newsletters out.  And it described the activities that we were able to do.  I stayed at Central State seven years and we were able, I was able to pull in young black psychologists from different, who had gone to historically black schools [historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs)], who were not trained as clinicians.  But I trained them on the spot, and trained them how to be clinical psychologists right there at the hospital.  And so we made, things changed, but this was a transitional period also where they were moving from what I would call a snake pit kind of environment to a more hospital like environment.  And the patients now, I think, they may have three or four hundred patients at the hospital.  But they had, it was over four thousand patients the last day I was there.  That was the census report, we got a census report every day.  But all black people came there, and some of them, they were in locked wards.  I was there when we first decided that we would have what you call unlocked wards.   Some patients hadn't touched the ground in twenty-five years, but when we unlocked those wards, we let them be able to walk on the dirt surface.  They didn't even know, see, how a human being would walk on the ground when they had never walked on anything but those wooden floors in those buildings.  They had to change their whole gait, their whole way of walking, you know.  So it was quite, quite a time.
Story_ID: 635030
Speaker 1: There was segregation within segregation, because the staff [at Central State Hospital, Petersburg, Virginia] was white, the doctors were foreign doctors and white, but the patients were all black.  And I remember we had two--three, we had one, two, three--in the administration building, we had three toilets, a restroom whatever you want to call them, for whites and one for blacks.  They had, no, they had four for whites.  They had one for white men, one for white women, one for white patients, and one for, yeah white women, and one for, yeah, they had two, and one for workers.  One for white workers, women--one for white workers, men--and then one for guests, visitors, okay, white.  And then they had one, it was for all blacks, whether you were a patient, whether you were a male, whether you were a female, or what.  They had one.  And I could remember going to staff meetings and I would raise my hand before the staff meeting.  They'd say, "Any more further business?"  I said, "Yes, when are we going to get restrooms for women, men and patient men and women? And then the second question is when are we going to get some deodorant for the patients?"  Those were two things I can remember just fighting and fighting, because the patients would come into your office, and the odor--the odors that we had to deal with was just like nothing you've ever seen before.  And I said, I remembered that baking soda would do it.  I said, "We got a pharmacist out here, I know he can make some deodorant.  But we got to get some deodorant for these patients."  And I just fought for that.  Those were my two big fights, the restroom--everybody using the same restroom if you were black, and no deodorant for patients.  It was not pleasant, but I, I learned a lot and it was a good job.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well thank you, because that's historical, and people really need to know that, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.
Story_ID: 635031
Speaker 1: So you were there seven years?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right?  So--
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you what happened, the reason how I left from Central State [Central State Hospital, Petersburg, Virginia].  The first year I was there, that summer, they say, "We're going to have a picnic for the patients."  And they said,  "We're going to give them fried chicken, watermelon and the women are going to get a new bandana and they're going to get a house dress, and all the patients who could go outside, that we're going to let outside, can get some new overalls.  And we want somebody to take pictures and to write an article to put in the mental health, state mental health journal, about what we're doing at Central State."  And I said, "You're going to do what?"  And they repeated it.  And I said, "And where are you going to publish this?" (Laughter) And they said, "In the mental health journal."  I said, "So mental health at Central State consists of getting a new bandana and eating some watermelon and some chicken and getting some fresh air?"  So, I went to the superintendent and I told him, I said, "I would be embarrassed if I were superintendent and they put that in the state mental health journal of how we're treating our patients and how we're dealing with mental illness out here."  And he said, "Oh?"  He was Dr. Nielsen [Juul C. Nielsen], I never will forget, he was from Nebraska.  And he said, "Well, I've never seen anything like what goes on out here myself" (laughter).  And so he said, "I think we'll cut that out."  I said, "Okay."  I stayed there seven years, and one day I was sitting at my desk and this memo came, we used to, no e-mail, we got memos.  And I got this memo, and they said that they were going to have family day and they were going to have watermelon (laughter) and they were going to have some fried--and I said, it's time for [HistoryMaker] Florence Farley to leave this joint.  I said, I have gone full circle.  I don't believe if I went to the superintendent, he would even understand what I'm talking about.  So I said I'm going to get out of here.  And I called Dr. Daniel [Robert Prentiss Daniel] at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], because he had been asking me to come home.  And I called him I said, "Dr. Daniel, I'm ready to come home."  And he said, "What?"  I said, "I need a job, I'm ready to come home."  And so he said, "Well put your application in and let's see if you can make the cut."  And I said okay, and I did.  And Dr. Whitehurst [Keturah Whitehurst] hired me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is 1964?
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962].  Yeah, 'cause I--'62 [1962] I stayed there seven years.  I went there '55 [1955].
Story_ID: 635032
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right (unclear) okay so 1962.  So, you joined the faculty as a--
Speaker 2: At Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].
Speaker 1: As a psych- instructor in psychology?
Speaker 2: I started, I was part time in the counseling service.  I was hired as a clinical psychologist in the counseling service, and 50 percent of my time was teaching.  And I did that for several years and then I went into full time teaching.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did you like teaching as opposed to working in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved it.  I want to do it now.  I miss it very much. I taught, what, forty years?  A little shy of forty years, I guess.  About forty-one years.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now what did you like most about teaching?
Speaker 2: When I left Central State [Central State Hospital, Petersburg, Virginia], I left with the watermelon deal.  One thing--I thought I had done it all out there, I couldn't do anymore.  But I recognized that people who became mentally ill didn't become mentally ill in the hospital.  They came to the hospital because they had become mentally ill outside.  And I felt that there was something that must be going on outside that was causing people to become mentally ill.  And as I thought and talked and looked at all the variables and all the kinds of things, I just felt that if we could educate people to help them not to be as severely ill as they were--that a lot of what was going on and what had gone on in the lives of those people were interpersonal things, and it was just as much interpersonal as intrapersonal.  They became intrapersonal problems after the interpersonal relationships. And I really thought that education was the answer and was the place that if I could work with people who were going to eventually work with people, that they could learn how to be different, you know, in their relationships within their homes and within wherever their jobs were, that we could help to eradicate some of that severe, the severe problems that I saw.  And so that was one of the things.  And I even, I taught a course for years called mental hygiene, and I mean that's all it was.  It was just, as we teach personal hygiene in school, we taught mental hygiene.  And it was one of my outstanding courses as far as students were concerned, and I still feel very strongly about that one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you mean by mental hygiene?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Mental hygiene basically--just as we say you learn to brush your teeth and you learn how to wash your face and comb your hair and do all that, that there are some hygienic ways of doing things, and that if we can buy into those kinds of things, that we would be more mentally healthy.  And so it's a part of how you help the individual to use those kinds of practices to be mentally healthy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what kinds of practices do make you mentally healthy?
Speaker 2: One thing, you learn how to make choices and learn that maybe that's one way, that's a good mental health practice.  It's that you learn how to make choices, okay.  And I would teach them how, you know, how to evaluate and make a choice for yourself and that that's something. You learn how to deal with your emotions.  You don't take on other people's baggage.  You empathize but you don't sympathize.  So there are just certain kinds of ways that we can facilitate ourselves becoming all that we can become.  And we buy into ourselves and our own growth and realize that that's our responsibility.  If people can help you to assist you along the way that's fine, but it's not their responsibility to make you what you are.  And so there are just certain things, if we take all of their theories in psychology, I would take them and see what kinds of practices would come out of them and then make them into basic principles of mental health.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you were just--well maybe I'll ask this question later I guess.
Story_ID: 635033
Speaker 1: About what time did the--I know in the early or mid-'70s [1970s] when the Association of Black Psychologists was formed?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I was there, in San Francisco [California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay. Now this was in what--seventy--
Speaker 2: This was in some of that stuff because I was a northeast coordinator that first year.  What happened, let me tell you.  That was--everything is a story.  We went to, I have a picture somewhere of a group standing on a stage in Washington [D.C.], and we're standing on the stage and I'm in that group.  My mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] is up in Maryland, visiting with my sister.  And she cuts the TV on and she sees me on this stage with all these kids.  And so when I got home she said, "Florence [HistoryMaker Florence Farley], why were you on that stage with those children?"  I said, "Because they needed a body, Mama."  And so she said, "Why were you all up there?"  And I said, "Well, we were trying to make the association of the American Psychological Association [APA] recognize that we needed some special funds for black kids in school, in psychology.  They needed that for their research and all of that.  And they were not giving them their money."  She said, "Well they said that they were students."  And I said, "Yeah."  She said, "Well, why were you there?"  I said, "Because they picked me.  They decided that I looked enough like a student that I could get on stage, and they needed a warm body and I went up there."  She said, "You're going to get in trouble."  I said, "I don't care, Mama."  So, anyway, that was the kind of first rumble that we had with the American Psychological Association.  So the next meeting was in San Francisco.
Story_ID: 635034
Speaker 1: Okay, San Francisco [California], so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So we go--
Speaker 1: American Psychological Association [APA].
Speaker 2: Psychological Association.  They have their meeting in San Francisco, okay.  And we, they decided that the blacks are going to get together, okay.  And so a couple of sessions--they take over a couple of sessions of, I don't remember particularly what they were, but different meeting places, you know, different groups of young black guys and gals are getting together and they're going off of the spoken agenda and bringing their stuff in, looking at it from a black perspective and so forth, okay.  So we, they started passing these notes and said we were going to have a meeting and it's a secret, you know, and everybody--you're going out and somebody puts something in your hand, you know, and all this kind of stuff, real subversive underground kind of stuff.  And so anyway, we were going to have this meeting in this particular hotel room and tell everybody to come to the meeting.  So we all get there, it's a crowd of us, all black people getting it together.  And they started, and it [Association of Black Psychologists] was formed right there.  We started talking and some of the guys from California and Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], just a number of them, you know, guys from out of New York [New York] and all, and they started, and it was formed.  And that year--now the next year we met, I became the north- southeast coordinator for it, and I had this whole region, and we had regions and all--
Story_ID: 635035
Speaker 1: And I stood, I stuck with them for a few years and we did, we had a big meeting in Boston [Massachusetts] which had some, some real meaning to it, because Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was going over into Boston in the black community, and the kind of research they were doing always, it was blacks being second class and not being at the same level that whites were.  And I mean, and looking at them, you know, in that way--and it was always pitting blacks against whites kind of stuff, no research dealing with looking at blacks as an entity in and of themselves, you know, as entities in and of themselves, and how they develop and they form and so forth.  And they weren't paying the people.  They were making them subjects but they weren't paying them any money and they weren't giving the agency any money for using them and so forth, so they were just using them.  And so we came out against assessment and the manner in which they were assessing and putting kids into special ed [special education] classes, and we came out in terms of the bias in their research and all and we started exposing that, and got a good case, the Larry P. case [Larry P. v. Riles, 1979] in California, about assessing and the fact that children should have a person who looked like them to do the assessment.  And we did that very early, in terms of the assessment programs that were going on at that time, and looking at who was being put into special ed classes and all.  So those were two things.  And also black kids were getting the shaft in graduate schools, and so we formed groups of people who would help them with their dissertation, help them get through their oral exams, and that kind of thing.  And we'd send them out, and when they had certain kinds of problems--I remember I went to Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] and worked with a group of young ladies who were having problems with interpersonal relationships with black guys and it was a number of things.  We were very active during that period, during that early period of the Association of Black Psychologists.
Speaker 2: Who were some of the leaders of the association?
Speaker 1: Ooh, can I think of anybody?  My good friend Reginald, Reginald, Reginald.  He died recently.  He went to Ethiopia and then came back to Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  I can't think of Reggie's last name.  I'm blocking on names right now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm blocking, really blocking on names, but I remember Reginald, Reginald Jones [Reginald L. Jones].  And I see this other little guy, I can't think of him right now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I can see him (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: Asa Hilliard, he was there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Asa G. Hilliard [HistoryMaker Asa Hilliard, III] --
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was there.  Okay, oh god, the guy down in Georgia--you know, down in Georgia now.  I can't think of his name.  It'll come.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Was Morris Jeff, was he involved in--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't involved?
Speaker 1: That wasn't--
Speaker 2: Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright]?
Speaker 1: Later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Later.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: They was a little young.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 635036
Speaker 1: Now before we get you to Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio], I want to go back and maybe catch up.  Now you, you heard--you had some comments about Dr. King, I think.  At some point--he came at the time I guess when you were working at the hospital, he came through Petersburg [Virginia] and spoke?
Speaker 2: Who, Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was all over Petersburg.  He spent a lot of time in Petersburg.  The first night he spoke, the first meeting he had was, it snowed.  I was married, and I was working at Central State.  And I did, I was sick, and my husband [Richard Farley] went and he came back just all excited, just all excited about Dr. King.  And my sister-in-law, she had gone and they were over excited.  So that was the first that I ever heard of anybody who had heard him speak and all.  We joined--we had relationships, because he came to Petersburg often during that time.  And we formed the Petersburg Improvement Association.  So, like the Montgomery Improvement Association.  So we had a PIA here, too.  And we formed--Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] was here, Milton Reid was here.   I can't think of the name of the guy, it was at Zion Baptist Church [Petersburg, Virginia], he was one of their leaders.  Herbert Coulton [Herbert V. Coulton, Sr.] was here and they eventually went with Martin Luther King.  And of course Curtis Harris [HistoryMaker Reverend Curtis Harris] was down in Hopewell [Virginia], and all.  So it was a whole kind of group and we were very close to the PIA.  And I was having, dealing with things directly with the Central State Hospital [Petersburg, Virginia], because as I said, it was a lot--I told a couple of things that were going on there, but it was just plenty there that I was doing.  And also I left there and went to Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  By the time our kids started protesting--we protested the library in Petersburg.  The library was segregated in Petersburg.  And Wyatt Tee Walker and the group did, much of what we did was, our students would be involved and so we would do things like make sure that if the students were in jail or they were marching, or had a meeting or what have you, that the students who were in class, that they would take notes and make sure that the other students didn't fall behind.  That was a blanket kind of requirement.  You know, you're not going to jail, but you are going to study and make sure he knows his work and all.  My husband owned, he was a businessman, and he owned properties, so we had deeds to property, and so we could make sure we were always ready to be able to get people out of jail.  And so you kept your deeds available and made sure that you had paid your taxes and everything, and you could use your deeds to get the kids out of jail and so forth.  So that was one thing that was very necessary to do, that we had to do.  We had, we were dealing with issues dealing with registering to vote, and Virginia came up with the blank slate, blank slate rule.  It meant that they would give--they would give you a card with nothing on it.  You had to remember the questions, you had to learn the questions to register to vote, and you had to put the answer in the right order to those questions.  So we had to teach, and we taught, and I was one of those teachers.  We had to teach our people what the questions were, and they knew the answers, you know: your name, your address, and all right down the line.  Have you ever been hospitalized?  If so where, and all of that, hospitalized for mental illness?  That was one of the questions, because you had them, and you had to answer these questions, so it was a blank card.  And you registered.  And so we had to teach that.  That was before the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], you know, was passed.  We had to go through many changes before that, and that was one.  And so we would, right over here at the church right across the street, we would meet in the church basement and in the church anteroom, really, and teach the people how to register.  They came and they learned.  They said, "It's all right, you know, it's all right.  Let's let them keep on acting crazy.  We're going to act crazy with them.  We're going to learn how to do it."  And so that was going on, and as I said, that was that.  I didn't march, because I knew I didn't have the temperament to.  I didn't sit at any counter, because I knew I didn't have the temperament to let anybody spit on me and not fight back.  And so I just didn't deal with that.
Story_ID: 635037
Speaker 1: I led a couple of marches down Sycamore Street.  The Black Panther Party had come, had formed and they had come out of Washington [D.C.] to help us, come down here to help us do something, and they said that they had guns in their car.  And we had a march the next day, and they had, they brought an armored car and had it at the foot of the hill with guns pointed out at us (laughter) and we were coming down, and I was leading the march because the guy who was supposed to lead had backed out on us, and there I was leading this march and all these people behind me.  And they spread the word to tell the people don't do anything that could look suspicious, because the guns were pointed.  I don't know if they were or not, but I believed them.  And so like if you had a soda can in your hand, you know, make sure you don't throw it or throw it down or do anything with it, you know.  So finally we decided we would just sit.  And we sat on that hard concrete and did not go any further until they finally had the leaders, their leaders, they went down and talked to the people and all.  But they had called out the, I don't know whether they were state troopers [Virginia Department of State Police] or exactly who they were, but they were there waiting for us at the end of that march, because they claim the Black Panthers had some guns in their cars and they had put them in jail and they were holding them you know, overnight and all this stuff, so it was something.  We had a lot of little things that happened during that time.  Petersburg [Virginia] was active.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It didn't come easy.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, I guess, well, when did things start to change?  I mean when they start to be, when did segregation start breaking down?
Speaker 1: As soon as the law, the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] went in.  You know, the Accommodation Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title II] and all that.  We didn't have to do a whole lot.  We let--the people knew that they were going to obey the law.  We had obeyed the law all this time, now the law has changed, and now you're going to obey the law.  So we're going to come in here and eat, we're going to come in here and sit down, we're going to do what we want to do.  We're going to come and vote and we're going to deal with the power structure.  We're going to have some rights.  We had to, nothing came easy.  They decided to dilute, to annex some area in order to dilute the black vote.  We had to fight that, we had to take that all the way to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, but we did.  So we let them know, you're going to either give it up or we're going to try to use the sy- we're going to use the system to make sure that you give us what we are due.
Story_ID: 635038
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is the Voting Rights [Voting Rights Act of 1965] I guess, are, are, I mean the act was passed in '64 [sic.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Four.
Speaker 1: And by 1973 Hermanze Fauntleroy [Hermanze Fauntleroy, Jr.] is elected mayor of Petersburg [Virginia], right?  So, what was the process during that period?
Speaker 2: See that was--part of the process--well he was elected--no, Joe Owens [Joseph H. Owens] was elected city councilman.  Hermanze, the next election we got Herman on.  So we had two people on.  The next time Joe lost, that seat was lost.  So Herman had a period of time when he was down there by himself.  Now all this time we would go, if you like, and watch for him, to be his backup, to be down there with him.  We decided we would not let him ever go to a meeting by himself in that city hall [Petersburg City Hall, Petersburg, Virginia].  And so we always had people who would go and go into city council [Petersburg City Council], okay.  They then decided that they were going to annex some land, Prince George County [Virginia], Dinwiddie County [Virginia].  When they did that, we decided okay, we're going to let, they need to do it, they need to expand the border.  But they're going to take in all these white people, that's going to dilute the black vote.  So after we didn't fight annexation, and after they annexed, we decided that we should have a system, they should increase the number.  At that time it was just five people on council.  They should increase the size of council and go to a ward system.  And they said, no, they would not do that, they weren't going to increase it.  No, I think we said two, and have two blacks.  We didn't talk about ward systems initially.  Then finally we said, "Okay, you need to increase, and you need to go to a ward system of electing, so that this annexation will not dilute the black vote and the black impact."  And they said no.  So we went to court and we won, and we were the first case in the country to win, to get a favorable decision after annexation, okay, to minimize the effects of annexation on the voting strength of black people.  And so we won the case.  So the court ordered one year--they ordered us to draw lines and said we could use them for one year, and then we would have to make sure that, see how they worked.  And then we would have to come up with some permanent lines and have another election the next year.  And so it happened.  And so that's when we got the majority, the first black majority city council in the State of Virginia.  That's when we got that and that's when I went on council, and as a first woman to be elected to the council in Petersburg.
Speaker 1: Now this is in the late '60s [1960s] or '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: In '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, see because we came through Hermanze and Joe Owens, and this is '73 [1973] and--
Speaker 1: So, Mayor Fauntleroy was elected the same year?
Speaker 2: So that year we elected him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we elected him mayor, and elected a white guy, Donald Houser [Donald S. Houser], as vice mayor.  And that lasted for one year, okay.  The next year, we're up for reelection and I lost and Roy Hines [Roy "Omawale" Hines] lost.  Roy Hines was the youngest member ever to be elected to a city council.  He's the young black guy from Norfolk State [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia]--finished Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] and Norfolk State.  And so Roy was defeated and I was defeated.  And that's when I decided to go back to school.  When I got defeated I went back to school.  I went to Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] to get my doctorate.  And then when I came back from Kent State, then I ran again and won and stayed on city council for sixteen years or seventeen years.  And during that period I was elected mayor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what year were you the mayor, that you were elected mayor?
Speaker 2: In the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: In the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've forgotten how long, because I was the vice mayor and then I became the mayor.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, '84 [1984], I guess '84 [1984].  Does that sound right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  That sounds right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, 1984.
Story_ID: 635039
Speaker 1: You were telling me before we started the interview about the experience at Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio].  You had a--you said it was a pretty good setup there, right?  I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah I went to Kent.  There again, things were on my side again.  Kent State decided that they had not had success attracting blacks to their doctorate programs.  And so they made contact with historically black colleges [historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs)] and said if they had professors who didn't have the terminal degree, that they would like for them to apply and they would give consideration to it and they would pay their, they would come tuition free.  And so I--Dr. Whitehurst [Keturah Whitehurst], again, she was dean of the graduate school [at Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and she saw this letter that had been on her desk, that had been on the desk, because the person before her hadn't answered the mail.  And she saw it and she called me that night and she said, "Child, you're going to, come on, you're going to school."  And I said, "What?"  And she said, "Yeah this is too good."  So she sent me to Atlanta, Georgia where they had the initial meeting, and I went down there and I talked to the guys there and they said, "Oh, yeah, we want you."  I convinced them, they did, they needed me (laughter).  So they did.  And so I went to, got admitted to Kent State in the ed psych [education psychology] program.  And they gave me tuition free, and also I became a teaching fellow the first year, and then finally I became an instructor there.  And they really asked me to stay, but I couldn't stay.  And I got my degree.  They gave me credit for all the work I'd done at Virginia State for the master's degree, and in two years I had my doctorate, my Ph.D., and I came back to Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, but it was a good program, and Kent State reaching out, trying to reach out to increase the number of Ph.Ds. among black people.
Story_ID: 635040
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about being mayor.  Now what was that like to be the mayor of Petersburg [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: It was fun.  It was busy, I was busy.  It was rough basically for a number of reasons.  Hermanze [Hermanze Fauntleroy, Jr.] had been the mayor for that one year and then the city council [Petersburg City Council] had gone back to being majority white, and he was never mayor again.  And I was able to mayor over a period of years, a few years.  And, but by the time I got on council, Brown and Williamson [Brown and Williamson Tobacco Company], which was their largest employer, left.  That was a tobacco company, and they had been here for years and they hired a considerable number of people, and they left. They were bought out by a British company and they moved to Kentucky and Georgia.  So that took a toll on us economically.  They decided to build a mall.  Norman Sisisky was their representative, and Norman Sisisky was a wealthy person, he owned land.  And Norman said he would give us land for the mall to be developed in Petersburg.  And the developer decided that he did not want to develop it here, and he developed it in Colonial Heights [Virginia].  And that's a community that had pulled out that, well, had become incorporated as a city, and we were kind of boxed in in terms of being able to annex any land going north.  And Colonial Heights was the stumbling block, if you like, there.  But anyway, in Colonial Heights is a predominantly white community and very closed, if you like, at that time very closed to black people.  And so he put the mall [SouthPark Mall, Colonial Heights, Virginia] there.  And I was the mayor and I--we corresponded.  The city manager, the city attorney and I tried to get him to use this land that Norman Sisisky said he would be willing to donate to the city.  And the statement was made by the developer that he did not want the mall to have a black presence, and therefore he was going to put it in Colonial Heights.  So we couldn't get a meeting with him to try to convince him otherwise, but he finally made that statement.  The people in Petersburg thought that we had not done all that we could to get the mall.  We didn't never come out and give all the details of what was going on, but I let them know in my own way that we were not acceptable to the developer.  So, there was nothing we could do about it.  And so, of course they had the big opening and so forth and they wanted, they invited me to the champagne dinner and luncheon and everything else that they were having, celebrating opening the mall, when they finally opened it.  So I made the statement that I didn't celebrate with my enemies, and of course that hit the wire, and some people thought that was smart and some people thought it was not so smart (laughter), but I told them I would never go there.  So I haven't been in the mall in all these years, because you know, I know how it came to be.  So it took the retail, we were the retail based, retail hub of this area, and it took all, most of the retail out of Petersburg.  So Petersburg, you can't buy a decent pair of shoes in Petersburg, or anything, you know, so you shop elsewhere.  That's what I do.  But that happened, and--which was an unfortunate thing.  So we got hard hit by some stuff while I was mayor (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I've heard--
Story_ID: 635041
Speaker 1: Yeah, I heard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) While I was mayor.
Speaker 1: --yeah, Petersburg [Virginia] can be compared to East St. Louis [Illinois] and maybe Gary, Indiana and some other place where--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think we're that bad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  No, I don't.  Because I think the, I think of the difference in culture.  We weren't quote, that big city, that big of a city.  We still have some things here that hold us together.  And I guess part of it is the history, and that's able to kind of hold us together--the tourism, some small kinds of businesses that come and so forth.  But we used to be the mama to everybody.  People around us didn't have a fire department.  If they had a fire, Petersburg sent the people out.  They didn't have a jail.  All of their criminals came to our jail.  It was just a mama to all these jurisdictions until, I would say, integration, in after years, you know.  But there was a time here when Petersburg was, they didn't have schools.  They didn't have secondary schools in Colonial Heights [Virginia] nor the southern part of Chesterfield [Chesterfield County, Virginia].  They came, black and white, came to Petersburg High School [Petersburg, Virginia].  So they soaked us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh we were soaked, let's put it that way.  That sounds better.
Story_ID: 635042
Speaker 1: How long were you the mayor?
Speaker 2: Four--three years, five years, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Let's see, I did the two and two, at least four, maybe five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because it's two year terms, two year terms.
Speaker 1: What are you the proudest of, I guess, in that period of time?
Speaker 2: The fact that the people in Petersburg [Virginia] had somebody who was willing to put a lot of hard work in making this city the city--I mean making the city a city that they could call home and to be proud of and so forth.  I think in opening people's eyes that a whole lot had gone on that we didn't know about.  We didn't know such things as some parts of the city are assessed one way and other parts of the city are assessed another way with property.  It's a lot of little things that you get in, you find out because you're in a position to find out.  And so I found them out, and I told it.  And I said, you know, "We're not going to let this happen again, no matter who's in office.  This is what cities do and this is the way cities operate and we are going to make this one operate in our, in the behest of all people.  And there will be no quiet discrimination going on."  And so I think that was it.
Story_ID: 635043
Speaker 1: We were just discussing off camera, the, sometimes how there's a hidden agenda and coded language in city council [Petersburg City Council], that if you're not there, you'll never know it--
Speaker 2: Well, it operated so that already--you would think they'd already had the meeting.  And this is before we got on council.  And so they would sit and they would all have their heads down, and unfortunately, they were all bald, so all you could see were these bald heads.  And they would just sit there and mumble, and they didn't care.  And nobody had anything to say.  The only time you could speak was if a councilmember gave you a portion of his free time.  So during a meeting, a council could bring anything he wanted to the floor, and he would have about ten minutes to make that presentation.  So if a citizen wanted to speak, then the citizen would go to that councilperson and say, "I would like to--give me some of your time."  And then you could speak.  So naturally, Hermanze [Hermanze Fauntleroy, Jr.] had the time when he finally got on council.  So we could do some speaking before council.  But they had never had black folks speaking in council chambers before that.  So when we got on the council, the first thing we did was the Joint Center for Political Action [sic. Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C.].  They spent a weekend with us, just telling us the nuts and bolts of how to be, have a city council, which was one of the most tremendous things that ever happened to us.  People rallied around you, and they really rallied around us when we got to become the first, you know, predominantly black council in the State of Virginia.  So they came and said, "Let's plan out some things.  You all are going to go in there and be ready."  So we spent that whole weekend just learning just basic, just stuff, putting it together and applying parliamentary procedures that we already knew to the council situation.  And so one of the first things we said, we said, "Our citizens are going to have to have a voice."  So we came up with this public information period.  And so at the beginning of every council meeting there is a half hour that's devoted to the people coming and speaking and saying whatever they wanted to say.  And then every item on the agenda you could speak to it, for it or against it.  And that was one of the first rules we put in after we got sworn in for city council.  And from that day on, this open door was there.  And this is before the Virginia Freedom of Information Act, you know, kind of went into place.  We started that, and that was in '73 [1973].  And so the secrets--we found out that, as I said, that property in some places was assessed at 100 percent, but in other places maybe they were assessed at 60 percent, and that kind of thing.  So I tell people that one of the first things you need to do when you take an office is to go and read the file cabinet.  Stay after work if you take a new job, and just see what correspondence.  I don't know what you read now, with e-mails and all of that, but just take time and go in that file cabinet and see what the correspondence has been.  And you will get, your eyes will be open in terms of how to proceed and what has gone on before you.  That's the best place in the world.  Don't go around asking people what happened or what was Miss So and So like.  Just see what kind of correspondence went on with that office and you'll find out a lot.
Story_ID: 635044
Speaker 1: Was it hard to balance being mayor [of Petersburg, Virginia] and teaching at?
Speaker 2: No.  You know, I, I taught I think in Virginia State [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] longer than--when I left there I had been on faculty there longer than anyone else had ever been on faculties, okay.  When I went to Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio], we had a master's program at Virginia State in psychology, in ed psych [educational psychology].  When I went to Kent State, one of the reasons--Dr. Whitehurst [Keturah Whitehurst] and I talked about it--she said "You've got to get the Ph.D."  She said, "Because they're going to fire you."  Because I'd been fired once.  And she said, "Because you can't keep your mouth closed, and you're just out trying to do things."  And she said, "They're going to get you, you've got to get your doctorate."  So when this opportunity came, she said, "You've got to go."  She said, "Because they have the law that at sixty-five years you'd have to resign, retire."  And she was going to be sixty-five in three years, and she said, "I'm your only savior, so you're going to have to get your degree to protect yourself."  So that was another reason I went off to school.  And so when I--she said, "And the other thing is that we got to have somebody to keep this graduate program going," because she did all the theses.  And so I did, and I concentrated on doing stat- statistics, which is one of the basic things you need to do your research.  So I said okay, I'm going to double up on the stat and get really good at that, and then I'll be ready to do a thesis.  So I did, and I came back and sure enough she had to retire that year.  And we didn't get to work together after I got my degree.  And so I came back and, they, again, they made someone else head of the department.  But I was the one with the Ph.D. then.  And then I started directing master's theses.  So I ended up directing nearly a hundred theses from the time I got my doctorate until I left, which again was something that had never happened at Virginia State.  I don't guess it happened anywhere else.  But in order to make sure that we got, these kids got the opportunity to go on to the next level of graduate study, I did that.  So I was doing undergraduate--all that.   To answer your question, I was doing undergraduate work.  I always taught, I always taught a sophomore, junior and senior course.  And then I did the graduate courses and I did the graduate theses, and I would come home at five o'clock--I worked all day, got to work at nine and stayed to five.  Then I would come home and I would take a nap and take a shower, and dress and hit the streets.  And so I just had my life really packed in.  See, my husband [Richard Farley] died forty years ago, and I never remarried, and so I just had plenty of time.  And I never kept house well.  I never wanted to and never did.  So I learned how, I ate--my lunch was my large meal of the day, and I never cooked, and I still don't.  And so I just did what I had to do, and it was all right, it was good.  I didn't get tired and I didn't get sick, I was never hospitalized.  I had bouts of bronchitis once and a while.  My students once marked me down very low on attendance, and when they did the student/teacher evaluation, that was the lowest score I had.  And I had to go to class the next day, and I said, "You know, I don't give a care how y'all evaluate me, because I'm going to stay on this job until I retire, but I would like to know why did you all mark me down so low on attendance?"  I said, "I haven't missed a day this year.  I haven't missed a day for years, I haven't used a sick day for years.  So why did you do that?"  And they said, "That's the reason."  (Laughter) They said, "We never have time to study for anybody else's class.  We don't even have time to breathe, because you're here every day and so we just gave you a low score" (laughter).  "You should learn how not to be here every day."  So, I was able to handle all of it, juggle it all.
Story_ID: 635045
Speaker 1: Are there any particular students that you remember that came through, that you shepherded through that are--?
Speaker 2: Most of them, I remember most of my students
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really do.
Speaker 1: I don't want to get you in trouble--
Speaker 2: No, because they don't listen, they're not listening to this, because they can tell you the stories.  But really and truly I had some just outstanding students.  My students left.  We worked hard in graduate school and I worked hard with them with the master's.  We worked hard, period.  They will tell you, they will tell you that.  They--their undergraduate degree-- they would go on from that, to other schools to get master's and had absolutely no problem.  They'd get into a Ph.D. program.  I have, we have turned out some Ph.Ds.  I've got Ph.Ds. all over this country and in some top flight jobs.  And they just have done well and their experience, they value the experience they had at Virginia State [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and I value them, too--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because they have made us proud.	Made us very, very proud.
Story_ID: 635046
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, as a psychologist, I just wanted to ask you a couple of questions about, you know, psychology in the black community.  We were discussing off camera, and I said I was going to ask you about what you thought about the drugs now being used to control behavior as opposed to, you know, counseling and stuff.  Or what do you think the balance should be?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I need to, I have to go back to history again with me, okay.  When I started working, my first encounter with psychiatric patients was at Crownsville State Hospital [Crownsville Hospital Center, Crownsville, Maryland].  While I was there, the first drug, Thorazine, was the first tranquilizer.  Before Thorazine, as I said, told you earlier, we had no medication.  Patients didn't take any medicine.  There was no medicine for psychosis.  And so Thorazine came along.  Well, we had to be trained to know, for Thorazine.   Smith, Kline and French [Smith, Kline and French Laboratories; GlaxoSmithKline plc] was the pharmaceutical company that put out Thorazine.  And I went to the conferences, seminars that they had for that drug, and I remember that they were discussing it.  They kept asking, "Why is this effective with patients?  What part of the brain does it influence?"  And they said, "We don't know, we don't know why it's effective.  That's something that we still have to work on.  We know that it does help allay anxiety, and that means that these secondary symptoms that you see are not there, but we don't know where it works."  And they started talking about, talking about the dosage.  They said, "We don't know anything about the dosage that you're giving.  Our experimental animal was a dog, and our dogs would not take a dosage of the amount that you are giving your patients, so we have no information on that."  And that was the initial stage of Thorazine.  They also, every week they took blood from the patients and they would do a urinalysis of everybody who was on Thorazine.  When Reserpine came out later that they started using for depression--and then the drugs start multiplying, okay.  They stopped doing the weekly analysis at Central State [Central State Hospital, Petersburg, Virginia].  Now, I'm at Central State.  They stopped doing the weekly blood analysis, the urinalysis and so forth.  I kept up with the literature.  They were as much in the dark about what would happen and so forth.  Years later we start seeing patients who kept taking the Thorazine and so forth, we started seeing them show trembling behavior.  They were showing Parkinson's syndrome, symptoms.  Also, you saw, we saw a lot of anxiety would be decreased and the symptoms would be decreased, but the patients often were in stupors.  So we started seeing a lot of secondary things from these drugs.  Sure, no more patients were on the floor sleeping in their own, you know, body waste and so forth.  A lot of things--it was cleaned up.  Everybody looked like they were doing--.  We don't know what was going on.
Story_ID: 635047
Speaker 1: Okay, then we jumped to now they get the next class of drugs, and everybody is saying--let's see--one of the next drugs we come into contact with is for hyperactivity in children.  They start giving the drugs for that.  Again, they don't know how they work, why they work.  They don't know what part of the brain is being affected.  That's in the initial stage.  All they know is that the child is not as hyperactive.  Ritalin, that was the drug of the day for children.  Every child was on Ritalin.  Then they started even letting them give it to the school children, this kind of stuff.  So, I'm now, I'm saying all of that, that's history.  And I said before, information was not there, knowledge was not there.  It worked, and we got into as a culture--I think we're into, it works.  No matter what area we go into, if they're doing, if we're doing something, if it works, we keep doing it.  And we don't always know why we're doing it.  Now we've gotten folks kind of hung on these drugs.  They are as addicted to them as they are to some other kinds of drugs.  So they have a kind of addictive quality and they're being abused.  And trouble is still part of the life of the people, see.  Trouble is still, and nobody deals with the troubles that people have, and how people are handling trouble.  So, we get a lot of acting out now, even though we got the drugs that we can give you.  We have a lot of acting out.  They'd be hospitalized, deinstitutionalized, so we now have people on the streets.  We have homeless people who basically are mentally ill and need us to help them help themselves.  And we're not doing it, I don't think, in the best way.  We're putting responsibility on them that they aren't able to handle, because the nature of the illness is that they are not, that they cannot be responsible for taking a pill and staying on a pill.  That's the nature of mental illness.  So the nature of mental illness hasn't changed.
Story_ID: 635048
Speaker 1: Now do you think that there are--I mean what--are there certain mental disorders that are more prevalent amongst African Americans than anyone else?  Or what kinds are, seem to--we were talking to a medical doctor [HistoryMaker Dr. Charles Lovell, Jr.] last week and he was talking about diabetes, hypertension and heart disease being three, you know, of the chronic diseases among African American people.  What mental disorders are chronic?
Speaker 2: I don't think there are, I don't think there are.  I don't think there are any.  I don't think that any group is any more susceptible to any psychological disorder than any other group, I really don't.  I think the expression of the disorder can differ, maybe, depending upon people's circumstances and how they do.  But I think that a person who has hallucinations has hallucinations, and I don't think one group of people have them any more than others.  Now I may--mine may be dealing with more, maybe more religious.  Yours may be more economic or what have you, but they are hallucinations.  So, the content of them may differ, or vary, but the hallucination itself doesn't.  Or, I may be delusional, I may be paranoid, you see.  But what I am paranoid about is going to be part of my world.  What you're paranoid about is going to be part of your world.  But it's not on a racial basis.  It's just that you live in your world and I live in my world.  Does that make sense?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I remember [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory said one time that if you're black and you're not paranoid, you're crazy.
Speaker 2: There may be a little to that (laughter).  He may be a little bit right.  At least--he says, be hyper vigilant, would be a better way of saying it.  You need to be hyper vigilant, and if you're not hyper vigilant, if you're not vigilant, then maybe you need to be more hyper.  I was having an experience the other day and I was getting ready to react to this lady, and I said, oh my goodness.  I said, all those feelings I used to have in the '70s [1970s] are back, are still there.   Because I knew that's where it was coming from, you see.  As the folks say, she struck that nerve.  And it just came right out. And I said okay Florence [HistoryMaker Florence Farley], I understand, you know.  Yeah, so, you are what you are.
Speaker 1: So, you would be in favor of more human interaction rather than the use of drugs, is that what you're saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  You've got to get to the root of it.  The drug masks, it masks too much.  And then when it pops out, it's uncontrolled, because you have not worked with the person to let them let it out gradually, you know, in an interactive way.  So, yes, it's too bad.  So when it comes out, it's explosive.  When anger pops through tranquilizers, you got, just, it's just unharnessed energy.  And you see, it's just unharnessed, it's just, boom.  It's like that, it's explosive.  So we get real tragedies, real tragedies, yeah.
Story_ID: 635049
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we always ask this question in this way.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I don't want to tell you that I'm hopeless, or that I have stopped having hope.  That's a better way of saying it, not that I'm hopeless, but that--I don't know, it's entangled.  I can't articulate it.  It's so entangled, it's so--it has been messed up so badly.  And it's just been messed up, I think, so badly that I don't, I just can't even say.  Because it has become so complicated.  It is so complicated.  It has so many pieces, so many--well I think what I'm trying to say is that I don't know who African Americans are anymore.  I've lost, I've lost my, I think I've lost my understanding of them.  I think I have, so you see I really think I've just lost, I've lost it.  And I'm not satisfied, not happy with the fact that I feel this way, that that's the recognition that I've come to.  But, so therefore I can't have--you see, so I don't have any hopes or anything because I don't know where we are, I don't know who we are right now.  I don't know what we are.  I don't know anything about--I don't know us.  And one time I was just so clear on that, you know, and I believe I was right.  I knew who were, but I don't know it anymore.  Too many people have played with us, we've let too many people play with us, and too much has gone on.
Story_ID: 635050
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point in life, what do you think today, what do you see today as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think basically my legacy is that I was a teacher who believed that folks could live and enjoy life and be productive in life and could achieve in life and could be all that they could be, really.  That I taught--that I tried to instill that in my students.  I expect to see that when I see a student of mine.  I expect that they are showing that.  And I think that my teaching and style of teaching and reason for teaching was revealed and that they picked up on it.
Story_ID: 635051
Speaker 1: Also, if you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: I underestimated several times in my life.  I underestimated the ugliness of some people.  I did not believe that certain things would happen.  And so I may would have acted differently if I had not underestimated the extreme to which they would go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause I know, well, just listening to your life story, you seem to be so positive and buoyant and you look back at the earlier part of your life with such reverence, you know, for the way people treated each other and looked out for each other.  Is that, do you think that that contributed to not being able to estimate the bad things that people can do?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Uh-huh, yeah, I think you made a good point of that.  I think that's true.  Yeah, I think so.  I just didn't know that people could do that to each other, because it never happened to me.  It just, it didn't happen to people around me.  Yeah, yeah, I just didn't think they would.  I thought to be that ugly, people would have to have done something to them, you know, and didn't.  And so I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 635052
Speaker 1: Now you're involved in, we alluded earlier to the fact that you produce craft work and arts and stuff like that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now when did you start doing that, and--
Speaker 2: When I was a little girl in Sunday school.  My first, my first--well let me see, that was my cross stitch.  I started knitting when I was a little girl.  I saw a little white girl knitting with these needles and it was in a department store.  And the counter, the shelves behind her just had all this beautiful yarn, all these beautiful colors and all.  And she was sitting there doing this, and this lady who worked in that department store, would periodically go over and say something to her, and she would just do it, and she would go.  And so I went home and I told my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] that this little girl was doing this and what she was doing, you know, and thread and all of that, and I didn't know what that was.  And so she said, she told me, "I think that's either knitting or crocheting."  And so, I said, "Oh, so really?"  So she said, "Yes."  So, anyway I said, "Well can I learn how to do that?"  And so she said, "I don't know Florence [HistoryMaker Florence Farley], I don't think, I don't know how to do it."  She said, "We can sew together, but I don't, I can't do that."  So I said, "Well I would like to learn how to do that."  She said, "Okay."   Well, I started, I went into this store and I saw this book, a ten cents book and it says, 'How to Knit.'  And I always had the power that if you could read something, you could do it, you know.  So, I got the book and I looked at it.  I got my [maternal] uncle [Alfred Ware], the same uncle, and he gave me money to buy thread and a needle and I got that, and I started--and I started and I looked at the book.  And finally my mother would read the pattern to me and I would do what she say, and we were working it out.  We got to a point where I couldn't go any further.  And so I said, "I could go down, Mama, to that lady at Pugh [N.W. Pugh Company, Roanoke, Virginia], at that store, and I bet you she'd tell me, because she told that little, told that little girl--," I didn't say white, "--little girl."  So she said, "No, don't you do that."  She said, "I'll get somebody to help you."  And so she got this woman, this woman was a little old lady in Roanoke.  She didn't know what she was doing either.  So anyway, I put my stuff in my book bag and I went down to that store, Pugh, and I told the lady--I showed her my stuff, and I told her I couldn't get it off the needle.  So she showed me, and I went home and it was off the needle.  And I said, oh, god, what am I going to tell Mama, she told me not to do it.  So I said, "Mama, I got it off the needle."  So she said, "Did you get it off the needle by yourself?"  And I said, "No."  She said, "How did you get it off?"  And I said, "The lady at Pugh told me how to do it."  And she said, "I told you not to do that, Florence."  And I said, "I know it, Mama, but I did."  So anyway, from then on I've been knitting and crocheting.  And I do needlepoint.  And I do cross stitching, I do crewel.  And so I've had about four shows and I have these pieces now and I don't know what I'm going to do with them.
Story_ID: 635053
Speaker 1: Oh, I need to ask you about your family.  Yeah, yeah, do you have any children?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No children, okay.
Speaker 2: No children.  My husband [Richard Farley] died forty years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never remarried.
Speaker 1: Well, who do you consider your family now?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have one--see, it was, one sister [Ludie Saunders Sims].  And she's in Maryland, and I have plenty of nieces and nephews and great nieces and nephews and great-great nieces and nephews, and so forth.  So I have a huge family that way.  I have a couple of cousins, but my brothers had brothers and--brothers had children, and they have had children.  So we got a plenty of children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I have a big family and I, I live here.  And I stayed here after I, after my husband died, I thought about leaving and I decided not to since this was not my original home.  But I spend my holidays with my sister in Maryland.  And my nieces and nephews live up there so I spend a lot of time there.
Speaker 1: Okay, is the community here in Petersburg [Virginia] still tight, I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: No, we're not as tight.  I have, I have people, and I have good friends here.  I have, we have things going on in city government.  They call me and I call them.  We talk and, backwards and forwards.  So I have a few, but we have so many other people, new people who've come into the community who don't know the history.  And they don't act right (laughter).  And so we have that problem.
Story_ID: 635054
Speaker 1: Okay, did your parents [Neoda Ware Saunders and Stacious Saunders] get a chance to see you become successful and--
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Your parents.
Speaker 2: My mother.
Speaker 1: Your mother, okay.
Speaker 2: My mama.  Now, she came down when I was sworn in as that, but my mother--I need to find her letters 'cause I found one the other day.  And I'm sorry I didn't put it--I, put my hands on it now.  But when I was standing on that stage, you know, no, when I got fired.  I got fired at Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  That's something I never--we haven't talked about.  But that's okay.  But I got--she wrote me this letter, and I found it the other day.  And she was quite a writer too.  And she wanted to know had I thought about the consequences of getting fired and the fact that I would have to maybe move somewhere else and find a job somewhere else.  "And you're married [to Richard Farley], and you don't--and you've got--you're not by yourself.  And you need to understand that."  Oh, it was a quite a letter, and I, I hadn't even remembered that letter, you know.  But I got to pull that out and put it into my papers because it's quite a letter.  Then she says--we had, when I got fired, we took twenty-five hundred people to Richmond [Virginia] and marched on the capitol [Virginia State Capitol].  And I was out in front.  I may have a picture of that.  And I was out in front, and she saw it on television.  And so she, she was in Roanoke [Virginia], and she saw it.  And then, of course, they told the story, you know, that we were heading, led this student protest, and this, that and the other.  And so she was upset about that.  So she, but she saw me.  She was always afraid--and I never was afraid 'cause I didn't, I didn't--again, I'm black.  I didn't think anybody would do anything to you.  When Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] got, died, I was in--I've done a lot of travel too.  That was another nice thing about everything else I've done.  But I was in Liechtenstein, little teeny place.  Maybe you've heard of Liechtenstein.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in there--
Speaker 1: Near Belgium, I think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And we were looking at the snowcapped mountains, I never will forget.  And we got word that he had been shot, and that's where we were.  And I was over there.  I had students, took a group of students over, and we toured eight countries in Europe that year.  And that's when I realized, that, yeah, they will shoot you, they'll kill you.  I didn't know, I didn't believe it, but she wrote that letter.  And she told me, "Nope, I want you to stop."  And I wasn't doing anything, I didn't think.
Speaker 1: You were reinstated, right, as a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was hired the next day (laughter), rehired the next day.  I had to get the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] and everything else involved, but we, we did it.  Yeah, we did it.
Story_ID: 635055
Speaker 1: One thing I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you about.  You have an Africa, right over your heart right between, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I mean what is the, what's the significance to you?
Speaker 2: I bought this in Dakar the first time I went to Africa.  I did, went straight across the bulge, right straight from Dakar all the way over to East Africa, Tanzania, Kenya and with the University of Massachusetts [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] study group.  And I was studying parent/child relationships in Africa, attachment and certain psychological things that go on in childhood.  And so that summer, I, I spent there, and I bought this, and I've been wearing it all these years, just keep it on.  So Nefertiti is sitting on top of the continent, yeah, and I love it dearly, never take it off really.
Story_ID: 635056
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I, one thing, when I told you about the firing, I'll just tell you that kind of quickly because I think it was highly significant and it still is, 'cause it's out there.  And it hasn't been really all finished.  But it was, it dealt with desegregation in higher education.  And we were all embroiled in the Virginia state school of agriculture [Virginia Polytechnic Institute] being merged with Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia], that's V--that was VPI.  And they, also we had a two year white college here in Petersburg [Virginia] that was overnight started because the patron of that college was head of their appropriations committee in the House of Rep--House [U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations].  And so he put the money up there so they could start this school, and there was a threat that they would become the four year college and Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] would be diminished.  Okay, so the whole thing, one whole school going there.  This school gonna escalate to a four year school.  So a group of students and faculty members, a few faculty members, and I was a faculty leader, and they had a student leader, we got together and decided to protest it.  And it escalated into some other things, but it was at the same time that they were trying to desegregate higher education.  And so they came out with a federal law--the office of civil rights [Office for Civil Rights] came out and said that they had to make Virginia State, which was the--and Norfolk State [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia], the two black state colleges as whole as all the other colleges were.  And, of course, it took them a long time, and they, they haven't--they really never did it.  But they did better by it.  So--
Speaker 1: By the way, what year is this?
Speaker 2: This is '68 [1968], '69 [1969], '70 [1970].  And see, things were going--it's just all these things were just converging, you know.  And I just happened to be in different places (laughter) where the effects were being felt and got in the middle of it.  And so, anyhow, we, that whole thing had to play itself out.  Presidents resigned and different people got fired, and they decided that I was a leader and another guy, were faculty leaders.  And so they fired, dismissed us, and we had--we were on tenure track.  And so they hadn't done it right.  So we were rehired immediately.  But that whole thing happened, and it, it set a tone.  It had, it had an impact in terms of what happened in higher education in the State of Virginia.  They claim now that all these schools are equal, but they're not.  And they still have holes in 'em, but at least Virginia has been lifted from the decree of, of it.  But that's because some ball was played (laughter), some games were played.  But it's, it happened.  And I think it was a very significant time and very few people know about that and know the, know--and black colleges [historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs)] in other states went through the same thing.  And they, they worked, different states worked out their plans in different ways.  But I don't think any of 'em did a adequate job.
Speaker 1: You're right.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Just as [HistoryMaker] Florence Farley, who had a good life and enjoyed every minute of it, and still do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you.
Story_ID: 635057
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead and tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is, this is I (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: This is [HistoryMaker] Florence Farley.  I'm in my office at Virginia State [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and that's a picture, and you see that hand up there.  I was famous for making a point with the student.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's in the '80s [1980s], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is in '80 [1980].  This is a picture at the time when I was the mayor [of Petersburg, Virginia], and I'm with Yvonne Martin--Yvonne Miller [Yvonne B. Miller], Jean Cunningham [Jean Wooden Cunningham] and Jesse Mayes [Jesse J. Mayes], and all of us were elected officials at the time.
Speaker 1: Oh, dear.  I am at church (laughter).  I was often called upon to be a speaker for Women's Day.  And so I'm doing, giving one of my famous, Women's Day speeches.  That was around, in the '80s [1980s] also.
Speaker 2: And this is another Women's Day speech.  See the hats.  Boy, I'm really talking there (laughter), giving that Women's Day speech.  And I never gave the same one twice.  I'm real proud of myself, sit down and write speeches, but I need to put all together now.  Yep.
Speaker 1: This is so historic.  We've gotta do it too.
Speaker 2: That's Vern--Dr. Vernon Johns my buddy.  He loved me dearly, and I loved him dearly.  And I stayed with--lived with him during my year in graduate school.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: Vernon Johns.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones played him on TV ['The Vernon Johns Story: The Road to Freedom'].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they did.  They shot it here.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me two months shy of being sixteen.  For some reason, my mother [Neoda Ware Saunders] wanted me to take that picture and send it to my daddy [Stacious Saunders].  You see on there, "Your daughter, Florence," as if he didn't know who his daughter was.
Speaker 2: And here's your daddy.
Speaker 1: And there is my daddy (laughter).  You see how well dressed he was?  He was, he was a--he should have been a designer.  He would have been a beautiful designer of women's clothes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: And there's my mother and my father.  And he was extremely pleased that he had brought my mama that fur coat.
Speaker 2: Got it in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 1: Pittsburgh, that's right.  And here I am with a sucker in my hand, receiving my Ph.D. (laughter) at Kent State University [Kent, Ohio].  And I'm, I'm--(laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: That's right, and I had the sucker in my hand.
Speaker 2: And there's another picture of Kent State.  I stayed in Tent City when I was at Kent State, where they had killed those, killed the children early--years earlier.  But that's the area that they had bought it.  I--
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of me at Kent State that they put on their famous graduate wall.
Speaker 2: And this is my first venture out of Roanoke, Virginia.  I'm back--I'm on that last roll, looking up, laughing.  But this was at Bennett College in North Carolina [Greensboro, North Carolina], and it was a--I was a Girl Reserve [Girl Reserves of the Young Women's Christian Association], and I went down there to how to be a leader.
Speaker 1: Point to which one you are?
Speaker 2: There I am right there, right there, cutting up, cutting up, cutting up.
Speaker 1: This is being filmed too, even as we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, really?  Oh, god, you all are so--wait 'til I tell my nephew about it.  Wait 'til I tell--I'm gonna tell my nephew all these things you all did to me (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, god, nah, I didn't.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my mother that you see on the wall here that I finally crossed it.  She's a pretty lady.  She's a pretty lady.
Speaker 2: And that is why--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, I'm so serious there but that's, that's one of the pictures that I used in one of my campaigns.  And I used to have a guy would come around and do pictures of me.  So he wanted one.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And this is a picture of Fred [ph.]--oh, it's something on here.  Okay, that's a picture of me with my staff at Central State Hospital [Petersburg, Virginia], those young people who came from different HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] and I trained them to be clinical psychologists.
Speaker 1: And there I am in South Africa.  That was the hotel that we stayed in, and I was going down to breakfast one day.
Speaker 2: And here I am with my friend, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis.  She's smoking a pipe, and I'm smoking a cigarette.  And I think we had a bottle of scotch back there on the (laughter), back there on the table (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a pipe.  You see the pipe in her hand?
Speaker 1: Before I didn't.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's got pipe in her hand, and then that was at Virginia State, the first, the big picture.  And the small picture, she came to Kent State to speak, and I was, she and I were eating lunch.
Speaker 1: And this is one of my last pictures, one of camp- one of my last campaigns.  I think it was the campaign when I ran for school board.   It is.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the last picture.  I was running for school board at that time, and I won.
Speaker 2: In my first campaign, 1973, when I first ran for city council [Petersburg City Council], young people in this ward helped me.  They were the ones really who were, who did all the work, and they rejoicing at the victory party that we had.
Speaker 1: And there I am going over to see--I had a picture somewhere, and I don't, couldn't find it.  But there I am, going over to Robben Island [South Africa] where Nelson Mandella was in prison.
Speaker 2: And that's the earliest picture of Florence Saunders Farley.  It's not Farley.  That's Florence Therese, and my mother called me all of that.  And I must have been nine, eight or nine years old.
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of me when I finished high school [Lucy Addison High School, Roanoke, Virginia].
Speaker 2: And this is a picture, this is a news release that they did when I was commissioned in the Women's Army Corps [Women's Army Auxiliary Corps; Women's Army Corps], August 3, 1951.  Isn't that something?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a, that's a cross stitch of a painting that Clementine Hunter, who is considered the black Grandma Moses, and she's a folk artist.  And her work is shown in the Metropolitan Museum of Art [New York, New York].  And that's her, one of her things.  I have about five of those, different things.  She just paints.  She just puts anything on the canvass, just, just put anything out there, yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, hey, or you liked that one.  Yeah, that's another one of my cross stitch.
Speaker 2: What's the title of this one?
Speaker 1: 'Hair' [ph.].
Speaker 2: 'Hair', okay.
Speaker 1: 'Hair' just 'Hair' 'cause I just took it from different, different photographs I had, I saw--I had seen, rather, of different styles of hair, and I just did it, kind of dreamed that one up.
