Story_ID: 17938
Speaker 1: Can you give us today's date and location?
Speaker 2: March 28th, 2003 at the HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your full name and spell it, please?
Speaker 2: Charles, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, Eldridge, E-L-D-R-I-D-G-E, Freeman, F-R-E-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's name and spell it?
Speaker 2: Jeanette, J-E-A-N-E-T-T-E, Rena, R-E-N-A, Winston was her maiden name, W-I-N-S-T-O-N, Freeman.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And your father's name?
Speaker 2: William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Isaac, I-S-A-A-C, Freeman.  And he was born in Richmond, Virginia.
Story_ID: 17939
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I imagine blue.
Speaker 1: And--.
Speaker 2: You should have guessed that.
Speaker 1: Yes, you look great in it too.  And your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fish, and flounder, I guess, is the type.  And I've always been looking for flounder, trying to find that taste that I had back in Richmond, Virginia.  But it's difficult.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Mexico.
Speaker 1: Any special part?
Speaker 2: Acapulco.  I'm old hat.
Story_ID: 17940
Speaker 1: Would you give me an idea of what you remember about your grandparents and tell us something about them?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, not very much.  The Freeman family has always been older fathers.  And my father's--my grandfather [Charles Freeman], I never knew him. He died, oh, many years before I was born.  He died, in fact, when my father [William Freeman] was just in the sixth grade.  And he was a, he was a contractor.  He did lathing work.  That was a big trade then.  And he did a lot of the major buildings, I understand in Richmond [Virginia].  He had a big crew.  He died in a parade--overheating.  And my grandmother [Lucille Freeman] that I, of course, never knew on my father's side, she died of the swine flu shortly before he died.  So my father at, I guess about twelve, thirteen years old, started working.  He had two older--three older sisters that he tried to help, and he was the only male in the family.
Speaker 1: Was he the oldest?
Speaker 2: No, he was next to the youngest.
Speaker 1: And your mother's--your grandparents on your maternal side?
Speaker 2: I never knew my grandfather [Willie Winston].  He had died many years ago.  He was a, a, I guess entrepreneur.  He used to have lunch stands, I'm told, in, in Baltimore [Maryland] and in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when they were building the railroad tracks or the, or the trolley car tracks.  And he would have lunch stands that he operated in both of those cities.  And he died long before my mother [Jeanette Winston Freeman] married my father, and of course, he brought her to, to Richmond.  My grandmother I did know, Molly [Winston].  And she was, she died I think when I was in the [U.S.] Army back in about 1956.
Story_ID: 17941
Speaker 1: What was your relationship with your father [William Freeman], what was it like?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was--he was a hard-working man.  He always felt that--well, he had gone through that experience of working at a very young age.  And he was a Pullman porter, and he couldn't take that any longer.  Then he came back to Richmond [Virginia].  And he worked for a dental laboratory, just doing deliveries.  And then he started a business on the side.  He was gone a lot.  And, and he would also, in addition to doing floor finishing work, starting out in that, he would also take care of buildings--go by at night, check the heat and give coal.  And he would take my brother [James Freeman] and I with him.  My brother is about two years older than I.  And we--it was interesting going to these buildings with all these stocks and supplies around and--but he, he gave us all the possible time that, that he could.  He was a man who loved to read.  And he kept books around and magazines around.  And he tried to educate himself.  He even took a law course, one of those mail order law courses. I don't know what you could have done with it in those days, but I've since learned that even in Illinois you could become a licensed attorney at some point without going to law school or even finishing college for that matter.
Speaker 1: And so the primary thing is to pass the bar [examination]?
Speaker 2: Is to pass the bar.  I don't think he ever completed the courses.  But I think his attempt at doing that kind of pushed (laughs), you know, pushed me in that direction.
Story_ID: 17942
Speaker 1: And what was your relationship with your mother [Jeanette Winston Freeman]?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was home all the time.  It was a great relationship.  She was the housekeeper.  And she kept our, our home well.  There's a picture of the home in the--where I was born on 5th Street in Richmond, Virginia.  She, I could only remember her going out and working for a very short period of time.  I went to the Navy Hill Elementary School [Richmond, Virginia] that was just about a half block from where we lived.  And they had no--no lunchroom facilities.  And the principal asked her if she would start one, so she did.  And it looked like she did too well because others moved her out (laughs).  Once she got the business going pretty good, and others saw that there, there was a good profit there, I think it--then that was the end of her services.
Story_ID: 17943
Speaker 1: What was life like growing up in the Freeman household on a day-to-day basis?
Speaker 2: Oh, we lived on 5th Street, and that was--it, it was a--the trolley tracks ran down 5th Street.  We were about four blocks from Broad Street, which is the main shopping area of, of Richmond [Virginia].  5th Street was a main street.  It was residential.  A lot of--there were two doctors in the block, ministers and school teachers.  But close to us and around us, there were people who were probably less, less fortunate than we were.  But my father [William Freeman] would take us out, and then finally we would go out, and we spent a lot of time--my brother [James Freeman] and I, we lived on basketball and, and sandlot football and it was a great experience.  We also made a big attempt--and we did a lot of that in bringing kids into our yard, we had a large backyard.  And my father, I remember, spending a great deal of time.  He--I don't know how he knew carpentry, but we built a little playhouse in back, and, and it was a clubhouse for the, for the neighborhood where everyone would come.  We would have fun.  It was a great coming up.
Story_ID: 17944
Speaker 1: My father [William Freeman], even though he worked hard, funds were not that plentiful.  We had a, we had a comfortable existence.  He wanted my brother and I to go to different schools, and he just could not afford it.  And I remember him telling--I had been accepted to some other schools, and, and he was pretty much in tears, that he could not send us out of, out of state.  My brother wanted to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and I hadn't even focused and--but when I saw what happened to my brother two years before, I knew it was impossible.  So we went to a local school.  We had then moved from 5th Street to the new neighborhood.  And we were within walking distance of Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia].  And we went to Virginia Union, my brother [James Freeman] and I.  But that was a sad thing for my father.  I think he, he always wanted to get the best education that he could.  And, and I, I think that he, he felt that going out of state would have been better--it would have been experience.  My brother and I--my brother was more outgoing than I.  I was a very introverted person.  I stuttered up until I was about fifteen.  It was hard to even overcome that.  And he worked with that.  I came out of high school at sixteen, and I'm going to a college campus, Virginia Union, with returning veterans at the time.  And I'm just a--a mere child.  So I think he wanted me to get some life's experience and to be out on my own.  But he could not achieve that, that for us, and it--I think it really saddened him.
Story_ID: 17945
Speaker 1: What about your mother [Jeanette Winston Freeman]?  What event stands out in memory?
Speaker 2: I, I think what I just told you before.  I always thought of my mother as someone who was home.  And I didn't know that she had the ability to get out there and do things.  And, in elementary school, to have a parent who is a major part of that operation at lunchtime, you know, all of the kids are there, they're scrambling for the sandwiches that she would spend all--get up in the morning and make--and milk, and had that coming in.  And so it was just, it was just a proud time for me, and it made me look at myself a little differently, you know, between those years.
Story_ID: 17946
Speaker 1: You were introverted when you were younger?
Speaker 2: I think I still am.
Speaker 1: Oh, you are (laughs).
Speaker 2: (Laughs)
Speaker 1: And you said that came from being the youngest or--?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know.  I don't know, I don't know what it was.  But it was interesting, you know, my, my father [William Freeman], he, he tried to break me out of it.  When we, when we moved to the, to a new area of the north side [of Richmond, Virginia], it was a larger home.  And in the back, there was a large garage with living quarters on top.  And he--instead of using--he--said he had two cars, which was unusual back then.  But he kept one for his sons to drive.  And--but, so rather than, than use the garage for cars, he converted it into a little apartment for me.  My brother [James Freeman] married at eighteen, so he was--his wife moved, you know, in with us.  And, and I was, you know, I was so--always very--when I went to college campus, I was young, and I was very shy.  But it made me instantly popular when the kids on campus found out I had what they called the habitory in my backyard.  And all--and I became the center of the parties (laughs).  So it was a big change for me, and, and I think he did that to, to sort bring me out of the, the shyness that I, that I had.
Story_ID: 17947
Speaker 1: But you were an excellent student, so you put all the energy into--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--well, I was, I, I think I did well without doing a lot of work.  I, I finished high school at sixteen which is, you know, was very unusual.  But I, I, I knew when to cut classes (laughs).  I always knew--I never really gave it my all.  I--I felt that through high school and, and through college.
Speaker 1: So you could get a good grade without struggling?
Speaker 2: Well, and yes, I--and no, not a great grade. I'd get, I--in high school, the honor society, but my grades were not great at Virginia Union.  But I, I would always pass.
Speaker 1: And, at, was it Navy Hill [Elementary School, Richmond, Virginia], was elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was elementary school years like?  Who was your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't remember their names.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some incident that made a particular teacher stand out for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure.  I can't think of her name, but it wasn't because of, it wasn't because of her.  It was because of what happened between us that made me remember.  We were given a test. We gave, you know, we took a test.  And, and we, when we finished, we could go and put it on, the results on her, on her desk.  And I had a friend who was a seat or either next to me.  And he put his paper up after me.  So his--so when she was looking through them and grading them, she came to his first.  And it was in class.  And it was the first one hundred, you know.  And then she goes down four more papers, and she finds my paper, and I get a hundred.  And she said, "This is impossible," said "Freeman, you've been copying off his paper," not realizing that I had put mine in first.  So it was a devastating thing for me.  But, but I'd, you know, I'd mentioned it to her, and I told her that, that I'd gone in first.  And she, she realized that it was true.  But, at, at the time it was kind of--I didn't do that until the next day after I went home and said what had happened.
Story_ID: 17948
Speaker 1: So middle and high school years, what were those like?
Speaker 2: I, my brother [James Freeman] and I both carried newspapers for the, the 'Richmond News Leader' [newspaper].  And we would get up early in the morning.  My father [William Freeman] would, would get up with us and drive us to the pick up station.  And we would load the papers in his car, and he would drop us off at our route, and our routes were always near our home.  So we would carry papers before going to, to school.  And I did that all through high school [Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: And were you saving for college too?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: In your high school years, what kind of student were you, socially and academically?
Speaker 2: Not much of a student socially.  I, I left premises as soon as I could, always back to the basketball court.  I was always late getting there--not late getting in, in the morning, but my mornings were always tied--was always tied up with the newspapers.  Activities, I was in Cadet Corps, the Honor Society, at graduation, I was the class giftatorian [sic], but that--not active in plays.  I had a cousin who came, who moved back to Richmond [Virginia] from New York who was very active in plays.  And I used to envy him because he had such a gift of gab, but that was not what I could do.
Speaker 1: Any favorite teachers--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I ran, I ran track as well.
Speaker 1: Did you put down a good mile for it? (laughs)
Speaker 2: (laughs) I was so naïve, I, I really was.  I've always, I've always liked clothes.  And I remember going--we went up to Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] for a track meet, and there was--I can't think of this guy's name, but he was from one of the islands.  And I think he, he was either number one or number two in the states in the hundred yard in 220.  We did a hundred in 220 then.  And, and I'm out there running at--and I didn't mind if I had argyle socks on (laughs).  But, and somebody finally said, "What are you wearing, argyle socks, you're running track, you know, either no socks or white socks minimal."
Story_ID: 17949
Speaker 1: Who were your mentors or role models when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, Oliver W. Hill [Jr.] and his partner--I can't think of his name, but he ended up being a federal judge in, in the D.C. Appellate Circuit [Court].  What's his name? [ref. to Spottswood W. Robinson III] He may still even be on the court there.  No, he can't be.  He'd, he'd have to be well into his eighties and nineties, but they both did a lot of civil rights work, lawsuits.  And, and they, and they, they worked with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And there were cases in Richmond [Virginia], and some of the teachers at [Virginia] Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] would be involved.  I remember Professor Johnson who was a good family friend, but he was history teacher, but he, he was a very strange guy.  And he had little quirks and little things that he wanted to learn about.  He learned trains.  So when they were talking about train desegregation and arguing some of the cases that were argued by Oliver W. Hill, Bob Johnson would be the expert witness.  And, of course, he would come back to class and he would tell us about his experiences and that was his--always so interesting.  But I think Oliver W. Hill is probably a person that I looked at, and I, I admired.
Speaker 1: How did you get into a relationship with Mr. Hill?
Speaker 2: I really did not.  I'm, I'm a little kid carrying newspapers to his office.  And I only heard about him through Dr. Johnson, who was a friend of the family.  When he would come by the house, we would talk.  And I'd had a lot of classes under Bob Johnson.
Story_ID: 17950
Speaker 1: Was it in those years that your interest in law surfaced before--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No, I think before that.  My, my father [William Freeman] would never let a day go without in some way mentioning that he would want his sons--he had made it clear that he wanted his sons to become lawyers.
Speaker 1: So after you finished high school and went off to college, you were thinking law then or did that come to you later?
Speaker 2: No, I was thinking law then.  I didn't know how I would do it.  That was a, that was a problem.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us how did you do it?
Speaker 2: Well, for two years I, I did not.  And then I, I got drafted into the [U.S.] Army, and then I began to save money in the Army.  And when I returned, I had, I had met someone--I didn't want to go back to Richmond [Virginia].  Richmond had become, in my life, at my family home, had become too easy.  I felt that I had to get away to another city, otherwise, I would fall back into my same old habits.  So I, I did that.  I came to Chicago [Illinois].  There was a fellow I'd met in Washington [D.C.], when I was in school, Simuel McGill.  His father used to be the attorney under [publisher Robert S.] Abbott for the '[Chicago] Defender' [newspaper].  He and Abbott married sisters and lived on King Drive.  The McGill mansion I think is still on King Drive.  It's being converted now into condominiums or something.  But that was, I was told that there's a night law school here.  You can come to Chicago, you can work, and you can go to school at night.  A friend of mine from Virginia Union [University], James Walton, who became a judge here, who's now retired, had started working for the Cook County Department of Public Aid here.  And I contacted him, and he said, "I can help you."  So I did.  I came to Chicago and I got a job as a social worker within about a week.  And then immediately within, within, within a couple of months, I became a property insurance consultant.  And that's what Walton was for the--so it was, it was just a--to have that position, and, and to start law school, financially, it, it made it much easier for me.  But in addition to that, the, the law schools in Virginia had not start integrating.  A fellow by the name of Fred Stokes and I, who is now a principal in, in Richmond, went up to T. C. Williams Law School [University of Richmond, Virginia] one day, knowing what would happen, but to register.  And, of course, we were denied registration.  And then the dean took us in, I guess they just knew something was coming.  And Richmond was a different kind of city.  They did not handle perceived problems with violence.  They handled perceived problems with diplomacy.  And so he immediately told me that if you were to go away to another school, out of state, you know, the state of Virginia would pay a great portion of your tuition.  So that was another incentive (laughs).  And I wanted, I wanted to leave anyway.  So I came to Chicago.  Fred Stokes stayed and went into education.  He was never interested in law.  He just went up there with me.  I needed some support.
Speaker 1: So in addition to working and getting help from--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) The State of Virginia.
Speaker 1: The state of Virginia, that really helped.  And I suppose having your military service and all that, you were in a better place anyway to start law school.
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes.  I was so, so young, coming out of college at, at twenty.  You know, most, twenty-two, twenty-three, and then, and being in an environment of, of much older students during those years.  As I said, the returning veterans was a, was a phenomena for, for a lot of college campuses.
Speaker 1: So you entered, what year was it when you entered law school?  And tell us which one.
Speaker 2: In John Marshall Law School [Chicago, Illinois] in 1958.  And if you go to night school, it normally requires four years, but I went to summer school, so I was able to come out in three and a half.
Speaker 1: And your dad, was he still living?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, he was--came here when I was sworn in to the bench, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's wonderful.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: He must have been a happy man.
Speaker 2: Oh, he was.
Speaker 1: Did he say anything to you about it?
Speaker 2: No, the Freeman men are pretty much alike (laughs).
Story_ID: 17951
Speaker 1: So your introverted demeanor, that comes from your dad [William Freeman] or your mom [Jeanette Winston Freeman]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think both.  Family life, they were--the--my grandmother lived one block away, next to Paul Freeman, by the way, yes.  And Paul with his goats in the yard, and his father was a produce guy back in those years.  But that was a, a closeness, you know, we would visit with my grandmother, my father's sisters--two them were teachers.  One had moved to, to New York.  But it wasn't a great family visiting, get-together kind of thing.  And I guess because my father was thirty-five, thirty-six, thirty-seven, I guess, when my brother was born, he, he did not have young friends who had--who usually had kids our age.  So we didn't have--we didn't run with children of my father's friends.  A little different.  In fact, my, my father, he'd almost, he'd--I think he'd almost given up on having children.  In one of the pictures there's a fellow there, Buddy Lee, so he--who was the son my mother's sister.  And Buddy Lee, you'll see him, he has the process [chemically relaxed hairstyle].  He was an entertainer in, in New York, and his wife, Kay, whose, who's white.  And, so my father almost adopted Buddy.  And Buddy lived with my parents, and then all of a sudden, my brother came.  And, you know, I guess that happens.  He was, he was a very happy man to have his, his own children.  But Buddy was his son too.
Story_ID: 17952
Speaker 1: And your brother, did he go into law?
Speaker 2: No, he's a teacher--well, he's a retired school teacher.
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois] or--?
Speaker 2: In Richmond [Virginia].
Speaker 1: In Richmond.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, okay, and while you were in John Marshall Law School [Chicago, Illinois], was there any challenge with the big age difference to you or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, night law school is different.  It's--my son had the, had the benefit of going to the University of Chicago [Chicago,Illinois] where you find, you know, everyone pretty much your age.  They may have gone for a second degree before going into law, so it may be just a couple of years, but everyone is pretty much in the same age bracket.  Night school, there were guys forty years old, fifty years old.  And, and I was still in my, in my twenties.  I was still, still young.  But it's, it's amazing that you ask the question.  I, I remember a friend of mine who's, who became very famous, [former Virginia governor Douglas] Doug Wilder.  We used to, during those two years when I was like doing nothing, we used to drive up to Washington [D.C.].  And he started at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And, and I went into the, into the [U.S.] Army and Doug, Doug was, was kind of not certain about what he was going to do.  He wanted medicine at first, but then he went, decided that he would, he would go into law.  And I used to tease him.  I said, "Doug, you're gonna be an old man when you get out of law school."  But it, but age is so relative.
Story_ID: 17953
Speaker 1: Did you marry before or after law school [John Marshall Law School, Chicago, Illinois]--well, I mean, how far after law school?
Speaker 2: This is my second marriage. My, childhood sweetheart in Richmond [Virginia] through high school and, and into college--we, we broke up two years before I finished. And, I hadn't seen or heard from her--and this is, I came out of the [U.S.] Army and I go to Richmond, just as a stop off to come to Chicago [Illinois]. She had moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and she came back to Richmond. Her, aunt and her uncle was there.  And, and that's where she, who she lived with for those years in, Richmond. And I hadn't seen her in all these years, and within three days, we got married.  She went to Washington [D.C.] to Howard Law School, where [Doug] Wilder was, and I went to Chicago. And that was in September, I think it was.  And then in December we said, ah, it's not--so we divorced.
Story_ID: 17954
Speaker 1: When you finished John Marshall Law School [Chicago, Illinois], you were all ready to start your career in law?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What were your first steps?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm in a, in a strange town, don't know that many people, just probably the--people I'd met were those, were guys in law school with me, and those that I, I worked with. And it was hard getting a practice going. I had worked for [Illinois Department of] Public Aid for I think two years after finishing law school. And then James Walton, I had mentioned before, and another friend, Albert Porter, that I was in law school with--we decided that we would, we would put an office in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois neighborhood]. And we did. So we started practicing in Englewood.  And I stayed there for, oh, up until I was elected to the bench.  And it was a, a corner office. I remember, 6300 South Peoria [Street], and, and I ended up with the building (laughs). So, and, there was a big package good liquor store on the first floor, and we had eight offices upstairs. And I, they were mine, of course. And the smartest thing I did in all those years is when, when [then Illinois state or U.S. Representative] Harold Washington was being redistricted out of his representative district, I said, "Harold, come on over here, you can have a spare office space."  And he did.  And to have him in the office was just great because he didn't care anything about the practice of law (laughs), you know.  And every time a client would come in, even during the years when he could practice--for a long time, he could not practice, but he would say, "Charlie, would you help these people?" I'd say, oh, sure Harold."  He was such a great guy. He, he did, he had--I don't want to get off, we're not, we're not on now?
Speaker 1: No, yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: We are, oh. Well--.
Speaker 1: When, when, when Mayor [Harold] Washington first started working with--how did you meet Harold?
Speaker 2: Oh, Walton had, James Walton had become active in the West Side politics in the (unclear) in the 29th Ward.  And so he took me over there, even though I lived south and, and got me into that organization. Things happened so fast.  Within two months Walton decided that he was gonna run for alderman against the 29th Ward organization.  Of course, that meant, I'm out too.  And I worked with him in his, his campaign.  And it ended up being a write-in campaign because they knocked him off the ballot. Back in those days, that was the, the thing to do, from the regular organization.  And so then I looked for a political home. And Dr. Eugene Mason, who was a dentist, I think on King Drive, said, I'll send you to [Chicago City Council Alderman Ralph] Metcalfe. He's a good guy. So I went to Metcalfe, and he--Metcalfe would, he would really do a formal interview with people coming in to work his precincts (laughs), you know.  And, you know, I walked in the office that, that day, by appointment, and there was his executive committee.  And, that was Kenneth Wilson, who was a state senator, state rep[resentative], became county board commissioner and then circuit judge and appellate judge. Harold Washington--a fellow by the name of Harold Conn, Lefty Morenie (ph.) and a number, of people. And, they talked and they asked me questions.  And I, talked with them.  It was like an interview.  And Metcalfe made it clear that there were no stage sitters. Just because you're a lawyer, you go out and you do work. I said, that's okay. I'll work a precinct. You know, I, I did, 43rd [Street] and Wabash [Avenue].  And, but when I left there, Harold pulled me on the side. He said, you know, he said, "I--you may like this." He said, but I tell you, he's gonna work you. And if you're not ready to do some work, don't, you know, don't waste your time. So we became friends, I think, you know, right off.
Story_ID: 17955
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit, something about your private practice years. What kind of things stand out for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I--general practitioner. I had to--because I always had some other kind of position, job, I--[then Chicago City Council  Alderman Ralph] Metcalfe moved me pretty, pretty fast in terms of political positions. The attorney general's office, five, six months. State's attorney's office, five or six months, then right into the, as assistant attorney to the board of election commissioners, which was a really, a plum, considered a plum spot. And then I was there for maybe a year and a half, and an arbitrator [poistion] in the industrial commission opened up. Harold Washington was the arbitrator, and Harold wanted me to replace him. And he, he worked that with Metcalfe and, I did. That required the, the governor's appointment. I think it was [Otto] Kerner--yeah, Kerner. I served there for eight years, and then Harold, who was very active and very influential then in, Springfield [Illinois], got close with Dan Walker, who became governor and he persuaded Walker to appoint me to the Illinois Commerce Commission. So I served on the commerce commission.  But during all of this time, I had a practice.  But all of these positions that I held gave me daytime freedom, not complete freedom, but enough so that I could take the kinds of cases that were not long hour, time-demanding cases in the court, in a courtroom setting. I don't mind the nights back in the office, you know, getting ready. But if you were, you had depositions, those are long-time, time-consuming things that I could not do with, the other things that I, I was doing. So I had a, general practitioner. The heavy cases, if--the few that I received, I would have to farm out to, someone else.
Story_ID: 17956
Speaker 1: And when Harold Washington joined your office, did you ever work on any cases with him?
Speaker 2: Harold didn't really want to practice law. He never really did. For the time when he was licensed, he would, he would be a funnel for the business. But he would do maybe the initial interview, but then that was it.  Harold didn't want to prepare any documents, he didn't want to do any filings. That was not his interest. And once he went to the [Illinois state] legislature, he just spent his time just preparing himself for that work. And he cared nothing--I guess he really had no interests in money. It, just never interests him. If he had a good book, he'll forget about going to court.  And that's the thing that got him in trouble with his law license because he would just--he would sometimes accept a retainer, you know, on some very small case. And he would forget to go to court and he wouldn't go.  And the bar associations wrote him, you got to come and explain your conduct.  And he, he wouldn't go. So he lost his license for a few years.
Speaker 1: He just really enjoyed politics.
Speaker 2: He enjoyed politics and he enjoyed reading. It, was amazing--he was, so unusual.  And, a very private person. Harold was extremely private. I, remember [Chicago City Council Alderman Ralph] Metcalfe in those years, boy, we would have private meetings sometimes when, when Metcalfe was beginning to move into the police brutality thing.  And we would be--he used to own the Community Insurance Agency at 48th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue] and he sold that to Milt Moses [founder of Community Insurance]. But we used to go, even when Milt Moses owned it, we would go up to his office. He'd always have about six or seven people we would meet and talk about things. [State of Illinois Financial Director] John Stroger, as well, you known, he's from the--and we would sit around there and just talk about things, what we could and, whatever, what's the future holding?  And he would have us out sounding various communities and, churches. And Ben Branch would come in and [unclear]. You know, Ben Branch?  He was the guy who played the saxophone for Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and then he came to Chicago [Illinois]. He would always play 'Precious Lord.'  So Ben Branch was always good with ministers.  And so he was a good source of information on what the ministers are doing, what they are thinking.  But Metcalfe would not want to start those meetings unless he could find Harold.  And Harold had a way of disappearing for days.  He would just--no one would know--know where Harold was. He would just go. He was probably at home and wouldn't answer. For three and a half years, when I was in Springfield [Illinois] on the [Illinois] Commerce Commission, we stayed in the same hotel, sometimes on the same floor. I was there every other week, and I, probably saw Harold Washington two times in those three and a half years. When we were in Chicago, every day, all day, we would, we would go across the street to--and have a drink together in a bar or when I ended up owning the bar and the package goods store downstairs (laughing), we would go down there.  But we were always, you know, together during the office hours setting in Chicago, but in Springfield, Harold was gone.
Story_ID: 17957
Speaker 1: Over the years, your relationship with Harold Washington, what was it like from your perspective when he was getting ready to actually commit to running for mayor [of Chicago, Illinois], the time he won?
Speaker 2: Well, Harold, changed before then. I think, before he went to Congress, Harold really changed.  And I noticed it a little bit. Some of the things that, he would--used to do, he had stopped doing or was doing in moderation.  And for years, he would always, he was a guy who wanted to push someone else ahead.  He didn't want to step out front unless he really had to. I always had that feeling about Harold.  So he, pushed guys like, [John] Stroger, a guy named Bill Harris who became the first African American president of the--Young Democrats [college-based arm of the national Democratic Party organization], which was a big thing back in, those years.  He always pushed them--Bishop [Louis Henry] Ford's son, Charles Ford, who's now--he, pushed them. We would meet over in the office, and Cliff Kelly and others would just sit around, aside from Metcalf, we would meet Metcalf.  Sometimes we had our little, scuttle sessions.  And Harold was always interested in pushing others to, do things and, step out in front.  And that was the, one of the most things that I, noticed about him. But then he changed from that.  And he realized that if, anything is going to happen, if any change is gonna be bought about, that I--that he thought were important, he had to take a real leadership role and kind of do it himself.  When, just before he went to [U.S.] Congress, I was elected to the bench and didn't see him that often. I went to Washington [D.C.] for the swearing in and so forth. That, kind of separated because on the bench, you don't hang around the old political offices you, you kind of, try to move yourself away from that. Then came retention time, and I had to call Harold. "Harold, I need help. I'm running for retention," and, Harold was meeting up at the packinghouse, and I went.  And, the way that Harold spoke, I could see the great change in him.  He was always a good speaker, but he was able to touch--but he was an intellectual speaker.  He was able then to reach and touch people, people who had to really give him the kind of support that he needed.  People were willing to give the grassroots kind of support. And I, and I could see the dedication in him.  So he, changed.
Speaker 1: So, when he consented the second time, when he told everybody, well, "If you want me to run, you have to raise the money--,"
Speaker 2: Yeah--.
Speaker 1: --and all like, tell me about that period when he was, he said, "Okay, if I get the support I need."
Speaker 2: He was gonna run. I think he was gonna do it anyway. But you, that's what you do.  You try to make, to force others to come forward and make commitments so that they don't find it too easy to back away from you once you're out there.  And I, think he, knew what he was doing.
Speaker 1: Did he know that--did he have a sense that the environment would change like it did and that momentum would--?
Speaker 2: In city council?
Speaker 1: No, before, as he was coming up to win, you know. There was all these things happening in Chicago [Illinois], generally that--.
Speaker 2: I, don't know. I, don't know. I, think when that first debate that he had when he just jumped out and attacked [Mayor] Jane Byrne, it was so dramatic, I mean, who is this guy? (Laughs)  You know, that, yeah, it caused people to see the possibilities.  And, I don't think it necessarily energized him. Harold always knew he was brilliant.  (Laughs). And I think he always knew that he was gonna get into a hard fight and he would give it his all.  That was the second time he ran.  The first time was, this disaster and he didn't expect much more from it.  But the interesting thing, but I've, a theory I've always had about, about Harold in 'Council Wars' [between aldermen who supported Washington and those who opposed him], I think Harold knew too much about city government to tell the leaders in city council that he was going to change the way things operate, without knowing what the reaction would be.  And I think he knew that.  And I think he knew that he would have been unable to accomplish anything without making deals with them. So rather than make deals with them, he made them his enemies to see if he could garner the strength and the support to take control by electing new aldermen. So he started--I think that Harold wanted that fight.  He wanted to be able to say, "I want to do this like I promised. I want to make some changes here, but I can't--those guys over in city council--."  And once he set that up, that he could change the make-up in city council and bring in some fresh blood, some new blood, I think that was his plan.  He's never told me, but I just--I couldn't see him not realizing that the power really lies with aldermen, you know. The mayor of, this city does not--he's, not the guy who can really run it if the aldermen will not let him. And they weren't about to let Harold do it, and I think he knew that. So why not make them your enemies?
Speaker 1: And he, struggled with it for quite a while back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but he was very successful (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: Very successful, three, three and a half years I think it was. Begin to start seeing results in the next aldermanic election, a lot of changes.
Story_ID: 17958
Speaker 1: As it was coming up after he [Harold Washington] won his second term [as Chicago mayor] and, was there anything evident about his health issues?
Speaker 2: Oh, I mean, everyone knew, they could see the, weight gain.  And, I knew that he wasn't honest with himself and with people. I knew, I used to go up to the, apartment.  And as you--it was, two bedrooms. You'd walk in, those bed--one room to the left he used as a study.  He had an exercise bike in there. And sometimes he would have someone there when I would come, and would say, "Charlie, have a seat over there."  So I'd go in there, and I'd wait.  And I would check odometer (laughs), and I would tease him about it.  It wasn't moving (laughs). I'd say, "Harold, come on, what are you doing?" You know, he, he'd just--.
Story_ID: 17959
Speaker 1: At what point did you find time to marry and start--?
Speaker 2: Well, I married when I was in law school.
Speaker 1: And, and did--was Kevin born? Kevin is your son, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, Kevin was, let me see, we married in '62 [1962]. Kevin was ten years later, almost ten years later.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had--.
Speaker 2: The Freeman's are old parents.
Speaker 1: Is your wife an attorney?
Speaker 2: No, no.  She works, well, she has two, jobs. She works for the City [of Chicago]. She's in the building department, and she's liaison to the, aldermanic offices.  She funnels the complaints from them and put them and put them into the right section.  And then she serves on the human rights commission for the, state [ of Illinois] as well.
Speaker 1: And so you had ten years where you didn't have any children?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, tell me about those years with your wife, what were they like?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was--she's a great partner.  She's always been a great partner.  And I think mainly responsible, you know, pushing me to, get through law school.  She used to do all my typing, all my notes and made certain she never interfered with, going to school and doing the work that I had to do in order to, finish.  And even after that, she said, oh, she's been my partner, and just, everything.  When I made that foolish mistake of taking over the liquor store and the package goods, the, bar and package goods store, she would run that (laughs) for, the family.  And when I finally went on the bench, and I had to get out of that, and I was glad I did, we started to dabbling in real estate. She--we would, she would take care of buildings, keep the books, I mean--we, did things as a, family.  We had one building that wasn't too far from us. It was about a forty-unit building and we did everything to make it self-sufficient. It was a corridor building. So we put in garbage chutes on the outside.  And the--but we would go there and work the building.  We would go there and clean the hallways, my son, my wife and I.  And she'd collect the rents. I thought she was gonna get killed out there, you know, because she's so, she's such a strong, aggressive person when it, when it comes to--and, a harder worker.  But she's always been my full partner.
Speaker 1: I'd like 'how did you meet' stories.  How did you meet?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, for the, few days before I--when I first came to Chicago [Illinois], before going to, public aid, I went to a place at 75 East Wacker Drive, that building with the beautiful top. They had to take down, now, they put back up.  And, I did part-time work as a delivery messenger for an office service there. And my wife worked for Sidney Clayton and Associates that were on about the twentieth floor of that building.  She was an executive secretary to one of the account managers or something.  And, we just met. And, dated from then on.
Story_ID: 17960
Speaker 1: And when [son] Kevin was born, and you moved into yet another role, that of father, what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: Oh, that--it was, new for me, of course. I--my, son is just a great son.  We, were fortunate.  We lived in South Shore, and, not too far from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  So he spent his growing up mainly there, in nursery school all the way through, through high school and back there for, law school, after Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].  My wife spent a lot of time with him during those years, just to be around him. She used to go there and run the bookstore as a volunteer just to be on, campus.  And again, an older parent, and a, parent who's involved in a full-time job and practicing law and, in the office 7:00, 8:00 o'clock at, night.  You almost have to import friends. But University of Chicago [Laboratory School] was different because a lot of the--you know, most of the students there were the children of professors and doctors at the, university.  So they were older parents too. So it, was a little different environment for us.  And my son would have friends over and, we would do things together. That's one of the reasons I went into boating because I could--we would always have our weekends together boating, take out [unclear] out in the lake, bring along his friends.  And it was always, always great.  So I was able to spend time with him even though I was busy, but--with other things.
Speaker 1: And did he come to law naturally or did you influence that?
Speaker 2: I did not influence it, I don't think, the way my father influenced, tried to influence it with me.  I, did not do that. I, didn't quite have--my experience in law was, that there're better things to do, you know. There are other things that you could do, and, most of my success, if I've, if I've had any, has been in trying to do other things in property and, rather than through the law. I didn't make that much money practicing. I didn't--and these other avenues, of course, were, closed to me then. But I, don't think I really cared which way he went. I wanted him to, do, I think, what he wanted to do.
Speaker 1: So, it was just a natural--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He just took to it naturally.
Speaker 2: I think so, I think so.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about--.
Speaker 2: You know, but, in backing up, you know, and thinking on this, it was kind--you know, I've, the, one secretary we had in the office was a lady that Harold Washington brought with him.  And because I was busy in the daytime, a lot of times, my wife would do most of my personal typing and the filing of cases, would meet the clients.  And sometimes, she'd take my son along, so he went in--he would go with her to court, and wait for me to come. She would get the clients ready, you know. And I did a lot of divorces, a lot of--ton of divorces.  That was the fastest, easiest way to, practice with my other schedule. And she would have everyone all lined up and, and ready to go.  And it was--so, he saw this.  And so I think he, would see me going to court.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he got a lot of hands-on exposure.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 17961
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your winning a seat on the Illinois Supreme Court. What was that like for you?
Speaker 2: Well, Cook County [Illinois] is, a very political place. And I, wanted the, seat.  I knew that if I did not have help, that I probably could not, win. Things just seemed to have fallen right. I've, since heard that I probably would not--if, if the current mayor [Richard M.] Daley, who I did not know very well, and we had talked, you know, a number of times, but really did not know him well, if he were in his full stride I probably would not be there.  It would have been someone else. I do know that, the time had come for an African American.  After all these years, an African American had never even run for the [Illinois] Supreme Court, much less get elected.  And I, think that the, structured party knew that this was an opportunity for the party to do something.  And I, know, have since learned that, there were others who were invited, African Americans who were invited to run for this spot. Earl Neal, for instance, but Earl, (laughs), Earl said, "Thanks, but no thanks."  So it was, it just fell my way.  And, the Harold Washington experience, they knew that I had been popular, had become known in the, community, and it would, it would make a, it'd make a difference in election. Tickets are put together for various reasons.  And I think that I was put on the ticket for reasons. I was always a good judge and no matter where I went, I, was always the most productive, the hardest worker and never learned to play golf and so (laughs), and boating was a week--a weekend pleasure. So I was a good, productive, hardworking character who, who did good work. So that was not, that was a plus, but that was not the deciding factor.
Speaker 1: And I guess it helped that you had political knowledge--,
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and experience, which most judges don't have.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was John Stroger that we came, up together, we came through the 3rd Ward together. And John is, a good friend. And, well, the three people who really were in a decision-making position then were Wilson Frost, Stroger and Cecil Partee.  And Partee was not quite with me.  He, I think he really preferred Blanche Manning, but I think the other two prevailed--.
Story_ID: 17962
Speaker 1: Can you tell us what it was like, your reception when you joined the Illinois Supreme Court bench, what did your colleagues have waiting for you?
Speaker 2: I, don't think there was anything racially that I could point to.  I'm the--I was a strange duck.  It's a very--and when you go to Springfield [Illinois], the, courthouse has three floors, the clerk's office on the first floor.  The second floor is where the courtroom is.  On the third floor, there are about twelve apartments, office apartments, two-room apartments with, baths, and that's where we, live when we are there.  And we have a cook on premises, and we sit at the table.  And it becomes, it's a kind of, you know, formal thing.  I don't like eating with people (laughs).  So, most times, I'd say, "Listen, I'm gonna eat in my room."  Or I'll go out an-- eat.  So it was, you know, I was the one, and I had to explain to them that, I love you like brothers, but it's not that, but I--sometimes I don't feel like being bothered.  And you have to excuse me for the way that, I am.  But I, felt no pushing me off.  If anything, I was the one who was kind of reluctant to develop friendships.  I, picked my own friends and, circumstances don't necessarily dictate who you, your friends who are to be.  But I had, no problems with my, colleagues.  And, I, think that I began to get immediate respect.  I, have always been so fortunate to have--picking great staff.  I have, I've always had some of the best law clerks and they, and they give me so much.  So at first term, I had my five or six cases and I went there, and you circulate the opinions.  And you, do it before you go.  And so then that's maybe thirty to forty circulating opinions for the different judges have written for those.  All of my cases got through unanimously.  And Bill [William G.] Clark was on the court then.  He said, "Well, you do have experience," you know.  But I'd come from the appellate court setting so, I, knew the, I had learned the appellate process.  And, I spent a lot of time reading cases of my--the guys on the court before I went on the court.  And I knew how they felt about certain things, what issues I could do to bring this one in.  And I had a great staff who also worked with that and, I prepared for it.  So I--went I think not as, the new kid on the block, but as a--full participant.  And, of course, [Illinois Supreme Court Justice Michael] Bilandic, the former mayor of the city of Chicago [Illinois], and I went in at the same, at the same time.  And he knew all these guys from, his, vast exposure over, the years.  And so it was, just, it was great, even the first time I, the first day I went, and I've never felt any, any slighting.  The only time I--the only time you get in disagreements is when it's on issues, you know.  And sometimes some of the positions I would take, and after I'd really began to feel my oats (laughs), I would, you know, kind of turn some people off.
Story_ID: 17963
Speaker 1: Would you trace for us what a day in the life of a [Illinois] Supreme Court Justice is like?  Give us some idea of that process.
Speaker 2: Well, in Springfield [Illinois], we spend fifteen weeks a year there, that's all.  We go there to hear cases mainly.  But we meet.  And during the beginning we were, oh, we spend hours in a conference room, very little time on the bench hearing cases.  But those times in the conference room, discussing cases and administrative matters.  You get up, you have breakfast.  We go downstairs and start our meetings at 9:00 [A.M.] or either go on the bench.  And, and we work all day.  At lunchtime, we break.  We go back up to the third floor.  There's lunch waiting for us, and we, then we go back downstairs.  And sometimes after dinner we go back down.  Memos are being circulated.  There's a staff on premises in that building on the, on the first floor.  And so memos are, are being circulated, sometimes up to 9:00 10:00 at night.  And it's a, work environment.  I don't think we could do it in a hotel.  We had to do that about, two years ago because of some work being done on the premises.  But it's just hard to have, to have that concentrated effort in a, in fifteen weeks a year, you know, on the premises of the courtroom, unless you are together.  The policy's always been that when you close your door, no one will knock.  Memos may wait outside for you, but everyone gave you your, would give you your privacy.  No one comes upstairs unless there's a request made.  My son's in town, can he come up and see me for ten minutes or--sure, okay, take a vote on it.  I mean, it's a really formal thing.  It, has lost the formality that it had when I first went on.  And, and sometimes I think that Bill [William G.] Clark, who was the former attorney general in the state [of Illinois], and then who went to the Supreme Court, may have been putting me on.  But I don't think so, or putting us on.  But from, from day one, when we met at the airport, we have a plane that flies us back and forth into Meigs Field [Chicago, Illinois].  We met at the airport and, he said, "Okay, now, when we get on the plane, it's set up like this.  Now I sit here, and [Justice Michael] Bilandic, since you've drawn next, you pick your seat, and then [Justice Charles] Freeman, you'll pick your seat."  So it's seniority.  I said okay.  And so, we get to, Springfield, and, we have a van that picks us up.  He said, "Now, the van has--," (laughs) okay, all right.  So, we get to the building, and it's a very small elevator and a, Tiffany lamp in the ceiling, it's a beautiful little elevator and very quaint.  And he said, "Now, (laughs) since I'm senior, I should get off first.  So I would get on last."  And we--now, dinner, and we, we wear ties-- and shirt and ties to dinner at the meal table.  And we, eat on time.  We start court on time.  We get downstairs on time.  And we don't eat until the chief takes his seat.  That, has changed considerably since (laughs) then because I stopped going.  And no, no--once you're eating, there's no discussion of any cases.  It's just, we would, we did not do that, just light conversation about other things, how--what's happening in the--but that's pretty much how Springfield is.  Most of our time is spent on administrative matters rather than on, the judicial end of, the court.
Speaker 1: When you're a considering a case, and each judge has X amount of cases--,
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --do you physic--well, you and your law clerk staff or, do you physically have to go through the whole, the paperwork and all (unclear) (simultaneously)--,
Speaker 2: Yes, it's the whole file, yeah.
Speaker 1: --every single (unclear) (simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: It could be boxes of files, yes, the record, yeah.
Speaker 1: My God.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's, yeah, it's--but that's why we, we take so few cases.  Courts differ throughout the states.  In Georgia, for instance, I, you saw the picture where the, the Trump--what's it called, the Trumpet Awards, the, Chief Justice of the Georgia Supreme Court was there and we talked about the difference.  They must live in the capital [Atlanta].  If you're elected to the Supreme Court, you must establish your home there.  But they are hearing cases every day.  And their cases are--their opinions are two and three pages.  Some of our opinions are forty, fifty, sixty pages.  And, but they hear tons of cases.  I mean it's unbelievable.  I don't think they have an intermediate appellate level.  In Illinois, we have an intermediate appellate level and we pick the cases we want.  We don't have to take cases except for capital cases.  So you can imagine that at this time, and what's going on now with the capital cases have been virtually wiped out, we're, kind of slow.  That pretty much describes what, what happens in Springfield.  Once we hear the cases in Springfield and we leave, we come back to our, our home offices, that's when the work begins.  So in your home office, I mean I'm in sweaters more than I am in shirt and tie, as casual as I can get because it's not a public office per se.  It's a, it's a work place.  And there are four law clerks, a secretary.  As chief, I used to have a double secretary.  And we do, libraries now, you know, you don't need all of those libraries because you have that little fancy machine with all that information in it.  And we do research and writing.  I meet with staff, staff in getting the, the cases out.
Speaker 1: And as you said in being the chief, I guess if we were talking corporate, it would be CEO--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you have to oversee the actual operating, administrative thing, that's an additional workload.  How did you (unclear) (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: It is, well, that's, that's--well, you pick good people.  I have--there's an administrative office.  And there are about 120 employees in that office.  Most of them are up at the old board of education building on LaSalle Street a block from where we are at 160.  And some of them are in, Springfield.  And they have various sections in the, in that--a section to deal with the court reporters, with the probation officers, education, insurance property acquisition, property repairs.  We have a good director there, Cynthia--Cynthia Cobbs [director of Administrative Office of Illinois Courts].  She was my law clerk from the appellate court into the Supreme Court and, finally I got her into the administrative office. She became the assistant attorney there.  And then she became the lead attorney.  When a fellow retired or quit about a year ago, we were able to move her up to the director of the administrative office, and a very, very bright, very sharp person.  But, it's that kind of right hands that the chief has.  So the day-to-day operation is mainly done by the director of the administrative office.  But that director will always, on close kind of things, will call the chief.  The chief does not really have any more power than the other six.  You are first amongst equals.  That means that if, I--if a chief has to make a decision on whether we're gonna buy two reams of paper or twenty, you can make that and don't even worry about asking your colleagues for their votes.  But actually, you do that with the assumption that at least three others support you in that decision.  If it comes to something major, then they can override you.  And, and it has happened.
Story_ID: 17964
Speaker 1: The appellate process, it operates pretty much along the line you're talking about, I mean over on the legal side of things?
Speaker 2: The appellate courts?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  They do.  They hear many more cases because they can't select the cases they want.  A person has an automatic right of, of appeal.  So they must accept all appeals.  But it, it reduces our workload just tremendously in, in states that have that intermediate appellate level.  I think that their Supreme Courts are able to give a much more in depth look and analysis of where the law is going, where you may want it to go, how change and times and technology should impact upon changes in, the law.  I, don't see how a judge who's a final arbiter of, of disputes can look at all of this, if he's writing decisions and hearing cases every day.  I, don't--but there are a lot of states that function that way.
Story_ID: 17965
Speaker 1: What direction or what changes, over especially your tenure in the [Illinois] Supreme Court, and where do you see law going in the state of Illinois?
Speaker 2: On the, on the criminal end, I, I don't believe the legislature will abolish capital punishment.  I don't think that's gonna happen.  I--well, you have people from all over the state who represent their constituents and, and I, don't know whether--I think the state may be a little bit more conservative than, what (unclear) said that I've experienced may be.  I think that changes will eventually come about in the law.  I started the, this thing when I was, when I was chief, talking about prosecutorial misconduct, forming the committee that one of my fellow justices headed.  He was a justice when [Thomas R.] Fitzgerald was over in the criminal court.  The charge to that committee was not fully met.  They looked at things a little different, more educating of, participants in the arena, the attorneys and requiring a certain amount of experience for them before they can handle capital cases.  I looked, I was mainly interested in, in changing some of the rules beforehand--discovery, opening up the process.  No one keeps any information from anyone else.  If you have it, the state has it, give it up, even if it's harmful to their position and, fixing in penalties that, that would enforce that.  That, those kind of rule changes have not happened yet, even though the legislature is now--then, later on, started looking at the same kinds of things.  Recommendations were made. The governor, the report to the governor contained a lot of that, but it has gone nowhere at this point.  Lesser bills, I think will probably get through, but recording interviews, interrogations, is, important.  I think it's important from both standpoints.  It protects the police department as well as the, defendant.  But, you know, we're focusing, we're forcing, focusing a lot of effort on, on capital cases when--and, and expense money, when I, I think we really should not.  And it's also taken the attention away from, from so many other smaller cases where there's--where the injustices can be as great, but it doesn't necessarily take someone's life.  It changes someone's life for ever, but it doesn't end the life.  And we can't get to that because we're hung on this, and then that's the, sad part, I think, about what's going on.  I, think eventually it, it will come.  There are studies that, you know, show that a lot of people just felt, well, it's, executions is a less expensive way to go.  And that's not true.  We've built in so many safeguards.  In Illinois, I mean executions may take almost twenty years sometimes and there are appeals and appeals within our state system and then into the federal system, and then sometimes back to the state system.  The expenditure is just tremendous.  I, if, we didn't have capital punishment, we would not have that expense.  If we decide to divert some of those funds, just into, to providing DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid], whatever, it, almost requested if there's a reasonable basis for it, if the DNA will make a difference.  It doesn't--a lot of cases, you have fourteen witnesses, what does the D--(laughs), you know.  But, there are other things that we could be doing, but we, just, we've gotten so hung up on this, and we can't seem to move forward on this.  I, think it'll be some years before some real meaningful changes are, are made.
Story_ID: 17966
Speaker 1: Do you see any greater advancement or the pace of change to the area of prosecutorial conduct, misconduct?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, I think so.  We've, started naming--that's, that's important.  We have to name those state's attorneys--and, and the next opportunity I get, and I, I think it'll be very soon--I've seen a couple of cases coming, where I think another attack has to be taken.  We just can't talk about naming the assistant state's attorney, that then puts them open to suspicions and questions when they try to go on the bench, or whether they may try to go.  They have to explain away this conduct.  But we have, we have people in that system who constantly do it, and constantly just, and should--and know better.  But they just constantly do it because winning is more important than, getting to the truth of issues.  At some point, when a person runs an office, that person has got to answer to why he can't make a change; why the assistant state's attorney must work at 26th [Street] and California [Avenue, Cook County Circuit Court--Criminal Division].  That person can work in traffic court.  So I think that it will be important--and I, intend to do it, that if I--a couple of cases that I've seen, some of the same old names that appear at 26th and California and then the way they try cases.  We have to reverse those cases.  They go back, and these trials--again, over and over again.  The, money, the time, the waste, the delay, when, if you let your employees know that if you can't present a fair, conduct a fair trial, follow the rules of evidence, closing arguments, do the right thing, if you can't do that, then maybe you shouldn't be at 26th and California.  You should be some place else.  Now, so, I, think that's the message that has to go out.  And, I think that politicians understand that because they face elections.
Speaker 1: And that would make a major impact--,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on cases and how they're tried (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Oh, it is, it is.  I, devised, I devised some, some rules that I have not been able to, to get past my--I've not been able to get them adopted yet.  But it's, it's recordkeeping.  There are, there are people in--and it's not just state's attorneys.  Sometimes there are public defenders too where--it's on both sides, but usually it is state's attorneys.  Sometimes the, the infractions are minor.  And, a letter goes in to the, the Attorney [Registration and] Discipline Commission, the ARDC.  And they open up a file, and they ask for an explanation.  Then the state's attorney or the attorney in question would give an explanation.  And they say, oh, that makes sense, okay.  No sanction, no--and it was probably the right decision.  But when it happens twenty times, the record's not kept long enough to have a history.  So my rules would have changed that.  It would have, it would have made the keeping of the records for a period of twenty years.  It would have made the records of the appellate court categorized for those who have been named in prosecutorial misconduct cases, they would be made available to the public and to bar associations.  Most of the people who get into the arena of, criminal defense and criminal prosecution usually have their eye on the bench.  And, and if, they know that there's a record that's being kept of--a permanent record for twenty years of their conduct that would be available to people when they do apply, not that it would necessarily disqualify them, but explain, you know, we need an answer or why is it this happened so many times.  There's something that's, it's, not, and this happens often now, but the Batson violations.  That was, Batson was the systematic exclusion of minorities from juries.  And it became fine science for some (laughs), all right, find different ways to do it.  And, so the Batson case came down from the U.S. Supreme Court and you have to explain why you have challenged a certain person.  Now, the rules become quite clear after twenty years, thirty years under, Batson, how can anyone today violate the tenants and principles that were put down, and it's--and, be an experienced prosecutor at 26th and California?  You, you're doing it intentionally.  So these are, the kind of things that I, think, if we can start making these things as a permanent record, start criticizing perhaps the leadership in those offices, supervisors and even the state's Attorney, for their employment selection or assignment selection, then maybe it would, it would change a little, somewhat.
Speaker 1: So how close are we to getting more of the changes you're talking about and how much faster can we get them?
Speaker 2: Well, within, the last, oh, I would say within the last five years, have been some changes.  In the appellate court, [Judge] Ellis Reid started putting out some stuff, tearing into state's attorneys and putting, and naming in the opinion, or part of the rules I was going to pass was to try to get--was to encourage appellate justices to name, and for us to name, rather--because sometimes you just talk about the conduct, but you don't name.  So and in order to find out, you have to go through files to find out who tried this case and then--but put the name in the opinion.  It's an embarrassment and, it serves a purpose.  It serves a good purpose.  So we've started doing it now on, on the Supreme Court.  Sometimes it's a fight.  It's--well, why you wanna mess--a person's career, you know?  Well, there's a reason for it. Justice [Mary Ann G.] McMorrow has, done it.  I've done it, and--but now, I, I think it's necessary to move to that next step, and, to move to the supervisors and, and the heads the offices.
Speaker 1: And can the--.
Speaker 2: And that can happen now.  That's not for the far future.  That's for the immediate future.
Speaker 1: Can the bar associations and lower court judges encourage that change to, by using names in instances where the person--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, yeah, the, the trial judges, they don't write opinions.  They, give orders.  They can write opinions, but usually they do not.  It's just an order.  So and, and sometimes you have to look at, a trial judge in a heavy-volume court.  He's spent two weeks in a trial.  And he gets the closing argument.  And, and the prosecutor and the public defender, they, get up and they commit every kind of possible error they would find.  And they say things they know they should not say.  This evidence was not really that way.  And there're objections made, and the judge said, "Don't do that again" and they go back and they do it again and again and again.  Now that judge now has to make the decision.  At the end of all the argument, one side or the other will say, "Judge, I want a mistrial.  I want to try this over again."  He'd say, (laughing) "I don't want this case no more.  I'm done.  Mistrial denied.  Take an appeal."  So, and that's, the kind of thing that--understandable, I don't know.  But you, have to look at, what a judge sometimes faces and there are good judges who really tried to stop this.  And they tried to oversee it.  But we sometimes those--the, the, and people in the arena, the attorneys in the arena know that, that they can get away with so much.  And they also know that, what we've done in the, appellate level, the intermediate appeal level, and even in the Supreme Court.  Once that case comes there, we can look at it, and we can say well, yeah, they should not have done that.  They violated this rule or that rule or that case law, and they should have known better.  But it's harmless error.  And the conviction is, is affirmed.  It may be harmless error, but sometimes you can have twenty incidents of harmless error that ripens into major error.  And, the courts have started, the appellate level, started looking at that phenomena, and, they are ruling in, sometimes, that way.  And I think that's gonna be on, the increase.
Speaker 1: So those people who want to abuse it, can do so by starting out with harmless error, and they keep doing it and they keep doing it--,
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --until they start getting the misconduct we're talking about--,
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in full bloom.
Story_ID: 17967
Speaker 1: Tell me whatever you can or choose to tell me about your most memorable cases in your career?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a hard time talking about one case.  I really do.  It's too, it still affects me in, in a way cause I, I always think that I, I will always believe that I made a terrible mistake.  It was--I was in the trial court in the law jury section, personal injuries, medical malpractice.  This was a case against Wyeth Laboratories [pharmaceutical company].  They made a suppository and it was administered to a child.  And it, it created--it had problems.  The doctor did not--I guess, the doctor made some errors, and there were insufficient warnings on the packages.  And when taken with other drugs, it had a synergistic effect, and it just--the, the symptoms continued to appear like they were getting worse, so you give more.  And the, the child was, was brain damaged and would always be that way, of course, for the rest of the child's life.  It took two weeks to pick a jury.  And it was big money involved, as you can imagine.  Now, a million dollars was settled out almost immediately by one of the defendants, and the trial proceeded against the other defendants, the drug manufacturer.  And when you have that kind of case, you're talking about products liability.  And you not only want enough money to compensate for the injury that would take care of this person for the rest of their life, but the attorneys are also pursuing what is called punitive damages.  And the argument is that we have to punish this defendant, this drug manufacturer, so they will not do this kind of thing again.  They will make corrections and they will make certain that all, everything is properly labeled and the warnings are out there.  So what does it take to penalize a, a, a person who drives a CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] bus?  Maybe a thousand dollars, you know.  What does it take to penalize a multi-million dollar corporation worldwide, like Wyeth Laboratories?  A lot more money.  During the course of the trial, the offers had gone up to twelve million dollars.  And I, and I'm--this is in the, in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s].  A lot of money.  The, the mother and the father were up from Arkansas--(pause)--very young people, African American and, and extremely sincere.  And against all advice, the mother refused to take the money.  Her belief that, that what happened to her child should not happen to another child.  So if you settle, then there are all kinds of confidential agreements you did not disclose and, and she wanted this to become public and known.  And there's nothing I could, I could have done to persuade her.  I had the power, and I kind of regret--this is my mistake, I think, I had the power to take that decision from her and appoint an--a guardian, a guardian to come in and make the decision for her.  But I did not do that.  The verdict came in for the largest verdict in the, in the history of the county at that point for twenty-seven million [dollars].  But I knew that, that's the beginning of the game.  It doesn't end there, and, of course, appeals were taken.  And by the time I got to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, some twelve years later, the case was there.  I had to recuse myself from it.  And, of course, the court said, "Ah, too much money--send it back," took the verdict away.  And they ended up settling the case ten years later, or eight years later for maybe three, four million dollars in addition to the million they had, they had received.  So again, and I look--but my, my judgment of, of the parents, that the million they got, it would have been okay because they, they were going back to buy a little farm and raise the child there and take care of the child there.  But it would have been much better if that case had been settled and it would have been over with then, and they could done not only much more for that child, but they could have done much more in their life.
Speaker 1: And a more appropriate penalty.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) For the company.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that, that--I tell you, when I've been asked that--and sometimes I try to avoid even talking about that case 'cause it, it's--still, it still affects me.  In the Appellate Court there was a case that made me angry, not, not (laughs)--we had--and I'll never forget this case.  It was a, a land acquisition case.  And a township had, had taken some land that included the backyards of a lot of homeowners, a whole strip, maybe running for about two miles.  And the process was not done right.  And there was--they got a, what you call a temporary restraining order, to stop the construction while, while the case is pending.  And the trial court had denied the temporary restraining order, so the construction was going ahead.  And when it reached the Appellate Court, I was in the Appellate Court then with two colleagues.  We heard the case.  And two of us, the two who was not assigned to write the case, decided the trial court should be reversed immediately, the restraining order should be entered, construction should be, should be halted.  And we made that decision.  The guy said, "Okay, I'll write it that way."  And, and after about a year, we looked, and we said, "Where is that opinion?  Where is it?"  The opinion, it had just fallen between the cracks.  And we, thinking that someone's gonna do it.  And, and by the time we, we had a, we realized the guy, the other, my other colleague who had voted with me, we found out that, that nothing had been done.  The opinion had not been written, and the, the reason--when we had a meeting, the other judge said, "Well, you know, it's too late now.  The road is done."  And, of course, we forced the opinion to go out anyway.  I mean even if, if you have to make it into a tennis court, you know, or--nevertheless, the property owners should be in a position to negotiate on equal terms to get fair value for the land, not just what a township decided that they would be given.  That was a case that was very frustrating in it made me, it made me sometimes a little bit more watchful of, of what's going on around me.  And, and because I have functioned, done all that I could, in what I'm supposed to do, you still have to watch it when it goes--when the ball gets to the other side of the court.  You just can't keep--take your eye off of it.  And that was the kind of case that I learned that lesson in.
Story_ID: 17968
Speaker 1: For a judge, perhaps, maybe the lay public and maybe some of the attorneys who come before you, don't realize all the nuances of what you have to consider--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, it's--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Beyond what you're reading.
Speaker 2: Oh it's, it's, yeah, about six or eight months ago, the 'Law Bulletin' did a study on, on figures and the delay in getting cases out.  And, and even the 'Law Bulletin,' they have a representative there in the courtroom, but they don't understand what the process is.  We, we would--a case is assigned to someone to write.  And that person will come in with an opinion, and they don't get enough votes, so it's dead.  Now they may try to rewrite it and they may, you know, so months pass.  And then finally, they say, I'll take a reject.  And so then it moves to another judge.  And then that judge writes the case, and that may not get through.  And then, you know.  So it, it looks like there's a lot of delay.  But the work inward, internally is just, is, is where it's at.  And it never hits the surface.  There's probably more writing done by our court that the public will never see, than what is finally published.  And, and things are done, battles are fought over issues through dissents and special concurrences and, and when you stop someone from getting a majority, they must then look at your view and consider that.  And they may change their opinion.  I, I think that most recently, with, with the new court that we have, it, it's--sometimes you get three new people coming in at once.  It's--there may be an attempt to make sudden changes in, in the direction the law has, had been gone and developed.  And I find a lot of problems in the search and seizure issue, the stopping of cars by, by police, bringing in sniff dogs.  And one opinion was in the papers not too long ago.  And the opinion comes out and--but you don't realize all the fighting, infighting that went on, and all the writing that went on and, and the effort that's put in to finally get enough votes to come out with a view that, that is--would not be too drastic of change to the way the law was, was proceeding.  So, yeah, I--it, it's a lot of work sometimes, but that's the enjoyment that I find in the court.  I, I, I look to a new court coming in and trying to understand where my colleagues' heads are and, and how they feel about things, and how I'm gonna handle this, and how I'm gonna get this through and, and deal with that.  And it--I don't play chess, but if you (laughs)--and it's, it's interesting, the, the interplay between the quiet of the conference room, that the public is never aware of and lawyers are never aware of, and even newspapers that follow this, don't know the extent that this goes on.
Speaker 1: So it--no matter what decision you make, pro or con, it would be extremely difficult to detail how you got there.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) 'Cause it's such an intangible route.
Speaker 2: Oh, you can do it, but we, we don't--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) I mean--
Speaker 2: Because you're talking about--you're pulling the sheets off of people who may have been on the other side of the way it finally comes out.  So you, you know, say how it was and how this developed and what are his views--his views originally was this, you know, but, should I just show him some law and they change, and the effect of it.  But it, it's, it's, it's something you really have to enjoy doing.  I--the appellate process I've always enjoyed.  The trial court, I did it, and, and I worked hard at it, but it wasn't what I liked.  The give and exchange and the give and take from the bench is, you know, that was okay.  I liked to conduct trials, but I, I like to, to get there and sit down and think about it and do a little reading and do a little writing and scratching and rewriting.  That's, that's what I enjoy doing.
Story_ID: 17969
Speaker 1: How do you see the new security act [USA Patroit Act] affecting the kinds of cases that you will be looking at in the future?
Speaker 2: Oh, the federal?
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Seemingly, yeah, seemingly, a lot of rights have been kind of--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But, and it's, it's federal, but we can always apply Illinois law.  But if it's in the federal court, we cannot.  But I don't know how that's gonna shake out.  I, I hope that, that some of the organizations that, that have began to challenge what has been coming out of this administration will, will be successful.  It's turning back the clock, and, and sometimes it's easy to get support to turn back the clock when you're in these kind of times. And, and people say, "Oh yeah, we, we need that, it's important." But the ramifications sometimes, the far-reaching effects of the stuff, we will not begin to realize and see until, until years down the pike when it--when it won't be too late because you can change, but harm and damage would have, would have been done.
Speaker 1: Especially in that, the application of these laws and regulations happen at such a low level, that the person who's gonna exercise the decision doesn't even understand the basis of, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 17970
Speaker 1: How has the composite attorney who appears before you--how has that person changed over the years?
Speaker 2: Oh, I hear lawyers complain all the time that--[former Illinois Appelate Court Justice Eugene] Gene Pincham is, you know, is--is one.  He's, he's been around a long time and, and a great practitioner, trial court, appellate court and just an activist in so many ways.  And I think he said one time, he told me that when he started practicing law, the rule book was like this (gestures with fingers).  He said, now, (laughs), I mean you need a wheelbarrow if you ever want to discuss rules.  My--one of my colleagues, former [Chicago, Illinois] Mayor [and Illinois Supreme Court Justice Michael] Bilandic used to say, and it's not too simplistic, but all we need are the Ten Commandments, you know.  What else do we need?  But, and then this society we, there are just rules and rules and rules and sometimes rules are--can be twisted and bent and, and misunderstood.  I, I think the practice of law has become very difficult for lawyers.  The small practitioners are, are drying up.  What I tried to do over in Englewood [Chicago neighborhood], it's kind of hard to do it.  And, and even when I was--towards the end of that, it began to change.  The, the big firms are, are going to control.  Specialization, I think, is, is going to control.  My son is, is specialized in--in an area and good now, but it could be bad when--if that folds.  Then what do you do?  You have to learn a new, a new area, and, and you're able, your ability to demand compensation that was equivalent to what you, you were getting is, is gone.  So it--the practice is, has changed considerably.  Lawyers are under more scrutiny than they have, than they've ever been before.  A part of the function of the court--we, we oversee the ARDC [Illinois Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Committee], that discipline attorneys for misconduct.  Those cases, they had a great number of those, those cases.  And sometimes you find that too many small practitioners get caught up in that process--sometimes for being bad businesspeople, as [Mayor] Harold Washington was, than, than dishonest practitioners.  And it's a problem, but it's a problem that's being, being worked on.  But that's the kind of thing that, that takes the small practitioner out of the, out of the game.
Speaker 1: Do you think the small practitioner, is he/she getting wiser over the years about how to--?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah.  I, yeah, minorities are, are reaching out, and they're not--they dream far, further than I ever did when, when I was in the practice.  They reach out for corporations.  They want a piece of what they're doing, and they demand it, and they're getting it.  So yes, the--they're, they're not--I don't think there are any pure minority firms that you could consider large firms in terms of 200, 300-person firms, but there are some fairly sizeable firms that have come along.  You know, [Chicago, Illinois attorney] Earl Neal has a, has a sustaining organization and office and has been for some time.  And it, and it--and I'm certain under his son, it will continue.
Story_ID: 17971
Speaker 1: You, as a [Illinois state] Supreme Court Justice and a Chief Supreme Court Justice, have an opportunity to impact law and our lives in ways we don't know yet, and in ways we can immediately acknowledge, how do you feel about that kind of responsibility and how do you feel about your role and how you've carried that responsibility?
Speaker 2: I, I think it's, it's important to have diversity on the court.  And I, I learned that early on.  I remember, as an example, [former Illinois Supreme Court Chief Justice James D.] Heiple got all that bad publicity, basically not too bad a guy.  But he had a case, and he was gonna write it a certain way.  It was a person who was arrested selling drugs down around Ohio [Street] in the River North area [Chicago, Illinois].  And a mistake was made at the lab and, and the, and the laboratory test was not completed.  But the officer said, "I looked at it and that's what it was."  And, and so we were--he, he'd written it in such a way that we would have allowed the conviction to stand even though there was no positive conclusion that this was, in fact, drugs.  He said, "What else would it be?"  I said--"See, there's a game out there in the streets.  You know, there are people out there who would catch the suburban kids coming in town with twenty dollars in their pocket and fifty dollars in their pockets, and they want to some--hanging out the car window real fast, and take off fast.  And they get sold a lot of baking soda."  So, and that could have been baking soda.  We don't know.  So, it changed that opinion.  Now, I don't, you know, that's not my life experience, but I, I know things.  I've been out here, and I, I hear things that Heupel, from his home, would not have heard that.  So, it's important.  I, I think it's important to try to bring in people of diversity.  I mentioned [director of the administrative offices of the Illinois Courts] Cynthia Cobbs.  I--that was a long, hard fight--now, she's at the top.  And she feels the same way that I do.  And she brings in--she's currently interviewing in the education section--that's education for judges, and she's trying to bring in diversity now into a very unique unit that trains judges, you know.  And she's found some good people.  In probation, downstate, it's important to have minority faces there.  So it's--yeah, I, I think that I have been able to, to do some things.  I think in, in, in some of the opinions that I've, that I have written--but a lot of time in some of the private conference room battles that are fought, I think that diversity and, and the experience that, that different lifestyles bring to that, to the table is important.  And I, I hope I've made a difference.  I, I certainly have, have tried.  And, and the people that I bring to the bench--we have a unique power in, in Illinois, the supreme ourt justices, we can appoint people to fill interim vacancies.  And that's one of the things that caused me so much problems a few years ago, with mainly the '[Chicago] Tribune' and the '[Chicago] Sun-Times' [newspapers] picked up on it.  They didn't like my appointments.  My appointments all went through screening at bar associations.  Sometimes, they may have had things in their backgrounds that they did not divulge to me or they did not divulge to the Bar Association that, that later on surfaced.  And a lot of these things and the people that they pointed out, you know, they pointed to, were the small practitioners.  And, and sometimes FICA [Social Security tax] was not paid.  Sometimes they did owe taxes.  And I don't think that made them any lesser judges or any less qualified to serve on the bench.  But that was a big knock, and that was in the--again, an attempt, I think, mainly to, to see merit selection come in, in so that we would not have the power of, of appointment, but that a blue ribbon committee would then pick people to serve without going through an election, leaving it to, to the public to decide.  I've, I'm--just, you know, the appointments a little bit, I'm proud of some of the appointments.  I've, I've made good appointments.  People have done well.  I've brought in all races, which sometimes gets me in trouble with, with (unclear) (laughs), you know, but it was really a problem for me going through the retention because I had to explain, "Well, wait a minute, you know, that--this guy was a great guy, and I, I did that and qualified."  But so I found myself in, into a quagmire, really, I, I really did.  I found myself having made a lot of appointments of people--we talked about this earlier, before we went on camera, who could not get elected.  And, and I, I always--I, and with Jews that I had appointed, they just could not get elected.  So I'd have to reappoint and reappoint, and, of course, the papers were always very critical of that--and qualified people.  And because sometimes ethnic names have a hard time getting elected in Cook County [Illinois].  There are people who run countywide two years out of law school, who won't even face a Bar Association, you could put their names on a ballot 'cause it's a fuzzy, nice-sounding name, and, and they're able to win elections, beating out people who are vastly more experienced than they are.  I made an appointment not too long ago to the Appellate Court, Ellis Reid.  Now, Ellis Reid, boy, he is a prince of a guy.  He has more experience than most people you'd ever run into and a good judge.  But he ran twice before, I think for the Appellate--he could not win.  So I finally was able to get him into an assigned position.  The papers criticized it.  So he doesn't have to run.  He can sit there for as long as he wants and he would not have to run.  So, and I, I hope I've, I've done some, some good things in, in that area of what I do.  I must say that my--for the first ten years, my two colleagues in, in Cook County at the time did not consider--did not make minority appointments--I can't say they did not consider.  [Mayor Michael] Bilandic, in his last year, did make one, but that was a vacancy that was in an area where only a minority would get elected anyway, a subcircuit.  With my new colleagues, things have changed.  [Justice Thomas R.] Fitzgerald comes in, and he's already appointed about three African Americans.  [Justice Mary Ann G.] McMorrow is now kicking up the pace.  And I, I think that's because I do the same thing.  And I've, and I've said that to them.  I've--especially after the, the, the retention that I went through and having a hard time to, to make certain that my base support was there, and having to explain some of the things that I've done.  I, I told my colleagues, I said, you know, "I've put all races on, and I've, effective for the--played a role for the first Asian to be elected, for the first open gay to be elected, played a, played a role in these things.  And, and I think you should too."  And, and I, I, and then luckily, and, and my colleagues are, are doing that now.  [Justice Robert R.] Bob Thomas, who was DuPage County [Illinois], you know, had a role in, in getting a Hispanic made associate judge here recently, which is, which is good.  [Justice Thomas L.] Kilbride is, is going to do something in his area.  So I, I think that, yeah, I hope that I've made a difference, and I, I try to.
Speaker 1: So that, that feels pretty good to make an impact you can see.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And to see which law changes--slowly anyway--.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (laughs).
Speaker 1: It's like, (unclear) (laughs).
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) And maybe it's, it's good, you know, there must be a certain dependability in the, in the law.  People make great plans and go out on great limbs expecting the law to be a certain way.  And I'm--it's up to me to be more commercial and business, than criminally.  And so there should be some consistency in, in, and--but law should change and should grow with, with the changes in the world.  But I don't like to see it happen too fast.
Story_ID: 17972
Speaker 1: Do we have many more Charles E. Freemans coming along?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got [Illinois Appellate Justice] Shelvin [Louise] Hall lookin' me in the back (laughs).  She, she's my lady.  She's--you know, we, we, we talk.  I, I appointed Shelvin.  She was one of my first appointments when I came onto the Circuit Court.  And then when I won in the [Illinois] Appellate Court, I could have put her in, in a position like [Illinois Appellate Justice] Ellis Reid has, where she didn't have to run.  But Shelvin, you know, she's--do you know Shelvin Hall?
Speaker 1: I know of her, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, she's, she's a little--she's a dynamo.  And she's active in national organizations.  She's not like I am.  She's very much involved in so many things.  Her father is a minister. He'd been very much involved with Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] so his, his contacts are all out.  So I figured that, I'd put her in an elected position.  And she was appointed. Is that it?
Speaker 1: We've got about sixty seconds on this tape.
Speaker 2: Okay, and she was appointed, and, and then she ran and she won.  She, she is the kind of person I think would be able to do credit to any position she holds, even the [U.S.] Supreme Court. I just think that she's such a great person, hard worker.
Story_ID: 17973
Speaker 1: One question I do want to ask you, that I didn't ask you, and which is another of our favorite questions.  What are the sights, sounds and smells that stick out for you in your growing up years?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I have to, I--the sounds of young men playing in sports, basketball, the handball, and that's--those sounds I think--I, loved sports.  I was so small though (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you live near water?
Speaker 2: No, well, Buckroe Beach [Hampton, Virginia] was not too far.  My, my father always took us on trips though.  That was, I think about a sixty-mile drive to the Norfolk, Virginia area.  James River runs in Richmond [Virginia], but it's, when it gets to Richmond, it's all boulders.  It's not navigable.  And no one swims there.  But there was a swimming pool.  We used to go to the swimming pool.  The swimming pool was run by [tennis player] Arthur Ashe's father [Arthur Ashe Sr.].
Speaker 1: Oh, really.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he was neighbor, no, not necessarily your neighbor.
Speaker 2: No, no, we lived near each other, yeah.  Ashe was, was younger than I.
Story_ID: 17974
Speaker 1: Let me ask you what would you like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think fairness, having, I hope, an open mind, an open ear, ability to get along with everyone, talk with everyone.  I think that.
Story_ID: 17975
Speaker 1: I recognize the building.  It's at the, that's the 5th Street Baptist Church that was a block away from where I was born and where I lived until I was about sixteen years old.  And I was in the Art Fellows Youth Band.  And I'm on the front row, holding the cymbals, and I didn't know a note of music, but I had to get in that band.  My brother played a saxophone, so he had to take little bro along with him.
Speaker 2: Hold on one second.
Speaker 1: Should I point to me?
Speaker 2: Oh, the little guy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right there, yeah.
Speaker 2: Next to the drum majorette.
Speaker 1: Yeah I was standing close to her.
Speaker 2: (Off-camera discussion)
Speaker 1: Now wait, there's two guys with cymbals.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Are you on our left or on our right?
Speaker 2: I'm on her left.
Speaker 1: Her left.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Our right.
Speaker 2: [Charles Freeman (front right) in the Art Fellows Youth Band, Fifth Street Baptist Church, Richmond, Virginia, ca. 1940. From the collection of Charles Freeman.]
Story_ID: 17976
Speaker 1: This is brother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Lee?
Speaker 2: Buddy Lee.  He is, he's my, my cousin, my father and my mother.
Speaker 1: Father, mother, grandmother--,
Speaker 2: Aunt.
Speaker 1: Aunt.
Speaker 2: And that's my aunt's daughter.
Speaker 1: [Charles Freeman's family members, n.d.; Maternal grandmother, Molly Winston (second row from bottom, left), aunt (second row from bottom, second from left), cousin, Buddy Lee (top row, second from left), Lee's wife, Kay (top row, third from left), father, William Freeman (top row, left), mother, Jeanette Rena Freeman (fourth row from bottom, left), brother, James Freeman (top row, second from right), and aunt's daughter (second row from bottom, second from right). From the collection of Charles Freeman.]
Story_ID: 17977
Speaker 1: That's a home at--on 5th Street in Richmond, Virginia.  That's where I was born and lived until, I think I was sixteen, at the end of high school [1959].
Speaker 2: On 5th Street, near what cross street?
Speaker 1: Baker [Street].
Speaker 2: [Charles Freeman's childhood home on Fifth Street in Richmond, Virginia, n.d. Freeman resided there until 1959.  From the collection of Charles Freeman.]
Story_ID: 17978
Speaker 1: I think taken in our backyard on 5th Street [Richmond, Virginia] of my father in the center, and my brother to his right, my brother's about two years older than I, and, and me to his left.  It must have been a Sunday.
Speaker 2: What year do you suppose that was, approximately?
Speaker 1: Oh, '44 [1944].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: '43 [1943].
Speaker 2: [Charles Freeman (right) with his father, William Freeman and brother, James Freeman, Richmond, Virginia, ca. 1943. From the collection of Charles Freeman.]
Story_ID: 17979
Speaker 1: My mother and I, so I'm told.
Speaker 2: [Charles Freeman with his mother Jeanette Rena Freeman, Richmond, Virginia, ca. 1934. From the collection of Charles Freeman.]
Story_ID: 17980
Speaker 1: That's me as a baby in the backyard [of the family's Richmond, Virginia home] again.
Speaker 2: You're hardly a year old here.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: [Charles Freeman as an infant, Richmond, Virginia, ca. 1934. From the collection of Charles Freeman.]
Story_ID: 17981
Speaker 1: That's my brother and I.  I don't know the location.
Speaker 2: [Charles Freeman (right) with his brother, James Freeman, ca. 1940. From the collection of Charles Freeman.]
Story_ID: 17982
Speaker 1: Were you still on 5th Street [Richmond, Virginia] here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was there until after high school.  I--that must have been, I imagine I was in high school at that time.
Speaker 1: [Charles Freeman in front of his home in Richmond, Virginia, ca. 1940s. From the collection of Charles Freeman.]
Story_ID: 17983
Speaker 1: Okay, it's a picture of my mother [Jeanette Rena Freeman].  I don't know the location, and I--from the, from the, I guess at her age, it's probably before she married my father [William Freeman].  She lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  So I have no idea where it was taken.
Speaker 2: [Charles Freeman's mother, Jeanette Rena Freeman, in her youth, n.d. From the collection of Charles Freeman.]
Story_ID: 17984
Speaker 1: That's on the, on the Atlantic coast [Buckroe Beach, Hampton, Virginia], Virginia, near Norfolk [Virginia].  We spent a lot of weekends there.
Speaker 2: [Charles Freeman's mother, Jeanette Rena Freeman, vacationing at Buckroe Beach, Hampton, Virginia, n.d.  From the collection of Charles Freeman.]
Story_ID: 17985
Speaker 1: [No narration.]
Speaker 2: [Charles Freeman's father, William Freeman, vacationing at Buckroe Beach, Hampton, Virginia, n.d.  From the collection of Charles Freeman.]
