Story_ID: 196854
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  [Edgar] Carey Lane is the videographer.  And this interview is taking place on Tuesday, May 18th, 2004, at 12603 Spriggs Request Court in Mitchellville, Maryland.  Now, [HistoryMaker] Betty [Francis], if you would, just for the record, please tell us your name, spell it, and your full name, including your middle name please.
Speaker 2: My name--good afternoon, my name is Betty Hager Francis.  Should I spell it all?
Speaker 1: Please.
Speaker 2: B-E-T-T-Y, H-A-G-E-R, F-R-A-N-C-I-S.
Speaker 1: And you could you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on January 11, 1946, in Washington, D.C., Columbia Hospital for Women.
Story_ID: 196855
Speaker 1: And the next couple of questions are just some People magazine-ish type questions, just to help us get comfortable with one another and you to get comfortable with the process.  So, if you could please tell me what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: My favorite food is, right now it's probably steak.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: And mashed potatoes.  And my favorite time of year has gotta be spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color right now is yellow.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Right now it's Turks and Caicos [Islands] in the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one?
Speaker 2: Get over yourself (laughter), or I'll get over myself, whatever.
Story_ID: 196856
Speaker 1: So now we're gonna start talking a little bit about your mother.  Could you please tell me your mother's name, and where she's from, and how she grew up, and what you know about her background, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I'm happy to.  My mother's name is Helen Elizabeth Brown Hager.  She was born in 1917 in Orange County, Virginia, and should I say the Blue Ridge Mountains of Virginia.  She was one of ten children.  Her father's name was Robert Brown, and her mother's name was Esther Wise Brown.  And I am actually named after my grandmother, whose name was Esther.  And they lived on a farm.  And my grandfather, as I understand it, I never knew either grandparent, mothers, any of my grandparents were all, they were all gone by the time I was born in 1946.  But from what my mother tells me, they had for a long period of time quite a wonderful life in Madison County [Virginia] on the farm.  And my grandfather raised horses and actually foxes for fox hunting.  That was the hunt country.  And I think, you know, I don't really get too much of a sense of what my grandmother was like, but I know that she worked for an herbologist.  She was like a secretary for an herbologist in the country.  I mean that, and that was really strange because I really do have a very strong interest in alternative medicine.  So I just think that's sort of interesting.  But she rai--you know, she had ten children.  She died when my mother was thirteen.  And my grandfather was a politician.  My mother says that people, black and white would come and sit on the porch when it came time for election and have Rob Brown tell them who to vote for.  And so, that, you know, I, you have such a--I had such a different opinion of what it was like to be in Virginia in those days, that she had such wonderful memories.  Then the economy crashed, and, and the family lost the farm, and things just sort of changed for them.  The kids had to come to Washington [D.C.] and sort of be parsed out to different relatives who lived here in Washington.  And my mother never really finished high school, but all of us finished college.  We have graduate degrees, and so that speaks I think volumes to everything about her spirit and will and determination, and she's a wonderful woman and still alive at eighty-six years old.  And I owe everything to my mother and father [William Henry Hager].
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Let me see, she is sweet and compassionate, she is willful, that's why she's alive at eighty-six with several ailments.  She was the center of her family, all her brothers and sisters called her Ma; they still call her Ma, because when she got here to Washington, it was she who--after, I mean there were different periods of time, and I don't really have it straight.  But, when they got to be adults, it was she who one after another brought them to Washington.  And they lived with her and my father for some period of time, each and every one of them.  And she took care of their kids so they could work.  And so she was sort of the stable person.  She's quiet but funny as a crutch, when she gets to know you.  So I don't know how to describe her, except she's wonderful, and I hope I'm like her in any way.
Speaker 1: Now did she share any other stories with you about growing up?
Speaker 2: Just how much she loved--she, they used to love to ride horses.  And, and she would tell stories about how she used to have to walk across the creek to get to school because you know, of course, they had to walk to school.  And so they used to have this little timber, then she was always the scaredy cat, but you know, they'd make her do it, her brothers and sisters make her do it.  And she said she was her father's favorite, (laughter) and so, I mean just her little things like that.  But I think that it was, I get the sense that there was this idyllic time.  What she saw is really a happy, happy, happy time before her mother died.  And then after her mother died and the economy sort of crashed, things got different.  But you know, she survived and thrived, and I take that as my inspiration for, you know, surviving and thriving, whatever.  And, I remember when I was young and my parents, you know, and their friends would come to the house they, no matter what was going on, and I had no idea what could have been going on in their lives, they were having a ball and always laughing and, you know, making the best of it.  And they had quite a wonderful group of friends.  And so my mother and father really--I don't remember drama growing up, if you know what I mean.  I don't remember all that drama going on in the house; in fact, there wasn't any.  And considering what I think both of them probably went through, that's pretty amazing.  And all they did was encourage us.  They really encouraged us all the time, so.
Story_ID: 196857
Speaker 1: So tell me a little bit about your father, starting with his name, where he grew up, and a little bit about his background.
Speaker 2: Okay, my father's name was William Henry Hager.  He was born in Upper Marlboro in Prince George's County [Maryland], as was his father, whose name was James Hager, and his mother's name was Sarah [Hager].  And I don't know her maiden name, but she was born in St. Mary's County in Maryland.  So I have a Maryland side and a Virginia side.  And my father was forty when I was born.  And he was a very quiet man.  He died in '89 [1989], 1989, and it surprised us that he had the longest funeral procession.  I mean it's weird that I'm talking about him in this way that I'm talking about him from his funeral.  But he had the longest funeral procession, and that said something to me, that he was loved and respected by so many people that we didn't really know, because he was just sort of quiet and did his job.  He worked in the Treasury Department [U.S. Department of the Treasury], so when we're growing up, my mother [Helen Brown Hager] basically didn't work.  She would take care of children during the day, and my father worked at the treasury department.  And then at night he had a woodworking--I don't know what you call it--shop, in the basement.  So, he'd go to work all day and then come home and work and do woodworking in the evening to supplement his income.  And I swear to you, everybody in Washington, D.C. had either a radiator cover or one of those old valances, those wood valances--you ever seen those--that, that my father made for them.  So he'd go to work, he'd come home, get one of those things and go install it and come back, and that's how he kept us going, how they kept us going.  They always had two cars, and he, they always had time to go work in the schools.  So, he was quite amazing.  I just remember him being steady, and quiet, and sort of always there.  And he was a wonderful man.  And he didn't, you know, he didn't talk very much.  He wasn't all that effusive, but he would, he would walk by you and sort of squeeze your leg like that (laughter), or you know, do something to let you know that he knew you were there, you know.  And he was just a wonderful man.
Speaker 1: Did he ever share any stories with you about growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really.  In fact, I know so little about him.  I learned a little bit about him after he passed, really.  He has two, he had two sisters who were still living at that time, and they really didn't even have very much to say about--what did they used to call him--Willie, they used to call him Willie, 'cause everyone else called him Hager.  All the family friends called him Hager.  My mother called him Hager; my aunts called him Hager; my uncles called him Hager.  Everybody called him Hager, and I just re- you know what I remember most about him is his laugh, is when they were playing cards, they used to love to play Canasta when we were growing up.  And when they were playing cards, I would just, we'd be upstairs, you know, and then I'd just hear him let out this laugh.  And it just let me know everything in the world was okay.  And the smell of sawdust, I always, you know, that always reminds me of him.  And he took me to work.  He used to take me to work with him at--and I thought he was the secretary of the treasury.  He was, in fact, a supply clerk.  But it was amazing, but he went to work with a shirt and tie every day.  And they treated him with a great deal of respect.  I really didn't know until I was older how black people were really treated the, you know, I didn't know that, because the people really treated him with a great deal of respect there.  But when I would go, my memory of being there is like all these supplies around (laughter) there--'cause like, yes, that makes sense--and, but sitting at his desk, and I always thought, mm, this is really cool; I really like this.  And he would take me out to get a corned beef sandwich, and I just always have loved, you know.  So that was a special time.  And he always got his Chinese food when there was something special going on, egg foo young and shrimp fried rice.  Billy [William Hager] missed all these; my youngest brother missed all of that, but my sister [Beryl Hager] remembers it.
Story_ID: 196858
Speaker 1: I know you said you didn't, you never knew your grandparents, but did you ever hear stories about them, or did your parents [William Henry Hager and Helen Brown Hager] ever share stories with you about your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Not very much, and I should correct myself.  I do remember one time seeing my father's father, but he was old and sick at that time.  His name was, as I said, James Hager, and he had diabetes.  And I'm sorry to say, I didn't--you know, he had a missing leg, and an eye was gone.  And you know, it wasn't, you know, I just didn't connect with him in a way that I remember very well.  And he and my father I don't think got along very well, 'cause there was a very quiet time.  That memory was just sort of quiet.  And the one that they all talk about the most is Rob Brown.  I don't have any stories about my grand- my father's mother, Sarah Hager.  And I don't really have any stories about my father's father, and he wasn't really very close with his family, so.  You know, I don't know, a lot of family you're closer to one side than the other side.  We were definitely closer to my mother's side.  And so it was my grandfather, Rob Brown that most of the stories are about, and mostly about horses and things like that in the country.
Speaker 1: How did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: My mother's cousin, Louise Bell [ph.], introduced them.  And in fact, they got married in her home.  And she's still living this day.  My parents got married in 1939 on my mother's birthday, August 6th, 1939.  And they lived in Deanwood [Washington, D.C.], and right next door to who is my godmother, who's still living, in fact, and who has just moved into a retirement community right up the road from me.  So, I mean they sort of kept all their connections really for a long, long time, and thank goodness some of the people are still living.  And so that's it.  My mother's cousin introduced them.
Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Betty [Francis], how far back can you trace your ancestors, who were they, what origin and what do you know about how your ancestors came to this country?  Were they free, slaves or, I mean were they free, were they slaves?
Speaker 2: You know, I really don't know.  I really, really, really don't know, and that's a regret.  The, some cousins on my father's side are doing some work, and, and I need to find out how far it's gone.  On my mother's side, I know that her mother's father's name was John Wise.  And from pictures that I see of him and his wife, I think they were pro- they may have been Jewish, I don't know, or some lineage, because they were sitting on the front porch of a store, (laughter) in Virginia.  And they looked--I mean I just think they ran a store.  And her name was Wise, so I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I just don't know.  And that's a, you know it's--I don't know.
Story_ID: 196859
Speaker 1: Tell me about your earliest memory.
Speaker 2: The earliest memory?  I don't know, it's on Rock Creek Church Road [Washington, D.C.].  I can't re- my sister [Beryl Hager] and my oldest friend [Peggy Amos] say they have to be my memory 'cause I don't remember things.  But we lived on Rock Creek Church Road in what is now I think called the Petworth section of Washington, D.C.  And I just remember our house there and sitting and watching TV maybe.  That--I don't know how old that I would have been at that time, but watching TV.  And I just have all these sort of conglomeration of memories in that house and sitting on Friday nights, my sister, and my first cousin, and I would sit in front of the TV and watch 'I Remember Mama.'  You've never heard of that, right, (laughter) and eat barbecue potato chips.  That was like we were in heaven.  And you know, it's funny, my mother [Helen Brown Hager] reminded me of--we were talking the other day, and she asked me if I remember that.  And I remember my mother cooking in the kitchen.  And she would always cut bacon in half to put in the frying pan, and I used to tell people it's 'cause we were poor.  And she said, "No, Betty, it's not 'cause we're poor, it's so I can get it in the frying pan."  But I just remember those kinds of things, of being with my family and playing outside, although I didn't play very much.  I wasn't very athletic.  I used to fall whenever I was trying to play, but--
Speaker 1: And can you share some other memories with us about growing up, like holidays, special occasions?  What were those like in your house?
Speaker 2: They were happy times; always family was there.  And we--Christmas was the best.  My, my--we just, I don't know, we just always had everybody around, you know, my mother's sisters and my cousins.  And the other, my father's [William Henry Hager] relatives would come over, you know.  And so, we always had a tree and we always, they always tried to get us everything that they could, but I mean, they were not, our family was not wealthy by any stretch of the imagination.  And so, but they stretched a dollar.  I swear my mother and father could stretch a dollar until it didn't know its own name.  And so Christmas was a favorite time.  My father's best, favorite holiday was Easter, and so they always dressed us up and toted us out so we could look real cute on Easter.  And you know, that was fun.  We used to get ready for that.  And I remember going downtown on the streetcar with my mother and my sister.  And you know, my sister and I would be fussing 'cause she was making us go to the department store to buy us clothes, but you know, that's being kids.
Story_ID: 196860
Speaker 1: Can you tell us your siblings' names and their birth order including yourself?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm the oldest, and my sister, who I keep referring to, is Beryl Hager, Helene Beryl Hager, and she is fifteen months younger than I am.  And then I have a brother, Bill Hager, William Hager, and he is thirteen years younger than I am.  I also have a half-brother, whose name is Michael Butler, and he is four years older than I am.  Now, Michael lives, Michael Butler lives in Tucson, Arizona, but my sister, Beryl Hager, lives in Washington, D.C., and my brother, William Hager, lives here in Prince George's County [Maryland], where I do.
Speaker 1: And what was daily life like for you all?  How did the day begin and that kind of thing, well, more particularly for you and your sister?
Speaker 2: When we were growing up?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, it was real, as I think about it now, it was really pretty structured.  I mean just, I just keep telling you there was no drama.  We will get--mama [Helen Brown Hager] would wake us up.  We would go downstairs and have breakfast, and then, as I recall, we went to, the first few years of my life I went to Park View [School, Washington, D.C.], which was in--I don't even know where, I don't know where it is--Quincy Street I think something.  It's right off of Georgia Avenue in Northwest Washington.  But then in 1954 it just happens to be the year of the decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  We transferred to Sacred Heart School [Washington, D.C.].  So my sister and I either walked to school, which back then you could let your kids walk to school and not have to worry about it, or we take the bus from Rock Creek Church Road over to 16th [Street] and Park Road.  And so we went to school, and we came home and did our homework, and had dinner, and went to bed.  That was the day; you know, that was it during the week.
Story_ID: 196861
Speaker 1: Can you describe your block and community life [in Washington, D.C.], and can you kind of give us a mental picture of what that was like?
Speaker 2: Geez, yeah.  You know, it's amazing I can.  It's just like I was right there.  We had this little block which, when I look at it now, it's not exactly the best, most wonderful thing.  But it, because it was a block between New Hampshire Avenue and Spring Road in Washington [D.C.], where the people who lived on New Hampshire Avenue, their backs faced us.  So that's it, the backs of the houses faced us, and you know, I don't know, you don't see that very often.  It's usually front to front.  Anyway, but everybody was nice.  Everybody knew each other.  We had friends up and down the street.  One of the teachers at Park View School [Washington, D.C.], you know, their kids, they, she and her kids lived up the street.  My best friend, Peggy Amos, that whole--that family lived, I could walk out my front door and into her house.  And so we were back and forth to each other I don't know how many times a day.  The reason my knees have gone bad is 'cause I was falling down every time I ran over to Peggy's house (laughter).  But, so they were our closest connection on our block.  They were just, she, to this day, is a part of our family.  And you know, her mother, and father, and brother, everybody's passed, but she's still part of our family.  And we've lost touch with the other people who lived on the block.  But I did have a real good friend who lived not too far away, and she's the--we used to walk to school together.  But I think that my mother's [Helen Brown Hager] best friend was Peggy's mother, so our two families were the closest.
Story_ID: 196862
Speaker 1: And tell me what sights, sounds, and smells remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, the smell is sawdust.  Sight?  I don't know.  I never thought about that.  The smell, bacon (laughter).  Is that terrible?  And you said sight?
Speaker 1: What sounds?
Speaker 2: Sound, birds and crickets, yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you have any other memories of growing up that you wanna share with us that we didn't talk about?
Speaker 2: No, it's just that my sister [Beryl Hager], I keep, I say no, and then I start talking again (laughter), but just that my sister and me, 'cause we used to, at sometime my aunt lived with us.  And our house was sort of--we only had three bedrooms, and my parents [Helen Brown Hager and William Henry Hager] actually had a boarder in one of them.  That's, I mean they made ends meet a lot of different ways.  So, one of the rooms, we always had somebody there, who I thought they were just another member of the family.  And they always were, and they stayed friends with our, us all the time.  But you know, my sister and I shared a bed for a little while, and I just remember, you know, we were just up there.  We were happy.  I'm just lucky, and I'm thinking about it.  We were just sort of happy.
Speaker 1: And you had said earlier that a lot of your aunts and uncles would come and live with you all for some time.  Tell us a little bit about that.
Speaker 2: Well, that, that was one, that was, that was the other part of that story, is that whoever came to live with us lived in the other bed.  So (laughter) it was two, it was like twin beds.  And so whenever somebody came the aunt or the uncle or whatever was in one of those twin beds, and my sister and I was in, you know, we were in the other one. But we were like, we were like happy; we were fine; that was fine, whatever, you know.  And they didn't stay long.  They would come, and whatever was going on in their life, they needed to be there, and the door was open.  And when they got back wherever they needed to be, they would go, but they always knew they had a place that was their home, you know, and that's why they called my mother Ma.  And the thing is my father  was right there, and he was Pa.  He, they called him Hager, but you know, he just, that was it.
Story_ID: 196863
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your elementary school.  You mentioned Park View School [Washington, D.C.].  Were there any teachers there that influenced you, and just what was your elementary school like?
Speaker 2: My elementary school was, you know, I think that it was fine, but I don't remember too much about it.  I have my report cards though.  And I remember that I had Ms. Landers [ph.] in the--oh my God, I can't believe this--Ms. Landers in the, I think kindergarten, somebody in the first grade.  Must have been Ms. Bluett [ph.] in the first grade, Ms. Stewart [ph.] in the second grade, and Ms. Ellis [ph.] in the third grade.  I cannot believe it.  And they were these wonderful women.  Ms. Landers and Ms. Stewart were sisters.  But my mother [Helen Brown Hager] was concerned, I now know, that I was too much in Peggy's [Peggy Amos] shadow, my girlfriend across the street.  And she decided--now, my mother who didn't get through high school decided that I needed to get out from under Peggy's shadow.  I hope Peggy doesn't ever see this (laughter)--but that I needed to get out from under Peggy's shadow so that I could be my own person, because Peggy had this real, you know, she was like just, she was a leader.  And she had this, just went and did a lot of things.  I followed her I think; I just followed her, and my mother didn't want me to do that, and I appreciate that, I really appreciate it.  So, that's why she took us out of Park View and put us at Sacred Heart [School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: What was that transition like, going from one school to the other?
Speaker 2: It was fine.  I don't know that--it is weird, but I don't know if I fit in that well at Park View.  I have no idea why I'm saying that, but I felt more at home at Sacred Heart, and so it wasn't hard for me.  Now that your tell- now that you're asking me this, I think it she probably was right.  I probably did need to go somewhere else.  And the thing with Sacred Heart, though, was that it was, they hadn't quite gotten used to the fact of black people, I don't think.  It was, because the year I was in fourth grade was, I think that's right, was, as I said the year of the decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  And the nuns, but the nuns were good.  I don't remember them really treating us in any way badly or differently, too differently or differently at all, but then--
Speaker 1: Was--
Speaker 2: --I might not know, you know.
Speaker 1: Was there a big deal made about it that, you know, this was happening in 1954, and even in your family or anything?
Speaker 2: It wasn't until years later that I realized that we moved the year of the decision, no.  My family didn't make a big deal about it.  You know, they really didn't.  I'm the drama queen.  They, my mother and father [William Henry Hager] just didn't make a big deal about things.  And when I look at the report cards that they saved from when I was in the youngest years, they really were paying very close attention to my progress, my parents were, and writing--you know, then you wrote notes back and forth to the teacher.  And you know, my father was always thanking the teacher for, you know, helping me to overcome, I stuttered.  I still do when I get a little sort of, you know, whatever.  And, but he was thanking her for helping me to overcome that and, but the teachers were calling me a leader, and that I thought was weird too, when, at a very young age.  So, it, those things are interesting to me.
Speaker 1: What type of student were you during those elementary school years?
Speaker 2: I got pretty much I think A's and Bs.  It wasn't until I'd gotten to, until--I remember, gosh the seventh and eighth grade and we had to do algebra and geometry, or was that high school [Sacred Heart Academy, Washington, D.C.]?  I don't remember when it was.  It was terrible.  I couldn't--because I always had this competition with this girl named Barbara Heller, and she and I were neck and neck for the A's, you know.  And I don't know if I was doing this because, I don't know why we were competing with each other.  It was just that, but we were.  And she got the math part, and I didn't get the math part.  And I even remember getting a C.  Oh, my goodness, I thought I wouldn't live through it.  So--
Speaker 1: And during the elementary years, the primary years, what type of child were you?  Were you a well-mannered child?  Were you mischievous?  What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: No, I was so well-mannered until it was, I probably would just make you ill.  I don't think, I think I was, I just tried to please any adult.  And I just had this extraordinary respect for authority.  And so I guess that's my parents teaching me without saying it for, you know, to respect people.  But I was mouthy with my paren- with my mother.  I was always mouthy with my mother.  So that was my little rebellious side I think.  And she was always running around that--I was all--she was always running after me around the dining room table.  That's the big family joke, about how she used to have to take off around the dining room table with something to sort of get me to pipe down.
Story_ID: 196864
Speaker 1: During the elementary school years, at this time, did you have dreams and aspirations, and if so, what were they?
Speaker 2: I really didn't have any dreams or aspirations, I really didn't.  A lot of people, I know do, but I really didn't.  I was just sort of living day to day.  And no, I didn't have any.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, moving on to the junior high school years, what junior high did you attend?
Speaker 2: Well, Sacred Heart [School, Washington, D.C.] went through the eighth grade, so seventh and eighth grade was still at the, the grade school.  And so that's it, and ninth grade I went to Sacred Heart Academy [Washington, D.C.], which is across the playground.  And that was an old house that was converted to a high school for 125 girls.  And so I was there from the ninth grade until the twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: But going back to junior high, what kind of student were you in junior high, and what kind of young lady were you starting to become?
Speaker 2: I was a good student, an obedient student, mouthy to my mother [Helen Brown Hager], and liked boys a lot (laughter).  And I wasn't very interested in sports and extracurricular activities.  They were--actually because the school was sort of small, and they didn't really have that much.  We--it's funny, I just thought about it.  What they did was teach us how to apply makeup, so that's how I learned in the eighth grade to put on my eye liner, which I have always remembered and always used.  And what else?  We played softball, but I was sort of pitiful, and play--I think I was more competitive in the classroom than sports.  And I played a little basketball too, but I was a little self-conscious, so I didn't do that very well.  I wasn't good at sports, so that's it, and I never have been.
Speaker 1: And who was influencing you at this particular time in your life?
Speaker 2: Influencing me?  I had a cousin who was four years older than me.  You know, her name was Barbara Bell, and she was cute and popular, four years older than me, and so I thought she was wonderful, which she was, but I really thought she was wonderful.  But you know, I think some of the questions that you're leading to, that you're asking me have to do with self-awareness, and I didn't have any, I don't think.  I mean I'm telling the truth.  I was just sort of living life day to day and without a lot of thought or understanding about what was going on in my life.  And so, the good Lord really took (laughter) very good care of me under, you know, so that's it.  I don't know if I could tell you who was influencing me.  I think the greatest influence whether she knows it or not is really my mother, Peggy [Amos], my friend Peggy, and my cousin, Barbara.  I think that they probably had the most.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And my sister [Beryl Hager].  Of course, of course at that time I wouldn't wanna admit that my sister, who is younger than me, was influencing me (laughter).
Speaker 1: And who were some of your friends in addition to Peggy?  Who were some of your other friends in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Diane Conway, Joyce Wilson was, she was a little white girl who was at school, she was--and the Galoni [ph.] twins, Toni and Marcie Galoni, Brenda Smith [ph.], Alex Tello.  I think by that time, we were going to dances at St. Martin's [School, Washington, D.C.].  And I had this guy I just, oh, I just had such a crush on him.  His name was Nelson Grilo [ph.], and his daughter is my neighbor, two doors down neighbor.  Can you believe that?  And oh, Danny, Daniel James [III] was, you know, I just had a big crush on him.  I hope he never sees this.  I hope he does.  He'd probably get a big kick out of it.  His father--he actually is a  general in the, I think in the [U.S.] Air Force.  His father was [General Daniel] "Chappie" James [Jr.].  But of course, we didn't know who was who then.  And we had, we just were friends; everybody was just sort of friends in school, so.  And I have a big poster downstairs of all my high school--I'm sorry, my grade school class.  I think it's the eighth grade class.
Speaker 1: And how did you spend your time after school?  What were the things that you really liked doing, the things you were interested in?  How did you spend your time?
Speaker 2: This is not very exciting.  I didn't do a lot.  I would do my homework and sort of hang out outside.  I wasn't really playing sports or, I'd jump rope, you know, some.  I never could do jump--Double Dutch.  But I would jump rope, and my sister reminds me I never played with dolls, so I didn't, you know, I wasn't doing, I don't know what I was doing.  I wasn't reading.  You know some kids who say they don't, not very active.  They're reading books all the time.  I read some.  I wasn't reading all the time, so I don't know what I was doing, you know.
Story_ID: 196865
Speaker 1: Did your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about that.
Speaker 2: We were Roman Catholics.  My mother [Helen Brown Hager] still goes to the Catholic church.  My brother [William Hager] and his family go to Mass, go to church.  His children are in Catholic school.  We all went to Catholic school, and I was extremely devout.  In fact, there was a point when I thought I was going to be a nun.  That was until I discovered boys (laughter).  But I really--we were a very good Catholic family, yes.  And we went to the Shrine of the Sacred Heart [Washington, D.C.], which is at 16th [Street] and Park Road.  So all of that was, sort of that was our little sphere.  The church and school was right over in that area, which was, I don't know, a mile or two from our house.
Speaker 1: And what were some of your experiences like in church?
Speaker 2: There are some of, I have very vivid memories of being in church.  I used to love it when, you know, that we used to pray in Latin.  And when we changed from Latin to English I was like undone, and that was when I was (laughter) a kid.  But I really just loved being in that church.  There was something about the atmosphere about it.  And you know, I just felt this close connection to God and to--so I was a devout little girl.
Story_ID: 196866
Speaker 1: So moving on to high school, please tell me again the name of your high school and what that was like.
Speaker 2: I went to Sacred Heart Academy [SHA, Washington, D.C.] for high school, from ninth grade to twelfth grade--(coughs)--excuse me.  And again, it was a one hundred and--it was an old house that was converted to a high school.  And the nuns who taught us were Sinsinawa Dominican nuns, and they were all, you know, quite, most of 'em quite nice, some of 'em were a little ornery, but they were pretty nice.  And actually by the time I got to high school, there were a lot of black girls in the high school.  So I didn't feel like I was sort of out of--that I was the only one, and smart girls.  You know, they were smart, and they were nice.  You know, they weren't really--we used to have to wear uniforms, and my cousin, my--so, at one point, I had a cousin who was there, and my sister [Beryl Hager] was there.  But my cousin was older than me, so we would roll our uniforms up (laughter), and you know, roll the waist up so, because we used to have to wear 'em below the knee.  And we'd roll 'em a little bit and you know, try to roll, the put our collars up, and just do normal teenage things.  And had, we had, we used to have to wear saddle shoes, and I forgot about those.  And we had a green blazer that--with SHA on it.  It was so, that was--and I used to ring the bell.  This is how good I was: it was my job to jump out of my class and go ring the bell so the kids knew it was time to change classes, believe it or not.  I was the head of the student council when I was there.  I never did quite get to be the sodality queen or whatever.  One of my friends was sodality queen, but I never got to be that holy.  But I was just like, you know, behaving myself all the time, most of the time.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends in high school?
Speaker 2: Let me see, who were some of my friends?  Yvonne Mobley comes to mind; Joyce Woodson [ph.] comes to mind, and we've not kept in touch, Laura Smith, and again, Toni and Marcie Galoni [ph.].  I think Joyce Wilson went to another high school.  But they--my cousin, Avora [ph.], and some girls who lived on her street went to high school with us.  And so they were some that I could, that come immediately to mind.
Speaker 1: And do you remember any particular teacher?  Did any of the nuns have a particular influence on you or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I just remember for some reason Sister Balthazer [ph.] comes to my mind.  She taught history.  I hated history (laughter), and I don't know why.  I couldn't stand history, and I never did get it, and she was the one who taught history.  But there was a little principal whose name I can't quite remember, Sister Elvira [ph.], something.  I don't know.  Sister Rosellen [ph.], Sister Rosellen I never really quite got because she was very pretty.  Anybody could see that she was very pretty.  I never quite got why she was in the convent.  And she and Sister Giordanne [ph.] were sort of good friends.  And Sister Giordanne was a young and attractive-looking woman too.  And we were always like, what are they doing being nuns, you know?  And so, and then we used to, we used to make up stories about, about those two and two good-looking priests, Father [J. Joshua] Mundell and Father [Vincent] Gatto.  So we had very active little minds back in that time.  But those, but they were very good teachers.  I'm telling you, the people that I know today who have the best grasp of the English language, and grammar, and writing, and speaking, I'm telling you, I have, I was in a meeting with a woman the last--six months ago.  And she used a word in such a way that I said my God, wonder where she went to school.  Turns out, she went to Sacred Heart Academy.  They taught us, I can diagram a sentence right now.  I can, I mean it's just amazing what they did in terms of our education.  And so I am eternally grateful for having gone to Sacred Heart School and Sacred Heart Academy.
Speaker 1: And at this time in your life as a teenager in high school, what were you thinking that you wanted to be, and what were you thinking you wanted to do with your life?
Speaker 2: I had, once again, I had not a clue what I wanted to be or do.  I just remember in the twelfth grade I had gotten good grades, and the--but there were no counselors; you know, there was nobody really guiding us.  And you know, my parents [Helen Brown Hager and William Henry Hager] hadn't been through the process.  So I just remember at one, at one day--I wish I could think of the name of the principal.  I think her name was Sister Reginald [ph.].  You know, she started talking to me about, [HistoryMaker] Betty [Francis], you need to start thinking about college.  And I'm like, what are you talking about?  I don't even know what you're talking about, but I guess I do have to start thinking about it--
Story_ID: 196867
Speaker 1: I learned about several colleges, basically Catholic colleges that were outside of the Washington [D.C.] area.  But then I somehow decided to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and I don't really understand how I--how that process, I don't remember how that process worked.  But I think I did get accepted to some other colleges, but Howard gave me a full scholarship, and it was right down the street.  So all I'd do is get on the bus and ride down Georgia Avenue.  And that's how I, that's really how I got to college, but you know, it wasn't with a lot of guidance.  It was the grace of the good Lord who, that got me to Howard University.
Speaker 2: And what year did you go to Howard University.
Speaker 1: I started in 1963, and as I said, I had a full four-year scholarship to Howard and what a blessing that was, including books.  And I worked, starting after my first semester.  I worked on Capitol Hill [Washington D.C.] for Senator Birch Bayh.  I don't know you've--there is a Birch Bayh [sic. Senator Evan Bayh] who's I think a senator now, but it was his father in 1963 or '64 [1964].  I had a girlfriend whose name was Andrea Newsome.  She was from New Jersey.  And she started working for Senator [Clifford P.] Case.  And I was always trying to be grown up, so I wasn't gonna pay attention to the sororities and the little kids playing on campus.  It is so weird.  So I wanted to be grown up and go to work.  So I would go to school from eight until noon.  I will never know how I got to school at eight o'clock in the morning every day, but I went from eight to noon to school, and then at one, from one to five I worked on the Hill.  And I bluffed my way into the job, because at Sacred Heart [Academy, Washington, D.C.] they taught us maybe one half a semester of typing.  So I said I could type.  And at that time--it's so funny--that I remember out of college the fact of robotype machines at Senator Bayh's office.  It was the precursor to the, to the computer.  And they had these--you would sit there and type, and this little tape would come out with holes punched in it.  And that--oh God, and if you made a mistake, then you had to go start all over again.  I don't even remember how we corrected the mistakes, but the tapes would tear.  And oh God, it was so frustrating, especially if you couldn't really type, and you were bluffing like I was (laughter).
Speaker 2: And what were your years like at Howard University?
Speaker 1: They were good, but it was--I made it more like a continuation of high school.  I did, and that's, I have a tinge of regret about that I didn't participate more in campus life.  I really think that if I had--'cause I would had closer Howard University relationships that lasted.  A lot of my friends have a lot of close relationships--well wait a minute--some of 'em have close relationships from college.  And you know, I had one or two and one of them died.  Most of my close relationships from college are friends, boys, who were boys, who we've grown up together rather than, you know, girls who have stayed together all these years.  But I remember, I remember Dr. Snowden, Frank [M.] Snowden [Jr.].  He taught us Greek mythology and the Greek plays and ah, what a voice he had.  And I will nev- you know, I remember the term hamartia.  No one ever remembers it.  I try to say it all the time.  And nobody knows what I'm talking about, but Frank Snowden would know what I'm talking about.  It's a certain kind of pride that Greek tragic heroes had that was always their downfall.  And you know, he taught us things like that and they taught me about international law.  I mean my world was very small, you know, because I didn't have any need to get outside of my little world 'cause it was just fine.  But I remember going into international law class and taught, you're thinking what about law in Africa?  What, why do we need to even worry about that, you know?  And then it sort of broadening, started opening up my mind.  So Howard really was the place where my mind started getting opened up to the rest of the world, and other people, and people from other places.  And I do actually have a lot of friends who are Howard friends and who, we are friends from Howard, so it lasted even though I wasn't there very much.  I was there in the morning and gone mostly in the afternoons.
Story_ID: 196868
Speaker 1: --What did your parents [Helen Brown Hager and William Henry Hager] think about your decision to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Well, I think they were very glad, and they were proud that I got a scholarship.  And they helped me every way they could.  I remember, you know, one time at--I was stressed out about something. 'Cause I was always trying to be stressed out about something.  I think I always needed a little drama because it probably was not enough going on at home.  But I remember my father saying you should quit that job [aide to Senator Birch Bayh].  I can take care of you, and just go to school, and don't worry yourself, just, you know, quit the job; you don't need be--he didn't know I was worrying about a boy (laughter).  But you know, it just was--what was your question?
Speaker 1: Just what did your parents think about you--
Speaker 2: They were proud of me.  You know, I was the first one, and they were proud of me, that I had done it, and basically I found it on my own.  And they supported in every step of the way, but I sort of basically, you know, pioneered it.  I had one cousin ahead of me who went to--who was a couple of years older than me, and he was in Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland].  So, you know, the family, see, my family were not college graduates, so we were the first generation to be college graduates.  So that was, you know, a very good thing--
Story_ID: 196869
Speaker 1: When I was--after my junior year [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I decided I was really grown.  And my girlfriend, Andrea [Newsome] and I decided in that year that we would leave Washington [D.C.] and go to Boston [Massachusetts] for the summer because she was, she wanted to go to summer school at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  And I wanted to work in [HistoryMaker] Edward Brooke's first campaign for the [U.S.] Senate.  He was a good, he was Peg--you remember my friend Peggy [Amos]?  It was her uncle.  And so at the end of my junior year, I got out.  He was the attorney general for the State of Massachusetts.  So I got on the phone.  I went upstairs.  I will never forget it.  I can see myself doing this as if I'm doing this second.  I went upstairs and sat on the bed and called Edward Brooke's office and the attorney general and said, "I want to come to Boston and work for you during your campaign."  And he said "[HistoryMaker] Betty [Francis], what did your mother [Helen Brown Hager] say?"  And I said, "I haven't told her yet."  So he said, "Well, let me call you back."  And so (laughter) then about, I don't know if it was the next day or just a couple of hours later, he called back and said, "Okay, you can come.  I'll find you a job, and I'll pay you."  And then I really--I went and I told my mother, and she was like, she couldn't believe it, 'cause I was twenty at that time.  And that really got me, you know, that's what got me really moving in my life I think, that I went to Boston; I struck out on my own.  And Andrea and I had this little apartment on Broadway in Cambridge [Massachusetts], down in the basement, one bed; one of us had to sleep in the living room; the other one had to sleep, had a bedroom.  So we alternated, who would get the bedroom, who got the living room.  And I stayed there and actually did not come back for my senior year.  I stayed there.  I met the man that I later married.  And when the campaign was over and Edward was moving, Edward Brooke, Senator Brooke was moving his office to Washington as a senator, then I could come back and work for him in the afternoons.  So I went back and finished my senior year at Howard.  And so silly, I didn't go to my graduation, my college graduation.  And that I think dis- I mean my--to this day, my mother is disappointed that I didn't go to my college graduation, because I got married.  And I was living in Boston, and so like, who would come back to go to graduation when I was married?  And you know, I finished.  And oh God, I wish I had given my mother and father [William Henry Hager] that, you know.  But I did give 'em law school graduation.  So I did later get my law degree [from Suffolk University Law School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Tell me a little bit about what you did on Ed Brooke's campaign, and what year was that?
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, that was 1966.  And he was, Edward Brooke was the first, was a Republican.  He was, had been elected as a black man in Massachusetts, which was pretty amazing back there, 'cause Massachusetts is not the most progressive of states in terms of racial issues, wasn't then.  But Edward was very, just, Senator Brooke, just the most wonderful man, brilliant, skilled, eloquent.  I just tell him whenever, you know, we have a chance to talk these days that he really helped me define my life.  He is a defining part of my life.  So, when I got there, he assigned me to be the secretary to the field director.  And the field director is the one who organized all the campaign workers for the campaign for the [U.S.] Senate.  And I didn't know a thing about Massachusetts.  I had never even stepped foot in Massachusetts before.  And there, you know, I walked into this whole campaign organization where most of the people had been on his staff for attorney--when he was attorney general.  So they not only knew the state, but they knew him, you know, and I really only knew him as Peggy's Uncle Eddie (laughter).  So, and which is, you know, so, we had to sort of, I had to adjust, and I had to learn the state; I had to learn all the counties and how it was organized.  And so we did that, and he got elected with a great, he had a great campaign organization.  He is such a great leader, though, that everybody was just, I mean they just couldn't do enough for him, so that we worked twenty-four hours a day.  It was a great time, really a great time.
Story_ID: 196870
Speaker 1: And also during this time, kind of the height of the Civil Rights Movement.  Were you active in civil rights at all?
Speaker 2: I pro- I wasn't.  And I, and that's something else that I think about, why was I not?  But I'm thinking that maybe I went to Massachusetts, and the Civil Rights Movement was happening in Washington [D.C.] and south, because that never happened in Massachusetts until later.  When, if you think about the busing and all of that, that really happened later.  So, I wasn't really that active.  I did, I acted out when I moved to Massachusetts, in terms of big afro and you know, but I wasn't really marching the way, maybe a lot of kids were.
Speaker 1: And you said that working on that campaign was a defining moment in your life.  How so?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all I felt independent, and I felt like I was coming into my own, and that I wasn't being defined by my family or what they sort of wanted me or thought I was.  'Cause I sort of always thought that maybe I was something else.  I don't know what it was.  But I just, I just always wanted to be sort of grown.  I don't why, and now I wish I was about thirty, but I just always wanted to be grown.  And so that, I was out; I was grown; I was able to take care of myself; and I was earning a living, and I wasn't, you know, and I was contributing, because I really believed in [HistoryMaker] Senator [Edward] Brooke, you know, that he should be the senator.  And so I felt like I was really contributing to that.
Speaker 1: And at this time, what were you thinking that you wanted to do with your life professionally?
Speaker 2: I had no idea.  I still didn't have any idea.  I went through Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  I got, you know, I was, I had a government major, and psychology minor, and no idea what I was gonna do after that.  And my friends were gonna go to social work school.  And they were gonna do this--I think I probably thought because of the way we were socialized during that time, women got married.  And my role model was my mother [Helen Brown Hager], who was married and raising a family.  And so I was trying to put it together.  You know, we were that sort of cutting edge of what you do, what a woman does that is in addition to having a home and family.  And so I wasn't, I hadn't formulated any career ideas at that time.
Story_ID: 196871
Speaker 1: Let's talk about when you went back to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You finished at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did you do next?
Speaker 2: When I finished at Howard, I finished my coursework at Howard in January, and I got married in April and moved to Boston [Massachusetts].  So, I did what I thought I was supposed to do, was get married.  And I, but I moved to Boston because that's where my husband lived, and I, by that time, had some friends there.  And so, you know, I was pioneering out.  And I was the first one of my family really to go that far.  And so we got a little apartment in Winchester, Massachusetts, which had no black people.  And, and I worked at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968].  I worked at Harvard University at the Harvard Astrological Observatory [sic. Harvard Astrophysical Observatory, later the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And I would like for you to know that I had the opportunity--now this is how ingrained this wife thing was in me.  I had the opportunity to go to Harvard University and get a master's degree in education completely free of cost, a scholarship, and I turned it down.  I had also the opportunity to be Governor Frank Sargent's [Francis W. Sargent] appointments executive assistant, and I turned it down, because the man that I married was, did not yet have his degree, and in those days you didn't do that.  So I turned it down and became a secretary.  I now know this is what was going on in my head--and became a secretary at the Harvard Astrophysical Observatory.  And I worked for Dr. Leo Goldberg and one of the women who had worked in Senator Brooke's [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] campaign, Nicky Vance [ph.], who was the one who actually hired me for this job.  And I think I worked there for, well, I worked there three years.
Story_ID: 196008
Speaker 1: We're about in the early '70s [1970s] now, right after you left Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Where, why did you leave Harvard?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't, I walked across the street at Harvard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went from the Harvard Astrophysical Observatory [later Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to the--where I was a secretary, to the Harvard University Press [Cambridge, Massachusetts], which is the publishing house at Harvard University.  And I worked for a man, I was hired by a man whose name was Mark Carroll.  And he was relieved of his duties, and another man came in whose name is Arthur J. Rosenthal.  Now, he was somebody who had a big influence on my life.  He was a New York City [New York, New York] publisher.  He founded Basic Books [New York, New York], which was basically a psychological publishing company.  And so he really was a professional publisher at the university press.  And he turned around a loss situation to one that was more profitable.  But he also kept telling me in the years that I worked for him that I needed to move out of there and go do something else, that he was very, very happy to have me, but I should get over myself and get a career and not just be his executive assistant.  I mean he moved me from secretary to executive assistant, to this or that, and then one day he just said look, you, you need to go to law school.  And if you go to law school, I'll give you Fridays off.  You go, you work during the week and go to school at night, and you can have Fridays off to study.  And I'm like fine, I'll do it, and that's what I did.  So I went to Suffolk University Law School [Boston, Massachusetts].  It's on Beacon Hill in Boston [Massachusetts] at--
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: I started in 1976 and went four years at night.  And the, I had a lot of support from my then-husband, who, I mean at the beginning there was a lot of support.  And, and it was so interesting, because during the years 1976 through '80 [1980], you know, he had two children, so my stepkids came to live with us during that period of time.  And some part of that time I, you know, I was sort of doing what my mother [Helen Brown Hager] did.  And my brother [William Hager] came to live with us while he was in college.  So, you know, we had a busy time there, but people were very helpful to me.  And so I was able to graduate from law school in 1980 and able to have a party and have my parents there to see me graduate from law school.  So I was very happy to do that.
Speaker 1: And how did they feel, your parents?
Speaker 2: Wonderful.  I think they just felt very good.  I really was the first member of our family to have an advanced degree.  And so they were feeling pretty good.
Speaker 1: And do you think that kind of made up for not doing the Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] graduation?
Speaker 2: Well, maybe, but my mother still reminds me about Howard (laughter).  But I think that, I think they were very proud.
Story_ID: 196009
Speaker 1: And after law school [Suffolk University Law School, Boston, Massachusetts], what was next for you?
Speaker 2: After law school, I had a series of--I left Harvard University Press [Cambridge, Massachusetts] where I learned to edit.  I could edit with the best of 'em, 'cause I really did learn from the best about how to edit.  So in 1980 I went first to Greater Boston Legal Services [Boston, Massachusetts] in the Family Law Unit.  And in the Family Law Unit we did a lot of things, guardianships, divorces.  We were the pioneers for open adoption.  I keep reading about open adoption now, and I remember that we really were working on that back then.  And it was a hard sell.  But it was a little bit depressing, 'cause I was still a little naive, and I had to sort of boogie away from there.  And then I went right--
Speaker 1: Depressing, how so?
Speaker 2: Well, because it was people who did not have means.  And they had, you know, all the social problems and kids that were being--you know, I had to get cart guardianships for children whose parents were either not present, or neglecting them, or abusing them, or whatever.  And so, it was just a little difficult.  Then I went to Boston Housing Authority [BHA, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: That was 1980, probably '81 [1981].  And during that time, you know, the Boston Housing Authority had fallen into deep disrepair, and so a court order put it into receivership.  And this wonderful young man by the name of [Lewis H.] Harry Spence was the receiver and really turned it around so that all--really rehabilitated some old public housing and integrated.  And so for three or four years I worked there as an attorney, a staff attorney in the Boston Housing Authority.  And one of the senior attorneys there at the Boston Housing Authority moved over to the Massachusetts Department of Public Works, which is the Massachusetts Highway Department.  And about, you know, six months after she was there she asked me to come over there to be deputy general counsel, so that was big news in Massachusetts at that time.  And so I was very happy to do that.  But while we were at the Boston Housing Authority I did a lot of landlord tenant law, and so that was an interesting, exciting time.
Story_ID: 196010
Speaker 1: But going to the Massachusetts Department of Public Works [later, Massachusetts Highway Department] was really what got me into this transportation business, so everything else was sort of leading up to it.  And as I said, the good Lord just led me to where I was suppose, where I was going because I didn't have a plan.  I really didn't have a plan.  And so I went to work in the department--actually there was another black attorney there.  His name was Ulysses Jacks.  And, but the woman who hired me was, her name was Marilyn Newman.  She was a brilliant woman, and she always sort of tried to make me have some confidence in myself.  You know, I've had always these little guardian angels along my path who have tried to, you know, make sure that I kept moving ahead and didn't--'cause have a tendency to sit when it gets comfortable.  Mm, I like this; I'll stay right here, so people would always tend to move me along.  And so we had some interesting cases, and at that time Michael Dukakis was the governor of Massachusetts.  And for whatever reason he asked me to be an associate commissioner at the Massachusetts Department of Public Works, which is the highway department.  And those were paid positions, so I was actually over a department in the Massachusetts Highway Department.  And there had not, there had been a woman who had had a position like that, but there had never been, as far as I'm aware, a black person.  And of course, I didn't know it and didn't make a big, you know, it was no, no significance to me, but I think it probably was to others.  And it was a gubernatorial appointment, so I guess it was a big deal.  And you know, I say with some trepidation that we, it was that board of commissioners that I was on at that time that we signed the first design contract for the Boston Harbor Tunnel [later Ted Williams Tunnel] Project, you know, that multimillion dollar project that took the Southeast/Southwest Freeway over the City of Boston [Massachusetts] down into tunnel.  And it was, I don't know, probably a $15 billion  project.  But when we started out, it was anticipated to be a $1.2 billion project, and we were like shaking in our boots to (laughter) sign that first contract.  But we did, and now it's transformed the City of Boston, it really has, and the commerce along that corridor.  So, that's one of the highlights.  But when I was there, we did a lot in terms of starting up bridge inspections in a regular way and trash collection off the roads.  Kitty Dukakis was a beautification person, and so one of her guidances to us was clean up the road.  So I started working on that even then.  And it's been sort of one of the things that I've kept with me wherever I've gone, is getting rid of litter.  So, all of those signs you see here in the county even, you know, they're usually my design (laughter) and my, and it's a deep interest of mine.  So, and we designed this little sign up there, it was a chickadee; that's the bird, the state bird.  So it was a little chickadee, and I can't remember what it said, but it was a cute little sign.  And we had this theory that it really did help people to remember to stop flicking trash out the window.  So we got a lot of road projects done in addition to starting the Central Harbor--Central Artery/Third Harbor Tunnel Project [Central Artery/Tunnel Project; Big Dig] started.  And that was a very interesting time with [Frederick] Fred Salvucci really had the vision for that big project to depress the Central Artery and make it a tunnel under the City of Boston.  And so I was working with him at that time with Governor Dukakis and Jane Garvey.  Jane Garvey was, became the commissioner of public works in Massachusetts, but then she subsequently became the federal highway administrator here, over at the United States Federal Highway Administration and the Federal Aviation Administration.  She was the federal aviation administrator on September 11th, 2001 [9/11].  So she has had a magnificent career and has been in some very interesting places, so we worked together then too.
Story_ID: 196011
Speaker 1: And so what was next for you?
Speaker 2: After I worked there, I was the--
Speaker 1: What years were those?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty--nineteen eighty-four [1984] I went to the Massachusetts Department of Public Works [later, Massachusetts Highway Department], and I stayed there until 1990, when Governor [Michael] Dukakis--you remember he ran for president, and we were all packing our bags to come home to work in the White House [Washington, D.C.] (laughter)?  Only it didn't quite work out that way.  So then we had to figure out what to do.  And Republicans came in, and oh, it was a big deal, you know.  And luckily, one of the things he did was to move me out of the commissioner's spot, because he knew that the new people wanted their own people in the commissioner's spot.  But he put me in as a hearing examiner, which was extremely boring, but it was a lifetime position, so, you know, it was a career position, in other words.  I was in, had been in a non-career position as associate commissioner.  So, in the government you wanna be in a career position so you can't be moved out, but I was too bored, so.  In 1991, [HistoryMaker] Sharon Pratt Kelly [later, Sharon Pratt] won as mayor of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.].  And her search committee, two things happened: one was, her sister was a friend of mine in Boston [Massachusetts].  We sort of had been there together for years.  And this, and the search committee, I don't know if [HistoryMaker] Benaree [P. Wiley] had anything to do with this, but the search committee invited me for an interview.  And so I came down and talked to the search committee, and the head of the search committee was none other than [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E.] Jordon [Jr.].  So it was an interesting interview because he's, boy, he's brilliant, but he's also very funny.  So we were selected to be the director of public works in the District of Columbia.  Now, the public works department in the State of Massachusetts is, it's a highway department.  The public works department in the District of Columbia is very different.  It has roads and bridges.  At that time, in 1991--I was there from 1991 to 1994--it had five thousand people, an eight hundred million dollar a year budget.  I was about forty-one years old, if that old.  I don't know, maybe a little younger.  I don't know, I have to figure that one out.  But it had roads and, it had all the city's roads and bridges, trash collection, recycling, all the city's buildings, all the city's fleet, parking, licensing of drivers, registration of vehicles, and the water and sewer utility administration.  It alone had 1,500 people.  So one day I woke up and there I was (laughter).  And it was very political.  Every meeting and conversation with the city council was on television.  Every budget hearing was eight hours on television.  So, it was something that we had to quickly get up to speed on.  I worked round the clock.  Oh, not to mention snow, not to mention snow.  And I am proud to say that the Washington Post had editorials saying what a great job we did on snow during those years.  But we did a great--I think we did great work, and I think Mayor Kelly was a wonderful mayor for the city.  She put together a tremendous team of professionals, really brilliant people who were devoted to the city.  Most of us grew up in Washington [D.C.] and loved Washington.  And I think it was just a confluence of events that [HistoryMaker] Mayor [Marion] Barry came back at that time and, but we did really, really, really good work under her leadership at that time.
Story_ID: 196012
Speaker 1: And what did you do next?
Speaker 2: After that [director, Department of Public Works, Washington, D.C.] in 1995, when we lost the election, [HistoryMaker] Mayor [Sharon Pratt] Kelly [later, Sharon Pratt] lost the election, and then it was just about that time that another one of my guardian angels, whose name was Major [F.] Riddick [Jr.].  You might know his name.  He was chief of staff to Governor [Parris N.] Glendening.  And a friend of mine in Chicago [Illinois] came together.  She, her name is Christine Boulware, and she had an executive search firm.  And a young man by the name of [HistoryMaker] Wayne Curry had just been elected county executive in Prince George's County, Maryland, which I didn't know very much about, but they told me that was my next assignment.  You know, my friends told me this is your next assignment.  And so I came to work.  I met with Wayne Curry, and I was just so impressed with him now.  He, too, is a brilliant person, one of the most articulate people I have ever met.  And he had a vision for Prince George's County that made me understand immediately what I was to do.  I mean he didn't have to sit down and write me a letter.  Once he told me what he saw as Prince George's County, I knew what the transportation component needed to be.  So all these other experiences I had led me to this, and I really believe that very, very profoundly.  And he really transformed Prince George's County.  I mean it was a sort of, it was PG County [Prince George's County], it was sort of backwater.  I think now we have a recognition as being the only jurisdiction in the country that has gone from a predominantly white, blue collar place to one that is predominantly African American.  It has the highest household income of African Americans in the country, which means the world.  It has the highest educational level of African Americans in the country, which means the world.  And some of the things that have hap- that are happening here in Prince George's, I really do, I know that Wayne Curry was responsible for raising the bar.  And I mean even the newspaper doesn't call us PG County anymore.  If you've noticed, the newspaper refers to us as Prince George's County.  Prince George's County is 500 miles, square miles, 820,000 people.  It's almost a thousand people, so it's a major force in this, in this Washington [D.C.] metropolitan region.  We have the second, we, we are the second highest technology center in the State of Maryland.  We are the number one center for artists in the region.  If, you know, people may not know that.  But anyway, that's my Prince George's County spiel.
Story_ID: 196013
Speaker 1: And as someone who, somewhat later in life, kind of discovered their niche and that kind of thing, do you wish this would have happened earlier?
Speaker 2: Not at all.  I really, I so believe that things happen when they are supposed to happen.  And I think all the experiences I had in my life led me up one after another.  And what comes next will be an--I'm sort of waiting to see what's really gonna be next.  But, and so, no, I don't regret any of it, because during that time, you know, I have a wonderful son and grand- I have grandchildren, and I have step--I have actually two sons and a daughter.  And I have two grandchildren.  And you know, I've had a full life.  And I've reinvented myself a number of times, and I like that part.  And so no, I don't regret that at all.
Speaker 1: And I think often when we think of transportation and the transportation industry, women do not come to mind, and particularly African American women.  So do you feel like you're kind of forging new territory here and paving the way for others?
Speaker 2: Paving the way, paving the way (laughter).  You know, I really, I don't think about that very much.  It's just sort of what I do.  And it depends what people think about transportation.  You know, if you think about being a truck driver, you know, but this--surface transportation, roads and bridges and transit is really what I've done.  And yes, it's a male dominated area.  But what I think that I have been able to bring to it is, first of all, some different ways of looking at solving some of the transportation problems and adding some form to the function.  I know I have a reputation for being the snow queen, for getting people organized and getting them out there to take care of clearing the roads of snow, and that's been an issue in this region.  And I think where--and, and I have sort of a unique position of having been in two of the major jurisdictions in the region, both Washington [D.C.] and the county [Prince George's County, Maryland].  And so, but, both those departments had wonderful people.  And it's just a little leadership that tweaked things that got the snow thing working in, working better and technology and a whole lot of things like that.  But what I have enjoyed as much about anything else about the transportation elements is making roads a welcome part of communities.  One of the things that we've done is added brick crosswalks, and brick lining to sidewalks, and trees, and landscaping medians, and all the things that enhance a community.  And so, in addition to changing the specifications for the type of pavement that we use in Prince George's County, which we were the first ones.  When I first got here I knew I had heard, been hearing about Superpave.  So when I got here to the county we were the first local jurisdiction to start using this Superpave, which is much more durable; it has a greater strength; and our roads are really gonna last a lot longer for not a lot, in fact, the same cost.  So I don't know why everybody's not using Superpave.  But we also have a prettier road system.  And so it's a softer road system.  I have this theory that one of the problems with living today is stress, and one of the biggest stressors is driving and commuting.  And so, I've, we've added trees wherever we could and landscaping to soften the experience.  And I have a colleague that has written papers that shows that it's supposed to really work.  So I believe that, and so we've done a lot of that, spent a lot of money, invested a lot of money in the county system, also invested a lot of money in our transit system here.  The bus in the county is--we started that from virtually nothing to almost two and a half million riders a year.  But that also, we tried to soften that up just a little bit so it's not as stressful an experience to ride the bus.  And so we try to add to the quality of life, and I think that's the female side, is not just being--engineers solve problems.  But, and I'm a lawyer, you know, so the two of, you know, we had to work out some kinks, but boy, we had a wonderful team.  And so, I think that the form and with the function is what the female part of it has helped to work through.
Story_ID: 196014
Speaker 1: Throughout your career many of your jobs have been tied to someone else's political--where they are politically.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And so sometimes when they aren't where they wanna be politically, you weren't where you'd like to be perhaps, and how has that impacted you?
Speaker 2: Well, I keep saying I'm staying away from politicians, but it really is the way that I can have an impact.  You have an impact when you are leading an effort. And if I believe in a political leader, an elected official, and I--remember, I'm a political science major.  I believe in the political process.  And so sometimes I could be inconvenienced by their, by political fortunes.  I have believed in these leaders, and so I will be okay.  What I, you know, the thing that I regret is that the people don't have the benefit of that particular elected official, because I've been able to help them to get their vision put in place in a practical way.  So, you know, I may be a little inconvenienced, but generally I'm okay, and it's another time to reinvent myself.  You know, I'm sort of getting up there in age now, but I know I've got some new things to look forward to, and it's okay.
Speaker 1: And the next reinvention, what do you think that would look like?
Speaker 2: I don't have a clue, I really don't know, I really, I really don't know.  But I want it to be some, I don't--I think I may be ready not to be on twenty-four-hour call, 365 days of the year, because, you know, people think of the snow season as when a person like me is on call.  But any storm, any weather-related incident has an impact on the transportation system.  And so I really have to make, I'm making decisions all the time about what our response needs to be, 'cause you have to prepare in advance.  And sort of not having to do that for a while, well, that'd be okay.
Story_ID: 196015
Speaker 1: So, [HistoryMaker] Betty [Francis], if you will, just talk a little bit about the changes that you've seen in transportation over the, the decades, the twenty--the more than twenty years that you've been in this industry.
Speaker 2: Well, the biggest one, of course, is the congestion and the expanding commuting times, based primarily on, how suburbs are growing.  So, we try to have, worked on not having so much sprawl, but we can just understand that it's gonna continue and the--how expensive all the transportation projects have become.  So, I really do believe that in the future the megaprojects are gonna be fewer and that most of the road system is, rather than being expanded, is gonna be managed through technology in one way or another, whether it's tolls or just giving people the heads-up that there's congestion ahead.  Get off the road and go this way or that way, you know, those kinds of technological management of the congestion.  And I think that there's some new ways to handle public transit other than just buses and the heavy, heavy, heavy rail.  We in the county [Prince George's County, Maryland] are about to get two new rail stations and one in Largo [Maryland].  But they're very expensive; I mean it's five hundred million dollars for those little segments.  So, we're gonna see more light rail.  There's this huge project that you're probably hearing more about that's very expensive, but it's called magnetic levitation.  The first one of those trains has started I think in Japan, just recently.  But you basically are riding on air via, through electricity.  And there's some money being spent into, at researching that here in this country too.  So people are gonna be looking at alternatives to our normal ways of moving, of mobility.  I do think that we are putting in more and more sidewalks.  I think people are being more health conscious.  I think people are gonna start walking more.  I think they're gonna start riding their bikes where they can so that they can get themselves out of traffic.  And God knows we need to get our kids walking more because they're getting a little hefty at a little too young; you know, their ages are too young, so.  But I do think that people are still wedded to their cars.  I think that all the things that we've tried to do to get them to carpool and do this and that, I still think people love their single-occupant vehicles.  And so they have to wait in traffic, because we can't expand the roads quite enough to handle all the single-occupant vehicles.
Story_ID: 196016
Speaker 1: As you mentioned earlier, you are transitioning out of your current position.  So, what is next for you, because the transition is coming very soon?
Speaker 2: It is.  I don't know yet.  This is another reinvention process.  I, I wanna, I feel like I've made a contribution, and obviously that's very important to me.  So whatever I do I want it to be a contribution to a large number of people, so I would have--that has to be a part of the equation.  But I've also gotten very interested in art.  And you know, I think as I've gotten older the visual things have become, their beauty, and those things have become very important to me.  And they give a lot of happiness to my soul really.  So if, boy, if I could find a way to put it all together and make a living, that'd be the best (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you consider yourself a role model?
Speaker 2: I don't consider myself a role model, but I probably, I may be.  I don't know.  I have always tried to, and this is one of the things my parents [William Henry Hager and Helen Brown Hager] have instilled in all of us, was honesty and integrity.  And that has been at the forefront of everything that I've ever tried to do.  And if one is a role model, I think that that's the most important thing that, that is the most important role that I wanna give.  And the other thing is to try to be of service to people and not to think about what you can get for yourself.  Just what I think, I think--and in my jobs, whatever job I've had I've always taken the position of the consumer.  I have always gone in and read every letter that comes in, and I sign every one that goes out so that I know what the concerns are.  And I agree with the response.  When you're running a big agency you can't write all the response letters, but you can, and the only way you can know what's being told to people is that you sign it.  And I've always tried to say yes more than no, and we say yes more than no, and we--so that adds to the quality of life of people.  It's, the transportation system is the people's window to the government.  And I really believe in government.  And so people keep telling me well, it's time for you to go to the private sector.  Well, maybe not, 'cause I really believe in government, and because it has such a huge impact and contributes so greatly to people's lives even when they don't know it.
Story_ID: 196017
Speaker 1: One of the things we didn't talk about when we talked about your growing up is that you do have a brother [William Hager] who's thirteen years younger--
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: --than you are.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about that relationship and what that relationship was like.
Speaker 2: My brother's name is William Hager, and my sister's name is Beryl Hager, and she's fifteen months younger than me, and he's thirteen years younger than me.  So my primary relationship for most of my growing up was with my sister.  So when Billy was born--we call him Billy.  When Billy was born, I was thirteen and basically was like, mm, okay, we have a brother.  And it was my sister who really sort of pitched in more than I did, and I moved away when he was nine years old.  So, I loved him, and he was cute as a button, and I did what I could in my--when you're a kid like that you're sort of selfish and doing what you wanna do, which is hang out with your friends.  But as we've grown older and grown up, he lived with me when I was in--when he was going to Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts].  And so three of his four years he lived with me and my then-husband in our house in Medford [Massachusetts], and that's when we really got to know each other, really got to know each other.  And now we are just thick as thieves, and I just have the deepest love and respect for him.  My sister and I say that he is my mother's [Helen Brown Hager] favorite.  But it's a good thing we like him, because (laughter) otherwise we'd be real jealous.  And my sister is a wonderful woman.  She has been a teacher in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] school system [sic. District of Columbia Public Schools] for her entire career.  She just retired from, she did early childhood education and she taught kindergarten for many years.  And she could, she would always say: when those children leave my kindergarten class, they are reading.  And I, wherever we go, I see somebody, some grownup or some parent who says hi, Ms. Hager, you know.  They just love her.  She's wonderful.  But now she's, she is--one of our friends that we grew up with whose name is [HistoryMaker] Kent [B.] Amos, who is the first cousin to my friend, Peggy Amos, has a series of charter schools [Community Academy Public Charter] in Washington [D.C.].  And he's been after my sister Beryl year after year after year to come to work for him.  And so when she retired she went to work for him, and she's the principal of his early childhood program.  And so she's doing a great job there.  So education of young people has been her primary thrust.  And Bill, of course, works in the Prince George's County [Maryland] government in human resources.  And he's also taken up this political piece because he's been drafted to go to Annapolis [Maryland] to represent the county executive as part of the county executive's team in Annapolis when the general assembly has been convened.  So he is, so he's got that political part of him.  And everybody there who's met him in Annapolis just thinks the highest of him.  You know, he's got a great personality, but he's also got that integrity, doesn't have ulterior motives with things.  He's like sort of pure.  In today's world that's sort of unusual.  But he's a lot of fun, and he has a wonderful family.  And so, we're really blessed with a wonderful family.
Story_ID: 196018
Speaker 1: And how do you feel about the way that you've lived your life?  And what's most important to you?
Speaker 2: My family.  I feel that I have lived my life the best I knew how to live it, I have known how to live it.  I've tried, as I've gotten older, I've become more aware of how it important it is to be good to people, to really be good, you know, try to always--you know, as you sow so shall you reap.  But I have, my philosophy of life is a Buddhist philosophy.  I practice Buddhism, and we believe in the law of cause and effect, that whatever you do you get right back, so it's sort of a self-serving (laughter) to be good, had to be good to people, and to take responsibility for your life.  And so I take full responsibility for all my life.  And I have been very blessed to have a wonderful family, and the people that I have worked with have been really wonderful.  I have had people come into my office in the public works and transportation department, and they're like, this is not like an office.  These people are happy (laughter).  And you know, they're just like, it's, it's 'cause I don't know what it is, but you, I think when people are making a contribution they're happy.  And so I would say that my family and my close friends are the, that's really extremely important to me, and making a contribution, and making a contribution while I'm making a living is, that's what's important to me.
Story_ID: 196019
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: I know I should say something like, you know, curing cancer, but I really wanna travel more (laughter).  I really wanna get on a--I wanna go and see other places.  I wanna go to the beach.  I love the Caribbean and you know, just sort of being on the beach and those kinds of things with my friends.  And so I just really, those are things I wanna do, and I wanna find a way.  That's what I'm trying to do, trying to find a way to put it all together and make a living and do all those things, you know.  And I don't know, I'm probably being a little bit optimistic, but I am optimistic, so.
Speaker 1: What are some things you wish you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: I wish I had let my mother [Helen Brown Hager] see me graduate from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] (laughter).  My mother and father [William Henry Hager] let me graduate from Howard.  Differently, I think that if I--I wish I had been more self-aware when I was younger.  I think if I had been more self-aware when I was younger I could have done some things differently.  I don't know what, but I know that sort of being--just sort of floating along through life is not a good thing and that, that you can, you should have more just general awareness about what your life is and what you wanna do with it.  So, I would do that differently.
Story_ID: 196020
Speaker 1: And what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: That we, I--my concerns are, there are a lot of them, but I wish that we could get together, and work together, and be happy for the successes of all of us, and help those of us who are not, I mean I know this sounds like platitudes, but I really, I've seen it too often where, where successful people are not always supported and, or recognized.  And I'm not talking about myself.  I'm talking about other people that I've thought, oh my God, you know, this is a wonderful thing, and it's just not--we don't always recognize the people who are doing the wonderful things who are African American, and we do not support our African American businesses as much as we should.  That money that we're making, we're making billions of dollars.  Our African American businesses should be making billions of dollars.  Our African American professionals should be doing really well.  If you look at other, and I don't wanna name other ethnic groups, but they support their own, and they support their children.  And I wish that we, you know, that whole thing about the village, it takes a village to raise a child?  You know, I wish we had the village back again.  You know, we've moved so far afield that a lot of these children are raising themselves.  And I wish that the black family would come back together.  That's the number one thing I wish, is that the black family would come back together and that we raised our children in a way that they knew they were valuable and that they were loved, and that the only way they know that is that they're loved in a very deep and respectful way.  So I think that's the number one thing.  I may have named it last, but it took me a minute to realize that that's really the number one for me.
Story_ID: 196021
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: What stands out the most? In terms of what?  I don't understand.
Speaker 1: Just in terms of maybe perhaps your accomplishments or just what stands out the most in terms of--
Speaker 2: My--oh, okay, I got it, my surprise (laughter), my surprise.  Because I mean, you know, I didn't have this plan.  And then I ride down, you know, this street in Washington [D.C.], in Massachusetts, when I'm up there, and in Prince George's County [Maryland] 'cause I've been here the longest, nine years, and I see my things all over the place.  I'm stunned that it, you know, it just sort of--we were able to pull it together pull a team, you know, we were able in these different places to do these different things, and it had, I think, a positive impact on people's lives.  So, I think that's what it is really, and my great, great, great appreciation for the good fortune that I've had in my life.  Those are the things that I think stand out the most.
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a woman who tried to do the best for people that she could.
Story_ID: 196022
Speaker 1: And why do you think history is important?  Why do you think it's important, particularly as African Americans, for us to share our history, pass down the history, et cetera?
Speaker 2: I think it's extremely important, and I'm so appreciative to [The] HistoryMakers.  Because one of the things we as African Americans do not have is our history.  And I mean you asked me about my grandparents.  I don't know about my grandparents and my forebears, and I wish I did, but I don't.  And that's because that oral history has just not been passed down.  And part of it, I know from my parents [Helen Brown Hager and William Henry Hager], is a piece of shame, and we have nothing to be ashamed of.  We have everything to be proud of for surviving and thriving in the way that we were, you know, that we were brought to this country.  So, I think that showing the accomplishments of African Americans is just the most important thing, and I just, I appreciate that you're doing this.
Speaker 1: And what message or lesson do you have for your children and your grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Is be honest, and be good to people, and be happy.  By all means, take the shackles off your mind about whatever you have, and do the very best you can, and make a happy life for yourself and your family.
Story_ID: 196023
Speaker 1: And you know, we had talked earlier about the decision, Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954].  We're celebrating the fiftieth year this year.  When you think back on just different things in terms of the African American community, more particular that, what are your thoughts on that, especially since you did start going to an integrated school [Sacred Heart School, Washington, D.C.] that particular year?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things--and, and I don't know, this is like free association.  One of the things that I think about is, Charles [Hamilton] Houston lived right across the street from us during that time, and he was one of the architects of the lawsuit.  And I realized this was a--he lived in an ordinary setting, and this was a man who changed history.  And it makes me realize that all of us can change history.  We can change anything, and it just takes a will to do that.  So, I don't have anything really profound to say about, about the Brown case because I think it was obviously long overdue.  And I'm concerned about what's happened to our educational systems in big cities because I think we're back to a place where we shouldn't be in terms of equal distribution of resources and the education that our children are getting in the public system.  But I do know that those were very forward-looking people.  And I know [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height was in the middle of that even though she's not recognized, but there were many people not recognized.  Carmen Turner, I cannot leave, a discussion about women in transportation without mentioning Carmen Turner, who was one of the executive directors of the Metro system, architect of the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority [WMATA].  So there were women involved in this too, but you know, the men that we know about were very forward looking, and very courageous, and very brilliant, but they lived in ordinary circumstances.  That's what I'm trying to say, is that ordinary, what looks like an ordinary person is doing, can do very extraordinary things.  And we have to really support and encourage all of our young people, because they're all able to do something very, very, very special for themselves and for the world.
Story_ID: 196024
Speaker 1: What advice do you have for people who may be interested in going into the transportation industry as a career?
Speaker 2: I would say that engineering for black people is a wide open field, and the business aspect of it for black people is extremely lucrative.  But this, you know, we just simply have to raise our skill base so that that can never be an issue.  But I've worked with some of the finest African American engineering firms and construction management firms.  So there's a lot of it, I mean the transportation economy, it drives the economy.  And black people should be taking a part of this money.  But there's also a social side to transportation because it is so up close and personal on the local side.  So people who have planning in their background and people who have traffic engineering.  You know, traffic engineering is a very specialized field, but it's very personal in terms of what the solutions are.  So there're many, many opportunities in transportation that people may not think about.  And I wish that African Americans--because I really think we have a special talent.  And if we mix our talents in with the other talents that are available, the richness of the diversity that we bring, there's really no end to solving the issues that we have.
Story_ID: 196025
Speaker 1: And what would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: My legacy, I would like my legacy to be, I would like my legacy to be that I tried--that I brought a visual quality to transportation projects raised that, made that become the standard, made that become the standard, that you add visual quality as well as the engineering to transportation projects, and that we made our employees' facilities in the county as, we really designed and built a number of facilities for our employees that are really quite special, and--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --and I'm very proud of them.
Speaker 1: --is there anything else you'd like to touch on, [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Betty] Francis that we perhaps didn't talk about?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything other than my appreciation to the people who have touched my life along the way, that they've--I've learned from everybody.  And I think, I've learned from everybody, but there are some that I've sort of mentioned that have stood out.  But then there are other people who have--I may not have mentioned.  You know, I worked with a wonderful woman as my assistant for the last nine years.  And she has had, she's just been the greatest to me.  And my, you know, I've mentioned my family, but I just have great appreciation for those who have had positive and maybe not so positive (laughter) impact, because I think that with struggle you grow.  I mean I don't think you grow without struggle.  So whatever has happened, I have some appreciation for it.
Story_ID: 196026
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my father, William [Henry] Hager.
Speaker 2: About what year do you think that was?
Speaker 1: I would say it's 1939.  There it is, 1939. 1939.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, this a picture of graduates of Sacred Heart School [Washington, D.C.] in 1959.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother [Helen Brown Hager], my sister [Beryl Hager], and me on the grounds of the Raymond School [later, Raymond Education Campus] on Spring Road in Washington, D.C.  And from the looks of it, that was probably around 1952.
Speaker 1: This is a picture on my first birthday.
Speaker 2: What year was that?
Speaker 1: Nineteen- so it would have been 1947.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother in the early '50s [1950s], I would imagine, early to mid-'50s [1950s], Helen Brown Hager.
Speaker 1: This is Robert Brown, my grand- my maternal grandfather.
Speaker 2: About when was that taken?
Speaker 1: I have no idea.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother, Helen Hager, her sister, Mary McConduit, my sister, Beryl Hager, and myself, and it was probably taken around 1991.
Speaker 1: And where are you, [HistoryMaker] Betty [Francis]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I am the--
Speaker 1: Here?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Here?
Speaker 2: Yes, the back right.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my maternal grandmother, Esther Brown, Esther Wise Brown.
Speaker 1: And about what year was that one taken?
Speaker 2: No idea.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my brother and me, Bill Hager, probably taken in the, in the '80s [1980s], mid-'80s [1980s], mid to late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me I think maybe second grade.  I don't know what year that would be without doing some math (laughter).
Speaker 1: So I think it, it would probably be the early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Early '50s [1950s]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, I started school when I was four.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of, I'm on the left, and that's my friend Brenda Smith.  And that was first communion in the early to mid-'50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my father and me when I was an infant, so it would have been 1946.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my father and mother when my mother was expecting her last child, my brother, Bill, in 19--well, that probably would have been 1958, 1959.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me.  I think it must be Confirmation, which would be probably late '50s [1950s], mid to late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my posse.  So, starting from the left is my cousin, Deirdre Sykes [ph.]; next is my sister, Beryl Hager; next, it's me; next to me is Peggy Amos, my friend; and I don't know who that other person is on the right.
Speaker 2: In about what year?
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-six [1956].
Speaker 2: And that's a First Communion picture of me, mid-'50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me in Culpeper, Virginia, also probably mid-'50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of me going to my senior prom with another HistoryMaker, [HistoryMaker] Harry [G.] Robinson [III].
