Story_ID: 656572
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Poco [ph.].  Ma'am (laughter), could you state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Norma, N-O-R-M-A, Jean, J-E-A-N, Barbee, B-A-R-B-E-E, Fairhurst, F-A-I-R-H-U-R-S-T [HistoryMaker Norma Fairhurst].
Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is October 24th, 1943; and I was born in a city by the name of Verona, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My last occu- actually, I'm retired right now.  But, I was a general manager for Radisson Hotel [Radisson Riverfront Hotel; Riverfront Character Inn, Flint, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And?
Speaker 2: I'm one of The Velvelettes, a 1960s female singing group; and I'm one of the original members.
Speaker 1: And The Velvelettes were connected with Mo- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Motown [Motown Records].
Speaker 1: --Motown.  Yeah.  Okay.  And you're the last group that's still intact, right that's?
Speaker 2: We are the only group from the '60s [1960s] that was with Motown to still be performing today with all original members.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June the 25th, 1914--I mean--am I saying 1914?  Am I okay (laughter)?  Two thousand fourteen [June 25, 2014].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  You don't have to give your address.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We're in Flint, Michigan.
Speaker 1: In your home, right?
Speaker 2: In my home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 656573
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer.  First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  Yes, spaghetti.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pasta.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I have a favorite color, yes, yellow.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The favorite time of the year is summer.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite phrase or saying?  Boy, I haven't really thought about it that much.  Wow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 656574
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family first--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and then your father's [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] side; then we'll try to put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name--
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Let's see, my mom (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We're not starting all over again, but--yeah, oh, I was asking your--
Speaker 2: My mom.
Speaker 1: --mother's--
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty [1920]--
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Earlene, E-A-R-L-E-N-E, her maiden name was Tardy, T-A-R-D-Y, and her married name Barbee, B-A-R-B-E-E [Earlene Tardy Barbee].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And, ma'am, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: My mother was born January 30th, 1920.
Speaker 2: And where was she born?
Speaker 1: She was born in Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Near the Mississippi border or, or?
Speaker 1: I think it was Pine Bluff [Arkansas].
Speaker 2: Pine Bluff?  Okay.  That's where the university is.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them; can you trace them back to emancipation or slavery or?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I've never done that.  But, my mother's mother passed away when she was six months old, so she never really knew her mom.  She died of pneumonia.
Speaker 2: What was her name?  Do you know?
Speaker 1: No.  I'd have to look at her--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --birth certificate.  But, her dad was pretty politically inclined.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And do you know (unclear)?
Speaker 1: I don't know what duties he actually had there in the city, but he was very much involved with politics.
Speaker 2: In Pine Bluff?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And her father, his last name was Tardy.
Speaker 1: Tardy.
Speaker 2: And what was his first?
Speaker 1: Luther.
Speaker 2: Luther Tardy?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, that is a place that black people have some political clout or some, some cultural clout, you know--
Speaker 1: Back in the day.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Little Rock [Arkansas], and then Pine Bluff--
Speaker 1: Huh.
Speaker 2: --you know, Helena, Arkansas, too.  So, Luther Tardy, now, do you know what he did for a living?
Speaker 1: I really don't.  I really don't.  And my mother just passed away in August--
Speaker 2: Do you--
Speaker 1: --so I can't ask her.
Speaker 2: Were there any stories about him being associated with the university there, University of Arkansas Pine Bluff [University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff]?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Or they used to call it Arkansas AF and M, I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've heard that.
Speaker 2: AM and N [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College], I think.
Speaker 1: But he--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But there's another set of family, Tardy families that are still alive.  I could really talk to his other set of children because he remarried after my grandmother passed away and he has another set of children.  In fact, his youngest daughter from the second marriage lives in Chicago [Illinois] and she is a registered nurse over the nurses at some hospital in Chicago.  So, I could ask her.  She might know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  So, so, so your mother was rai- was she raised in Pine Bluff (unclear)?
Speaker 1: No.  When her mother passed away, the ten kids were moved to Mississippi and my mother's grandmother--her father's mother and aunt raised all ten kids because they didn't want to break them apart after the mother passed.
Speaker 2: So, they went to Mississippi and--now, what part of Mississippi did they move--
Speaker 1: Verona [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: --to?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Near Tupelo [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, there were ten of them?  Gee, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was ten kids; and different family members had offered to take two or three, and he wanted to keep all of the children together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 656575
Speaker 1: Well, what was--now, she [Fairhurst's mother, Earlene Tardy Barbee] was born in 1920, and I guess she spent most of her life in Verona [Mississippi] then.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what did she say about life in Verona?  What was it like?
Speaker 2: She picked cotton.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, does--she did more than that, right?
Speaker 2: I think--you know, that's all she really talked about back then when I was born, but then later, they moved.  When they moved out of the South, she did more than that.  My dad [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] was in World War II [WWII]; and while he was in World War II, she was in Mississippi.  And then when he got out of the [U.S. military] service, they moved to--I think she lived in Washington.  I was conceived in Washington.
Speaker 1: Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C., yes.  But, she got on the train and went back to Mississippi for my birth.  She wanted to be with her relatives when I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, something tells me we're missing something here and that we need to go back to your mother's--now, did she finish school?  Was she able to finish--
Speaker 2: Yes.  High school.
Speaker 1: --high school?  Okay.  So, she finished high school in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she go to college?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: In Washington I believe she worked at a factory, but I never really asked her what type of factory during the war.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a time when a lot of women were brought into factories to make munitions and--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember her mentioning that.  But of course when they moved to Michigan, and I don't want to jump ahead, she worked at a hospital for thirty years--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the housekeeping department.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now--well, does she talk about what, what--you know, what it was like when she grew up in Mississippi with her?
Speaker 2: She really didn't tell--talk about a lot of stories about the South, nothing negative.  She never really shared anything that happened to them negatively.  She just said they had a good life.  They never went hungry because, you know, you assume with ten kids without a mother being raised by your grandparents, you might go through some difficulties.  But she said that they had plenty of food because he [Fairhurst's maternal grandfather, Luther Tardy] had a garden, and they never wanted for anything.  Their grandmother made all of their clothing and they were quite comfortable in their home.  So, I've never really heard any--anything negative about my mother's lifestyle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, during the war, she's in her mid-twenties--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And she's in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: --and in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 656576
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side, then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your, your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father's full name is Arthur, A-R-T-H-U-R, Barbee, B-A-R-B-E-E [Arthur Barbee, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth: September 15th, 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: Shannon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: S-H-A-N-N-A-N [sic.], I think.
Speaker 1: That's Shannon, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Mississippi, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--okay.  So, is that nearby Verona [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: It's near Verona, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, so what--once again, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  What, what did they--how far back can you trace them and--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I really have not tried to research either side, to be honest with you.  But, my--I would go visit my grandparents every summer until I became a teenager, so I was with them a lot.  They had a, a large farm and my, my dad's dad was a carpenter and a painter.  Whenever I would see him, he was always in white overalls, and he built his own home.  So that was his profession.  And he pretty much knew how to do everything: carpentry, plumbing--well, they didn't have much plumbing back then, they had an outhouse.  But he could pretty much repair anything, roofing, like I said, painting, carpentry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Arthur.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My dad is a junior.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Arthur, Sr. [Arthur Barbee, Sr.].
Speaker 2: And my grandmother was a stay at home mother because she had thirteen children.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Cliffie [Cliffie Barbee].
Speaker 1: C-L-I-F-F-I-E?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  So--now, once again, like what did your--was, was your father able to finish school?
Speaker 2: I believe so, yes; and then he went into the service, into the [U.S.] Army and he served in World War II [WWII].  In fact, when I was born, he was in Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did he have any stories about growing up he shared with you, what, what it was like growing up in his household?
Speaker 2: Yeah, nothing negative again.  He just said that his dad taught him everything that--the odd jobs that--you know, carpentry and so on and so forth, that he stuck very closely with his dad and his grandfather [Melvin Barbee].  He was very close to his grandfather because--I believe his grandfather was white and my dad was born with blue eyes.  So, the grandfather took a liking to my dad out of the thirteen because he looked more like him with the blue eyes, and so he tagged along with his grandfather a lot.  Those are the stories I've heard from my dad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he just said that he--his--he had a good dad.  He said, "My dad taught me a lot.  I had a really good dad.  And, of course, I loved my mom, too," he said.  And he talk--he's talking this way now because he's in hospice.  And I was around his dad and mom a lot, too, because I--again, I would go down every summer.  When I would go down, my grandfather would put me in his pickup truck; and I just remember when we'd stop at the store, he'd tell me, he said, "When we get in the store, don't say anything.  I'll do all the talking."  And I just remember people saying, what a cute little girl, what a pretty little dress she has on; and he'd look at me, meaning, don't say anything.  And now that I'm an adult, I don't know what that meant.  I guess the--what--because of the racial issues back then, he just didn't want any repercussions of me saying anything.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: But, I--there was a great understanding that I had white family there, too, because I remember him introducing me to this white man that came up to the, the truck and he said, "This is my granddaughter."  And then he said to me when we pulled off, he said, "That's your family."  And I, I just remember him being white, and I never asked who.  It's just something that I didn't do.  My dad has talked about it, you know, because of his grandfather; but we've never met that side of our family.
Story_ID: 656577
Speaker 1: Your father [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] was in the war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did he have any stories about the war?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  He was in Germany.  His job was to go from house to house to collect tires, any rubber.
Speaker 1: In, in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those were his--
Speaker 1: --in Germany itself?
Speaker 2: --in Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Him and I think he said two other guys, fellow officers, they wanted to make sure to collect certain things out of the homes.  And then he was in North Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was in France.  He talks about France a lot.
Speaker 1: What was his impression of France?
Speaker 2: A lot of beautiful women.  A lot of questions about his blue eyes; when he was over in other countries, they questioned his--they didn't know what he was, you know, his race.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, he was, of course, in a segregated army.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was he in like a Quartermaster Corps [U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps], or?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I've never really asked him that, perhaps I should.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He'll tell you.  He'll, he'll know.  And, so, how was he--how was he treated during the war?  Did he talk about that at all?
Speaker 2: He was pretty frightened on that boat ride; and he came back from the war not being able to hear very good because of the shooting.  But, now that he is ninety-five [years old], that's all he talks about, is being in the [U.S.] Army and serving his country, and what it means to him now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's very proud of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 656578
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Earlene Tardy Barbee and Arthur Barbee, Jr.] meet in Mississippi, I take it?
Speaker 2: They met in Mississippi, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  And is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: I believe they met at church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: How the different--you remember--I'm sure you've heard stories about churches inviting other churches over for family days and that sort of thing; and they met at church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he would go and visit her in his car.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I heard the stories a lot.  And they dated from I think age fifteen.  And they were married seventy-three years when my mother passed, passed away.
Story_ID: 656579
Speaker 1: What did your father [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] end up doing for a living?
Speaker 2: My father worked for General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Which plant did he work for?  I mean--or, or what (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Chevrolet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I believe Chevrolet, metal fab [metal fabrication].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Everybody was coming up from the South, getting jobs with General Motors back in the day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, this is--so, he came up--when did they move to Detroit area [Detroit, Michigan]--I mean, to this area?
Speaker 2: The Flint area?
Speaker 1: To Flint [Michigan], yeah.
Speaker 2: Gosh, I believe I was five [years old] when--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --they moved to the Flint area.
Speaker 1: It was about 1948 then, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now--so did, so did your father basically retire from that same job and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Story_ID: 656580
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --their talents--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I have a little bit of both, I really do.  I look more like my dad [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] and I look a little bit like my mom [Earlene Tardy Barbee], too.  My mother was extremely talkative, very friendly, outgoing.  My dad was more of an introvert.  He didn't talk that much.  I never knew why.  My mom would always like to go out to dinner and dad would not, and I never knew why, you know.  I don't know if it was his table manners or--I, I never figured that one out.  But, now that he's older, he's ninety-five [years old] right now, and he talks all the time.  But, probably mostly after my mom.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, now do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: No?  Okay.  So, you're the only child.
Speaker 2: I'm the only child.
Story_ID: 656581
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: In regards to?
Speaker 1: The first time you remember being alive and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --took note of it, you know.
Speaker 2: No--I traveled a lot with my folks.  Back in the day, of course, we didn't fly on planes or didn't do a lot of train riding, but my dad [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] would drive us everywhere because they would have sisters and brothers all over the United States.  So, we went to Washington, D.C. a lot 'cause my mom [Earlene Tardy Barbee] had two brothers there.  We would go to Ohio 'cause I had--we had family there.  So, I just remember traveling a lot, sitting and laying down and sleeping in the back seat of a car.  We would at least take at least three trips a year.  And being the only child afforded me being very close to my parents.  We were extremely close.  I was with my mom and dad all of the time--on weekends, holidays, you name it.  It was just always the three of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, where did you--where did the family live here in Flint [Michigan]?  Was there--was there a name for the neighborhood or side of town?
Speaker 2: We lived on the north end of town--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in a pretty decent area.
Speaker 1: Is that--I mean, was Flint like segregated by--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --(unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.  But, I didn't know--no, in fact, our neighbors were white on one side of us and I'm still in contact with that family; so, no, not really segregated that much.  I think the more influential areas were segregated.  You know, we couldn't move into an area like this, for instance--and this isn't influential now, but back then, it would've been.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know if that makes sense.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Sometimes--I mean, at, at one time, you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you couldn't move to this neighborhood.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You couldn't.  Yeah.  That's true in a lot of places.  So--
Speaker 2: Because of me being the only child, though, I was able to, like I said before, travel with them all the time; and I just remember going to--they took me to a, a show in Washington, Peg Leg Bates.  He was a dancer.  And I don't know, I must've been about four [years old] and they were visiting with our relatives and--yeah, I had to have been in Washington; and I just remember sitting in the audience just amazed at the stage lighting, thinking to myself, that's what I want to do.  That was my first show and I'll never forget it, never forget it.  And he was dancing on one leg.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He had a wooden leg and he would balance himself on that wooden leg; and I, I just--I was just in awe looking up at the stage.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He was the one great entertainers of those days and often would appear on 'The Ed Sullivan Show'--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --primetime TV, one of the few--
Speaker 2: I don't know of all that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I just--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He was--
Speaker 2: --remember that name.
Speaker 1: Peg Leg Bates.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My parents took me there; and that was the first time I had ever been in a theater.
Speaker 1: Is that here?
Speaker 2: No, it was in Washington.
Speaker 1: Oh, in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  We were there on vacation.
Story_ID: 656582
Speaker 1: I know your uncle--now, in terms of what you--I mean, you're a s- you've, you've been a--you've, you've had a career as an--as an entertainer--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so and you have an uncle named Simon [Simon Barbee], right?  That--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He's deceased now.  He passed away last year.  That--my--our--my dad's brother, his baby brother, his youngest brother was a singer.
Speaker 1: Right.  And, and he had a group called the Barbees, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And that consists of myself and Bertha [HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal], my first cousin, the other Velvelette [The Velvelettes].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was--it was my--
Speaker 1: So, just the three of you?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a fourth, a cousin--gosh, I'll have to think of her name--can't even think of her name, that's terrible 'cause we didn't really stay together that long.  We did, in fact, make a couple of recordings, though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Joyce [Joyce Barbee].  Joyce was her first name.
Speaker 1: That's probably further down the line.  I thought I'd just raise that, that there's a--there's a musician in the family.  Was, was--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --he the only musician in the family or the, the only (unclear)?
Speaker 2: There was--he was basically in my dad's side; and then on my mother's side, her sister was a musician, and she was the person that taught me my first solos, if that's what you would call them, in church.  And I was on the radio singing, "Yes, Jesus loves me" ['Jesus Loves Me'] and my--this aunt taught me that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what church did you attend?
Speaker 2: Methodist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: St. James Methodist church [St. James C.M.E. Church].
Speaker 1: Here in Flint [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, St. James Methodist.  And, so this is where you started singing solos--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in the beginning?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my dad [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] was Baptist or still is Baptist, so I would go back and forth between the Methodist church with my mom [Earlene Tardy Barbee] and the Baptist church with my dad, and he belongs--he still belongs to Foss, Foss Avenue Baptist Church [Flint, Michigan].  So I played the piano for the youth choir at his church and then would go back at her church and sing solos, and sing for teas and mother days [Mother's Day] programs and that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 656583
Speaker 1: Considering the area you grew up in and what was going on around you, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Here in this--in Flint [Michigan]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Some of the sights?  Familiar sights would be roller skating.  We had a park by the name of the Flint Park [Flint, Michigan] where they had rides--that was an attraction for children and teenagers at that time; going to the show.
Speaker 1: Movies primarily?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, movies.  I call them, going to the show.  That was about it.  That was our enjoyment.  That was our fun times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mom [Earlene Tardy Barbee] and Dad [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] wouldn't really let me do a lot 'cause they always like kept me close to home.
Speaker 1: Now, was there a lot of music in the home?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  My mother played a lot of music--blues.  And when we got our first television, Nat King Cole was the first minority that had his own show ['The Nat King Cole Show'], which was very appealing.  I listened to the radio a lot.  I'd lay in the floor and listen to--oh, what was the name of that show that would come on?  He'd play all the blues.  I think he came out of Chicago [Illinois].  Can't think of the name of the show now, but--
Speaker 1: This a late night show?
Speaker 2: Late, yeah, kind of late.
Speaker 1: It wasn't the one from Gallatin, Tennessee, right?
Speaker 2: Might've been.
Speaker 1: WLAC [WLAC Radio, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Gosh, I can't--Bertha [Fairhurst's paternal cousin, HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal] and I--
Speaker 1: They had like a big, powerful wattage station--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you--
Speaker 2: And we would listen to the music.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: I'd lay--I just remember laying in the floor listening.
Speaker 1: There's a disc jockey called the Boss Man or Hossman [Bill "Hoss" Allen] or something like that from--out of Gallatin, WLAC where you could order their records.  Was that the station?
Speaker 2: Oh, really?  No.
Speaker 1: It wasn't it?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Well, maybe it was out of Chicago.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: I, I think it was Chicago and it might've been one other station from the South, I think.  But, I would listen to a lot of music when I would go down south to Mississippi to visit with my [paternal] grandparents [Cliffie Barbee and Arthur Barbee, Sr.].  I'd wake up in the morning and she would have on the spiritual music.  I can't remember the names of the groups, but it would be the Four Blind Boys [sic.] and--
Speaker 1: Five Blind Boys [Five Blind Boys of Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Five Blind Boys or somebody and all these little quartets, I would hear them singing when I'd wake up.  She'd have the radio on, and I'd be listening to that every Sunday morning.
Story_ID: 656584
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah, it was 'Randy's Record Shop' ['Randy's Record Shop Show'].  We (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was Randy [Randy Wood].
Speaker 1: --we're rolling again.  But, that is him.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Randy's Record Shop' out of--
Speaker 2: I couldn't remember.
Speaker 1: --Gallatin, Tennessee, near Memphis [sic.].
Speaker 2: See, you've done the history, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You didn't just remember all that.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, I've--I, I--
Speaker 2: Kind of sort of.
Speaker 1: --remember some of it but then the other--
Speaker 2: But you--
Speaker 1: --I've heard it--
Speaker 2: --researched it.
Speaker 1: --you know, reiterated over and over again.  That, that is the--
Speaker 2: Oh, have you, from other people?
Speaker 1: Oh, sure.
Speaker 2: Have you really?
Speaker 1: That is the story--yeah, that is the record--I mean, the radio station [WLAC Radio, Nashville, Tennessee] you get late at night.
Speaker 2: So, other people have mentioned this.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Other singers and--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: You could get it as far away as--I mean, it had a great range.  You could hear it all the way up, you know, to, to Detroit area [Detroit, Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: --all the way down to--
Speaker 2: Who else said that?
Speaker 1: --the Gulf [Gulf of Mexico].
Speaker 2: Joe [HistoryMaker Joe Billingslea, Jr.]?  Or Aretha [Aretha Franklin]?
Speaker 1: No, no.  This is--
Speaker 2: Have you done Aretha yet?
Speaker 1: No, we haven't.  But a lot of people, you know--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's pretty well known.
Speaker 2: That was just in our day, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  I mean, there's really no need for it now, but in those days, that's the only way you, way you could hear black music on the radio until around '63 [1963] or '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] B. B. King died, too, right?  Was it B. B.?  One of the blues--it was the three top--
Speaker 1: B. B. didn't die.  He didn't--B. B. hasn't passed away that I know of.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Who were they talking about last night on that show that died?
Speaker 1: Somebody passed away last night?
Speaker 2: No, no, not last night, but they were--when I was watching this award show, they were showing everybody that had passed away within the year and I thought they said B. B. King--maybe not.  Not--maybe not B. B.--what's the other blues?
Speaker 1: There's Albert King, there's some other Kings, you know, not--besides him, but.
Speaker 2: There's like three or four biggies back--from back in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: I know Muddy Waters has been gone a long time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was one of my mother's favorites--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Muddy Waters.
Speaker 1: There's a lot.  There's a hundred of 'em.
Speaker 2: I guess that's all that we had, right, as blacks, was blues?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, rhythm and blues and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Until Motown [Motown Records] and some of these other--
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, you had big bandstand.  You had like--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the big band, Ella [Ella Fitzgerald]--
Speaker 1: --(unclear) urban--
Speaker 2: --and all those people, yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah, you had the urban sound, you know, Bill Doggett and--
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep.  Mom bought that.
Speaker 1: --people like, well, even Clyde McPhatter here and people like--you know, were coming--[HistoryMaker] Lloyd Price.
Speaker 2: Well, that's later on.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But, Bill Doggett, that was, what--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was--
Speaker 2: --in the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 1: --the era of my parents and your parents [Earlene Tardy Barbee and Arthur Barbee, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --listening to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Bill Doggett, yeah.
Speaker 2: And then Nat King Cole came along.
Speaker 1: Nat King Cole was in the '50s [1950s], too, yeah.  He peaked in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Are we rolling?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're rolling and we're (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: We're rolling and talking about it.  But, but, sure.  So, this kind of music was in your home.  You're saying--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that the music was in your home--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and your mother played a lot of records.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She played a lot of records.
Speaker 1: And you'd get that radio station late at night.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 656585
Speaker 1: So you had church going on.  You're singing--you start singing in church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, because of my aunt.
Speaker 1: --probably a little older, right?
Speaker 2: I think I was like five.
Speaker 1: Five?
Speaker 2: On the radio, four or five.  I was so--I was really little and everybody was very proud that I remembered the lyrics [to 'Jesus Loves Me'].  And so my aunt started me out first before my uncle [Simon Barbee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she taught me how to play the piano also.  In fact, she taught Bertha, my [paternal] cousin Bertha [HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal] that's in The Velvelettes.  My aunt started her out with the piano lessons also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, were there very many members of your family in Flint [Michigan] when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, all the brothers.  All my dad's [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] brothers lived in Flint, all five.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that provided quite a few cousins and everything, I guess, I suppose.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  But, Bertha was my only cousin that I would look up to Bertha because she was a couple years older and she was in college; and she was studying music, and I loved music.  So--and she played the piano, and so that's how we became so close.  And then when she started Western Michigan University [Kalamazoo, Michigan], I was attended colle- junior college here [Flint Community Junior College; Charles Stewart Mott Community College, Flint, Michigan], she would invite me up on weekends.  And, you know, that's how I started The Velvelettes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, we're gonna get to that.
Story_ID: 656586
Speaker 1: Tell us about school.  Now, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: Here in Flint [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what was the name of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Elementary, junior high [Emerson Junior High School, Flint, Michigan], high school [Southwestern High School; Flint Southwestern Academy, Flint, Michigan].  And then I only attended junior college [Flint Community Junior College; Charles Stewart Mott Community College, Flint, Michigan] one year.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute.  I wanted to go by each sc- each school, the name of the schools--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, my god.
Speaker 1: --so we can--
Speaker 2: I attended Jefferson--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Elementary.
Speaker 1: Jefferson Elementary School [Flint, Michigan].  Now, did you like school growing up?
Speaker 2: Did I like school?  Not necessarily, I really didn't.  I would often worry about my mom [Earlene Tardy Barbee] 'cause my dad [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] was a drinker, to be really honest with you.  So, I would go to school, in--elementary school and, and worry about her being okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, he had a problem then?
Speaker 2: He had a drinking problem, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, you know, so if he got (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And I can honestly say that now because people talk about that today in the two thou- year 2000.  Years back, people would hide those type of things, but he had a alcohol problem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I would go to school and sit and worry about her, if she was going to be okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause he, he must've worked second shift [at General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company].
Speaker 1: So, so, was he--?
Speaker 2: He was violent.  He would get violent with her--never with me.  You know, there was no abuse in the home, nothing like that, but I knew that he would get very angry when he would drink, so it kind of hindered me in school.
Speaker 1: So, is this a weekend thing or?
Speaker 2: It was a weekend thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So, I'm sure you've heard these stories before.
Speaker 1: Right.  Usually, fellows that have a job in a factory can maintain it--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --for five days and then it--
Speaker 2: And on weekends--
Speaker 1: --the weeks, and then the weekend hits.
Speaker 2: --yep.  Yep.  So, you've heard these stories before, yeah.
Speaker 1: I've seen them.
Speaker 2: Oh, you have?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, he, he was a hard worker, never missed any days of work, wonderful provider.  When he was sober, he was wonderful.  But, on weekends, we never knew how he was gonna come home.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  So, ali- fundamental alienation from the job.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's what they talk about in social (unclear).
Speaker 2: And as you become an adult, you realize that nobody is perfect.  None of us are perfect.  So, I've had to forgive him for that and just look at it that way.  None of us are perfect; and that was his problem.
Speaker 1: Did his brothers have similar issues?
Speaker 2: No.  He was the only drinker out of all five brothers.
Speaker 1: Did they help with him when he got--?
Speaker 2: They would tell him--in fact, he talks about that today, they would tell him not to drink because they loved him.  You know, but he was never rude to them.  He would just get belligerent with my mom, you know, for no reason at all.  And I just remember those days and they were very uncomfortable.
Speaker 1: Did you ever feel that they might break up when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I wanted them to because I didn't want to see my mom being abused that way.  And my summers were wonderful because, again, I went to Mis- went to Mississippi every summer, so that kind of gave me a break; and I had fun there.  So, my happy days were really in Mississippi with my [paternal] grandparents [Cliffie Barbee and Arthur Barbee, Sr.].
Story_ID: 656587
Speaker 1: Now the time that you were growing up and going to Mississippi, Mississippi was going through some--
Speaker 2: Oh, I know, but--
Speaker 1: --a lot of agitation.
Speaker 2: But they [Fairhurst's paternal grandparents, Cliffie Barbee and Arthur Barbee, Sr.], they kept me away from that.  I was never around anything like that.
Speaker 1: So, you stayed mainly--?
Speaker 2: I was right there on the farm.
Speaker 1: On the farm?
Speaker 2: Oh, right there on the farm.  They never would let--they were with me when I left.  So, I was never exposed to anything like that before.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you never had--were exposed to people having to get off the sidewalk for white folk or that kind of stuff?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  They kept me close to home so I wouldn't have to experience that.  I do remember when we would travel, I wasn't allowed to get out of the car.  I had to go to the bathroom on the side of the road; and my mom [Earlene Tardy Barbee] would cook the chicken and we would eat in the car on the way to the South 'cause we couldn't go to restaurants.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I do remember all of that.
Speaker 1: So, that would start say after you left like Kentucky or someplace like that, or Tennessee?
Speaker 2: I, I think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, they would just tell me to be quiet and go to sleep in the back seat of the car.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, yeah.  They--did your father [Arthur Barbee, Jr.]--did your parents ever have one of those 'Green Books' ['The Negro Motorist Green Book'] that would talk about where you could stop?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember that.  No, I didn't know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a book that's published about where you could stop.
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know that existed.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I, I, I hadn't heard about it either until I started this job, but apparently, black folks used it and there's a couple copies in the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Is that right?  Huh.
Speaker 1: --places.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: No.  They kept me away from all of that.  I never had to experience anything of that nature.
Speaker 1: Now, now, did they follow the Civil Rights Movement, you know, and talk about what was going on down there?
Speaker 2: They did watch it on TV, but see at that point in time, I was singing.  I was singing with--at Motown [Motown Records] at that point.  And I just remember when we were traveling, we stayed at a black hotel, did not stay at a white hotel; and I don't remember us having dinner in a white restaurant.
Story_ID: 656588
Speaker 1: All right.  Jefferson Elementary School [Flint, Michigan], back to that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did, did you have any favorite teachers there?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.  Like I said, school--you know, my mind was focusing on my mom [Earlene Tardy Barbee] and if she was okay and that sort of thing, so school really wasn't that important to me.  And because of the color of my skin, I was beat up a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the--Jefferson was an integrated school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what would you guess the black population was in--
Speaker 2: Gosh, I don't know.
Speaker 1: --Flint [Michigan] in, in those days percentage wise?  What--I mean, would you think like blacks were at least a fifth of the city or fourth?
Speaker 2: Maybe a fifth.
Speaker 1: Fifth?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  So, it's a lot less a percentage than say in Detroit [Michigan], but I, I knew there were--there's a substantial number of black folks here because of the factory jobs and--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, were there any all black schools in Flint when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I don't--I don't think so.  Now that I look back, just based on where you were living, you know, the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't really remember how--what the percentage was as far as blacks/whites in elementary school at all.  I just remember being beat up on my way to school, and on my way back from school.
Speaker 1: I mean, did it happen a lot?
Speaker 2: It happened a lot, yeah.  They would call me--
Speaker 1: You got beat up?  You mean--
Speaker 2: Really beat up because--
Speaker 1: They'd put a--
Speaker 2: --I--'cause I was lighter complected; and they would call me whitey and, you know, that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: The black students or the white students?
Speaker 2: The blacks.
Speaker 1: The black students would beat you up?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, yeah, because I thought it was the white students beating you up.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: The black students would beat you up because you were lighter.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, when you say elementary school, these are things that come to mind.  And I just wouldn't tell anybody.  Don't ask me why, kind of stupid, I guess.
Speaker 1: So, did you ever get any allies, you know--
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: --to walk home with?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I know you're, you're single--I, I mean, you're an only child.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: You had no, no brothers and sisters.
Speaker 2: I just had to get home.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  So, you--school was pretty kind of--wasn't very happy, I guess, doesn't sound like it.
Speaker 2: I, I wasn't--like I said, I'd get kind of jumped on on the way there and jumped on on the way back; and so school--yeah, I didn't look forward to going to school in elem- to elementary.  Only when I got to junior high, it was--it was okay.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was okay.  I was--
Speaker 1: So, so--
Speaker 2: --a little bit bigger--
Speaker 1: --what was the name of your--
Speaker 2: --a little stronger.
Speaker 1: --junior high school?
Speaker 2: Emerson [Emerson Junior High School, Flint, Michigan].
Story_ID: 656589
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers at Emerson [Emerson Junior High School, Flint, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Hm.  (Pause) Not necessarily, no.  I, I tried out for glee club or whatever, didn't get in.  (Laughter) The lady told me, she says, "I don't think you have the voice."  And boy, did I laugh at her after I signed a contract.  And--but then later, I did get into glee club and all these others.
Speaker 1: So, you'd, you'd been on the radio when you were five [years old]--
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 1: --singing a song ['Jesus Loves Me'] but yet you didn't have a voice for (unclear)?
Speaker 2: She said I didn't have a voice.  That might've been in elementary [Jefferson Elementary School, Flint, Michigan].  I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: God, I'd almost forgotten about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, so you did like to sing.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you do other performances?  Did you like (unclear)?
Speaker 2: In high school [Southwestern High School; Flint Southwestern Academy, Flint, Michigan] later on, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the--and I was in plays, that sort of thing.  But, I was pretty quiet.  I, I really wasn't that outgoing--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --to want to be in different things, I really wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I kind of wanted to be to myself.
Speaker 1: I'm just wondering like who your friends were.  Did you have a best friend?
Speaker 2: I had friends.  Yeah, I had friends.  I wasn't allowed to go stay overnight or anything of that nature.  Like I said, my folks [Earlene Tardy Barbee and Arthur Barbee, Jr.] kept me close to home.  They would allow me to go visit Bertha [Fairhurst's paternal cousin, HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal], you know, my family members, but they were--they just kept me at home.  (Laughter) I don't know why.  I have no idea why.  I wanted to go out of town, even then when I was eighteen, nineteen, and they would say, "No way."  So, you can imagine what they said to me when I told them I wanted to sign a contract with Motown [Motown Records].
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, we're gonna get to that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 656590
Speaker 1: Anything significant about junior high school [Emerson Junior High School, Flint, Michigan] before we leave it?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Did you start singing in junior high school at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the glee club.
Speaker 1: In the glee club, but you hadn't started singing with your uncle [Simon Barbee] yet?
Speaker 2: I believe I was singing with him, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, this is a good time--
Speaker 2: I can't remember--
Speaker 1: --to talk about how--
Speaker 2: --how old I was.
Speaker 1: Well, let's, let's talk about how you started singing with your uncle.  Now--
Speaker 2: My uncle?
Speaker 1: --your, your [paternal] cousin, Bertha [HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal], was--?
Speaker 2: That was later, after my uncle.
Speaker 1: That was later, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, how did you start singing with your uncle?
Speaker 2: My uncle?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I guess he just stopped by the house one day and asked my dad [Arthur Barbee, Jr.], his brother, older brother, if it was okay if I could sing with him and Bertha and this other cousin [Joyce Barbee]; and I guess dad said, "Fine, as long as you take good care of her," and I just started rehearsing with them, and that's how that started.  And my uncle had a very nice voice, but we would sing only at prisons (laughter) and for the el- elderly.  So, it wasn't a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's like community service kind of--type of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --well, or, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  'Cause Bertha and I would laugh and say--we wouldn't know where the heck he would be taking us until we'd get there.  And we went to this one facility, there were--it must've been a mental institution, and we were kind of laughing to ourselves saying, gosh, if our dads knew that our uncle was taking us to this place, they would be upset.  But, I remember performing with my uncle at a prison.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  In this area here?
Speaker 2: No.  We traveled--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to Ja- I think--probably Jackson, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Michigan?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the prison, actual prison [Michigan State Prison, Jackson, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And I don't really remember getting paid either.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is--so, you're getting some experiences that most young girls don't get.
Speaker 2: No, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, you're going to the--a prison?
Speaker 2: But, see, our--but our uncle was with us, so it was okay, and I'm sure he was doing it for a wonderful cause.
Story_ID: 656591
Speaker 1: What kind of music did you sing?
Speaker 2: Something similar to Perry Como, Nat Ti- King Cole.  It wasn't like a blues--nothing like that.  Oh, 'Que Paso' [sic. 'Que Pasa?'] was our first release, so I don't know if you've listened to that or not.
Speaker 1: I haven't heard it.  Now--but, this is--so, so you actually produced a record?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Yeah.  Okay.  So, you had two sides to--'The Wind' on one side--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'Que Paso' on the other side; both written by your uncle, Simon Barbee.
Speaker 2: Yes and I think co-written by Mickey Stevens [sic. HistoryMaker Mickey Stevenson]; and that's how we ended up at Motown [Motown Records] because Mickey was one of the writers at Motown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is 1957 when you and Bertha [HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal] sing along with your uncle on this album, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: On, on this record?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your uncle is a--is, is a reverend?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is he?  Okay, Reverend Simon Barbee.
Speaker 2: Barbee, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, but was, was the music intended to be religious music, or?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  He--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what kind of threw me off.  I thought--I was--I was expecting like gospel (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, he wasn't a reverend then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay?  He became a reverend later on, later on through the years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, these are like folk songs in a sense.
Speaker 2: Kind of, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --how did 'The Wind' go?  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Well, he was the lead singer.  I just remember the, the background.  I was a first soprano, so I was going pretty high, several octaves high.  But, like I said, he was kind of a Perry Como type, you know?  Kind of a real clean sound, beautiful voice now that I look back at it.
Speaker 1: Crooner like?
Speaker 2: Crooner, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Can you imagine a black crooner?  No, I'm serious.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, you know--
Speaker 2: He was ahead of his time back then.
Speaker 1: --Nat King Cole was, you know--and you, you had people like Nat King Cole.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was kind of on that level.
Speaker 1: Billy Eckstein and--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: You know--quite a few.
Speaker 2: Yep.  He was on that level.  It's just that he never made it.  He was just as good.  Now that I look back, you know, you have to know the right people or be at the right place at the right time or whatever.  I don't know.  But, he was really good.  You'll have to listen to some of his stuff.
Speaker 1: Well, he saw something in you and your cousin--
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Speaker 1: --Bertha, I guess.
Speaker 2: See, when, when you're growing up, you don't think of--think of it that way.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did you like performing?
Speaker 2: I did 'cause I was with my [paternal] cousin, Bertha, and I felt safe with my uncle and with her; and it was a lot of fun.  But, then it became pretty boring when he would sing the same things over and over and over and over, you know.  But, I guess it prepared me for Motown.
Speaker 1: So, the group was called--was called the Barbees.
Speaker 2: Barbees, um-hm.
Speaker 1: The Barbees, simp- and how long did the--did the group go on?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Bertha's the historian, so she'll know all of that, but I don't remember.  It wasn't that important for me to remember, to be honest with you.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So, it was a couple years at least, you think?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah, at least a couple.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, then he, he started--he was ordained and (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I don't know how quickly he became a reverend because I lost track of him--with him when we started at Motown, you know.  It was just a different type of lifestyle and we weren't as close.
Speaker 1: Is he still alive?
Speaker 2: He died last year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Here in Flint [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Story_ID: 656592
Speaker 1: So, there's a couple questions about Flint [Michigan], you know, we--a lot of people saw the movie 'Roger and Me,' Michael Moore, about the rapid decline of Flint--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, and the, the--all the factory workers here and--
Speaker 2: General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] pulling out.
Speaker 1: General Motors, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Huge plants here that--and, you know, the prosperity in Flint--
Speaker 2: Ended up closing.
Speaker 1: --that all of the sudden, boom, the bottom falls out--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in the early '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: So, you saw that movie?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, do, do you see the big difference between the Flint that you grew up in and, and the Flint--
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: --Flint of today?
Speaker 2: I do.  And when 'Roger and Me' came out, I was working at the Flint area convention and visitors bureau [Flint and Genesee Convention and Visitors Bureau]--I was a sales manager there.  So, it was my job to sell Flint and Genesee County [Michigan] as a destination site for conferences and that sort of thing, and it was pretty difficult to do my job.  But, believe it or not, I brought in a lot of conferences even after 'Roger and Me.' But, I think the movie even hurt us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really do because, again, that's what I was doing for a living.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know he cited in the movie different attempts by--you know, by, by the city to promote itself.  I think there was even an auto museum, automobile manufacturer--?
Speaker 2: AutoWorld [Flint, Michigan]?
Speaker 1: AutoWorld, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: And they ended up tearing that down.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  General Motors just decided to, as you know, move out of a lot of cities--Ohio; Detroit [Michigan].  I, I don't know if it's anybody's fault.  I mean, can we--can we really point fingers?  Times change, you know.  I don't think there were going to be that many factory jobs available anyway because of the, the--(sighs) what do you call it?  The--I, I can't think now.  I've gone blank.  There are big changes in the factories.  You don't need as many workers to perform the duties--
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's automated--
Speaker 2: --with the automated--
Speaker 1: Yeah, robots.
Speaker 2: --robots, yeah.  So, things change.  And we were just too committed thinking that General Motors was gonna take care of us.
Speaker 1: Now, what--now--
Speaker 2: It's not being realistic.
Story_ID: 656593
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to high s- I went to Southwestern [Southwestern High School; Flint Southwestern Academy, Flint, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sou- and did you like Southwestern?
Speaker 2: You know, my--(laughter) again, my mind was focused on Motown [Motown Records] because my mother [Earlene Tardy Barbee] signed the contract when I was eighteen.
Speaker 1: Now, wait, wait a minute.  Well, let's go back to--I mean, well, you know, were you trying to--I mean, when you started high school, were you thinking you were going to be a Motown performer?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a performer 'cause I had, you know, performed with the Barbees; and I played the piano and I was writing music.  I--you know, I--yes, I wanted to be a performer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: I wanted to be an opera singer--that's really what I wanted to be.  That was my hope.
Speaker 1: Were you taking classical lessons?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then when I started--well, you don't want me to jump ahead, but when I started junior college [Flint Community Junior College; Charles Stewart Mott Community College, Flint, Michigan], that's when I actually started the opera lessons and so and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were taking like formal--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --classical music lessons--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in high--
Speaker 2: Vocal--
Speaker 1: --in high school?
Speaker 2: --vocal lessons, yeah.
Speaker 1: High school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: With a private tutor.
Speaker 1: And piano lessons, too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And that's what I wanted to do for a living, wanted to be an opera star.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're singing with the Barbees in the beginning of high school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I guess, and then when the Barbees break up, then--I mean, The Velvelettes are formed in '61 [1961] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Western [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan].
Speaker 1: --and that's your senior year, right?  In--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --high school?
Speaker 2: Up at Western.
Story_ID: 656594
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would go to visit Bertha [Fairhurst's paternal cousin, HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal].
Speaker 1: Now, now, let's, let's kind of walk through this.  Now, you're, you're going to school, but you're seeing yourself at one time becoming an opera star--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and then your cousin comes up with the idea for The Velvelettes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  This is just a weekend thing.  We were--we just performed for a fraternity dance [at Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, kind of tell us how you found out about, you know--after you (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Bertha called.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She called you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she says, "You know, we're forming this group.  Would you like to be a part of it?"  And I says, "Yeah."  So, that's how that started.  But, I would go up anyway on weekends to party, you know, to go to the different sororities and fraternity dances because I was in my first year of college [Flint Community Junior College; Charles Stewart Mott Community College, Flint, Michigan] and, you know, all we would do, go, go to dances and be back in the dorm by ten o'clock.  That's when they had rules and regulations.  You know, it wasn't hanging out until two and three and that sort of thing.  And my folks [Earlene Tardy Barbee and Arthur Barbee, Jr.] knew I would be fine with Bertha.  I was still living at home [in Flint, Michigan] of course, too.  So, I was fine going up there to visit the first cousin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when they formed the group, she started getting you--well, well, how--who--tell us about the first rehearsal, the first time you went to a rehearsal with The Velvelettes.
Speaker 2: Wow.  I, I--
Speaker 1: Had you chosen the name Velvelettes yet?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Not at that point.
Speaker 1: So, what was the?
Speaker 2: I don't know what we called ourselves, to be honest with you.  I hadn't even thought about it.  But, we just performed for this fraternity dance and I think the prize was twenty-five dollars.  We had competitors; and Berry Gordy's nephew [Robert Berry Bullock] was attending this event and he thought we sound really, really good.  And I guess he mentioned to one of the ladies that we should meet his uncle [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy].  And we didn't know who his uncle was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't care who his uncle was--he just kept bugging us about meeting his uncle.  He said he worked with his uncle or for his uncle during summer months and that his uncle had these other female acts that weren't nearly as good as we were, and he really wanted us to meet his uncle.  So, we decided to go meet his uncle without even calling for an appointment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, what, what was your repertoire with the--I mean, well, well, first of all, who was in the group?  You know, Bertha, you, who else?
Speaker 2: Carol--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --and Mildred.
Speaker 1: All right.  Give their full names 'cause it's history.  You gotta give their--
Speaker 2: Bertha Barbee [HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal] at the time; myself, Norma Barbee [HistoryMaker Norma Fairhurst] at the time; Carol--Caldin Str- Gill [HistoryMaker Cal Street] at the time, her maiden name; and Mildred Gill [HistoryMaker Mildred Gill Arbor].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--
Speaker 2: And Betty Kelly.
Speaker 1: So you had two, two (unclear)?
Speaker 2: We had five of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's five--
Speaker 2: The two sisters.
Speaker 1: --okay.  Two sisters, you and your cousin--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and then--
Speaker 2: And then Betty Kelly was a friend of Carol.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that's five (unclear).
Speaker 2: There was five of us at first.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so what, what parts did you sing?
Speaker 2: I sang the first soprano 'cause I had a, a really high voice--'cause I was studying opera, remember?  So, I had an unusual range.
Speaker 1: What about the others?  What, what parts--
Speaker 2: Oh, you wanna know what they are?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  How, how was (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Carolyn was the lead singer and Bertha sang second soprano--no, Bertha--okay, let me go back.  I, I sang first; Mildred sings second.  We did kind of a jazz sound, which was unusual.  So, you know, we--it was like a five part harmony, which was very unusual, like Ruby and the Romantics, you remember them?
Speaker 1: Did you have an alto in the group?
Speaker 2: Bertha's the alto.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Mildred's second soprano.
Speaker 1: Okay, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Don't ask me what Betty Kelly was singing.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  Who, who sang the lead?
Speaker 2: Carolyn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 656595
Speaker 1: What was the repertoire of the group [The Velvelettes]?
Speaker 2: I wrote the first release, 'There He Goes.'  I wrote--I remember writing it at home [in Flint, Michigan] at the time, and I went over to Bertha's [HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal], my [paternal] cousin, for her to hear it.  And we worked on it and--so I wrote the first release.  But, of course, when we arrived at Motown [Motown Records], we auditioned with that and with a couple of others that Bertha and I had performed with the Barbees.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Now, how did 'There He Goes' go?  Can you hum a little bit of it for us?
Speaker 2: See, I'm not a lead singer.  But, I, I--
Speaker 1: Well just give (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I did write the melody.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) how the tune goes, so.
Speaker 2: Not r- I--
Speaker 1: Just a little bit of it, you know?
Speaker 2: I don't like doing that.  I really don't.  I'm not--I'm uncomfortable.
Story_ID: 656596
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, we were talking about the--now, by the time the group The Velvelettes audition for Motown [Motown Records], you're in junior college [Flint Community Junior College; Charles Stewart Mott Community College, Flint, Michigan] by that time, is that true?
Speaker 2: Um-hm--I, actually, high school [Southwestern High School; Flint Southwestern Academy, Flint, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Are you still in high school?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I would go to high school in a daze, you know, just wondering--I knew that my classmates had no idea that I was performing with The Temptations and Marvin Gaye and that I was actually rubbing shoulders with these people; and I kind of walked around with, you know, with my head high, you know, just feeling really good about myself.
Speaker 1: This is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I never shared this with any of my classmates.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: So, yeah, it was high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're, you're still in high school.  And, and what's your coursework in high school?  What, what are you focusing on?  Just music?  Are you still (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Music.
Speaker 1: --just music?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: 'Cause in light of your career in, in the hotel industry, you know, later on, I just wondered if you were?
Speaker 2: I was pretty good in math, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Math was one of my better subjects; and typing (laughter).  I, I was really fast with my fingers 'cause I was a piano player.
Speaker 1: Were you taking the business course--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --in high school?
Speaker 2: Yep.  I did a--
Speaker 1: That's what I was--
Speaker 2: I got A's in typing and that sort of thing and, and math.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was very good in math.
Speaker 1: All right.  And did you--
Speaker 2: So, I minored in math.
Speaker 1: I would just guess you didn't have a lot of time for extracurricular activities in high school.
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Didn't want it.
Speaker 1: Because you already had something (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Didn't go to any football games.  I didn't do anything.  I didn't want even go--want to go to my prom, but my mother [Earlene Tardy Barbee] made me go.  'Cause I had no interest; I was somewhere else on weekends.  You know, and like I said before, in the studio with Marvin Gaye playing the drums and Stevie [Stevie Wonder] sitting next to him and he's playing the harmonica; and just being around all these really talented people.  High school didn't mean that much to me, unfortunately.
Story_ID: 656597
Speaker 1: So, is it 1961 as you're a senior [at Southwestern High School; Flint Southwestern Academy, Flint, Michigan] that you start with, with Motown [Motown Records] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: And there's a story about the contract.  Your mother didn't want to--?
Speaker 2: My mother [Earlene Tardy Barbee] didn't want to sign.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you--well, first of all, before we get there, like, how did--tell me about when you found out that you--that you all were, were wanted by Motown?
Speaker 2: The day we went.  They were actually closed, nobody was there; and Mickey Stevens [sic. HistoryMaker Mickey Stevenson] walked out.  The young lady, the receptionist said, "We're closed.  We're not doing any auditions on Saturdays."  So, we were getting ready to turn around to leave and Mickey Stevens walked out--Simon Barbee, my uncle's friend that we had worked with before with the Barbees and he recognized Bertha [Fairhurst's paternal cousin, HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal] and myself, and he said, "What are you doing here?  Come on back!"  So, we did this audition with him and he went back and told Berry and they wanted to sign us immediately.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They saw something there.
Speaker 1: So, [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy hadn't heard you at this point--
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge, no.
Speaker 1: --but was ready to--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because of Mickey Stevens.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, plus, we were writers.  I had wrote, you know, that one song ['There He Goes'].  I didn't get much credit, or any credit for it because right now Mickey Stevens' name is on the label.  But, I was young back then, so what do you say?  Nothing.  So, that's the way it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, they come--they, they contact your mother because you're still a minor--
Speaker 2: I'm still a minor.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: I--so, I couldn't sign.
Speaker 1: So, you were under age eighteen--you were still seventeen?
Speaker 2: I must've been.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And Bertha, she was old enough to sign, so she was gonna sign.  Mildred [HistoryMaker Mildred Gill Arbor] was gonna sign and I'm assuming that Carol's [HistoryMaker Cal Street] mother [Dora McDonald Gill] had to sign for her 'cause she was younger than I; and Betty Kelly.  My mother would not sign.
Speaker 1: What was her concern?
Speaker 2: Her concern was, of course--keep in mind, I was an only child and they were very overly protective with me.  She said, "I don't want my daughter to be a part of that lifestyle.  I want you to finish up your degree.  I want you to go to college and I want you to be somebody."  I said, "I can be somebody.  I want to be an entertainer."  "No, you continue with your opera singing."  So, I cried.  I--so, she sent her attorney to Motown and they wouldn't let him in; and then she was really furious.  She said, "No, I will not sign until an attorney looks at the paperwork."  So, I cried and cried and cried and cried, so she says, "Okay."  So, she signed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I would never tell her anything that might have occurred that was negative on the road--
Speaker 1: Now, you were telling us--
Speaker 2: --'cause she would've said, "(gesture) I told you so."
Speaker 1: Now, you were telling us off camera that she was afraid that you would--this lifestyle would lead you to becoming a stripper.
Speaker 2: Oh.  She said--and then she started to cry.  I was crying and she was crying.  She said, "I'm gonna sign this but you're gonna become a stripper."  I'm like, "A stripper?  No, I'm not, Mom."  She says, "You're gonna become a stripper and I'll lose my daughter."  And she was cry- crying real tears.  And now I realize that, that, you know, she had every right to feel that way.  But, she had raised me in a way that that was not gonna happen.
Speaker 1: So, now, did your father [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] play any role in this at all?
Speaker 2: I'm assuming--he never said anything to me because he was kind of laidback and quiet.  I'm sure he talked to my mom.  I'm sure the two of them talked about it, then they made that decision between the two of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, he never really openly said anything to me 'cause that was just his personality.
Story_ID: 656598
Speaker 1: How did your routine change, how did life change once the contract was signed?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Earlene Tardy Barbee] told Berry that she did not want the schooling to be affected and that I could not go out on the road during school year, only during summer months; and I could only go to the--to the recording studio on weekends.  So, I would catch the bus and go down on weekends and meet Carol [HistoryMaker Cal Street] and Mildred [HistoryMaker Mildred Gill Arbor] and Bertha [Fairhurst's paternal cousin, HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal] at the bus station.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, their bus would arrive at a certain time and mine would arrive at a certain time, and then Berry would send someone to pick us up.  And I would have my books with me on the bus and I would be doing my homework on the bus and during breaks during the sessions so that my grades would not suffer.  Otherwise, I know that my mom would pull me out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did--I, I guess I'd be remiss if I didn't ask, like what did--what did the contract demand of you and what did it promise you?
Speaker 2: It was very bleak, needless to say.  In fact, I still have that contract.  I'm probably one of the only people that have the original.  Berry Gordy's sister, Mrs. Edwards, Esther Edwards [Esther Gordy Edwards], she was the manager for everyone: Marvin Gaye, The Velvelettes, The Temptations, all the artists; and you know what that means, she gets a certain percentage, the revenue that we make.  I have--still have the contract.  My uncle--the reason why I have it is because my uncle before he--well, his profession was an attorney, so my mother sent that contract to him; and he was cleaning out his office when he retired and sent that contract to Mom.
Speaker 1: Now, is this your father's brother?
Speaker 2: My father's cousin.
Speaker 1: Cousin, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: In Milwaukee [Wisconsin].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she did have the contract looked over by my cousin.
Speaker 1: I know we were told by Joe Billingslea [HistoryMaker Joe Billingslea, Jr.] earlier in the week that Mr. Gordy would request that the--that you have a--an attorney look over your contract before you sign it; I mean, would, would suggest that.  He would suggest it, not request it, but suggest it.
Speaker 2: Well, they wouldn't let my mother's attorney in the door.
Speaker 1: But, Joe Billingslea was saying that he--you know, he was so excited, he didn't want to wait for that (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the rest of the, they all--you know, they all just signed it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause they were so excited.  But, but, [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy actually said, "You should have someone look at it first before you--."
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  "Maybe you would like to do that before you (unclear)" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, see, our royalties are still based on that contract--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --today.  We still get royalties.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right, from air play--but it's based on that contract.
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on that contract, was it--
Speaker 2: Like 1 percent or something.
Speaker 1: Was it a fair contract for those days?
Speaker 2: No; probably not, probably not.  I don't know.  But, just having the exposure.  You know, today when I look back at it, you know, we tell Berry, "Just thank you for giving us the exposure.  You didn't have to sign us."
Speaker 1: So for instance in those days, 45 single [45 rpm record], you could get it--get one for fifty cents probably, you know, in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the record store or--
Speaker 2: But then--
Speaker 1: --or less maybe.
Speaker 2: --but when we would get our statement, there would be all kinds of expenses at the top, like cleaning bills and so on and so forth, you know, to where your income would be zip.
Speaker 1: Now--well, okay.  So, the 1 percent--
Speaker 2: Studio time.
Speaker 1: The 1 percent would be for recordings?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what did you get for performances?
Speaker 2: That's where they would have a list of expenses.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, those would be subtracted from--
Speaker 2: Cleaning bills, your, your--just everything.
Speaker 1: How, how did--how did Motown [Motown Records] determine what--well, or, or, or what did they pay you per show?  What did--do, do you?
Speaker 2: Very little.  (Laughter) Very--I can't remember the dollar amounts 'cause that's been so long ago.
Speaker 1: Did they pay you by group?  Each group got a certain amount of money--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then you'd have to divide it yourself?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that how they did it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  They didn't take the taxes out either--I think that's why so many entertainers end up in trouble with the IRS [Internal Revenue Service].  Even today, if we perform--they don't--people don't normally take taxes out.  But, we made nothing, let's put it like that.  But I guess they were saying that they had to regroup what they invested in each group.  I don't know how they worked it.  I mean, it's been so long; and we were so young we didn't care, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a lot of people still hold grudges because of that, too.  A lot of the group--a lot people today.
Speaker 1: Well, I know it's been said that there's no--the- most record com- companies if sued, you know, lose 'cause they, they all owe somebody some money.
Story_ID: 656599
Speaker 1: I just wanted to find out what you--how, how you felt (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What my thoughts were?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what your thoughts were.  But--you know, but you didn't--but, here you have this opportunity, right, to perform?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] gave us the opportunity.  When you look back on it, you can't hold grudges for life--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --about things like that.  Things happen and so be it.  Leave it be.  And we were able to go into other professions to make a living.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, and that's one thing about The Velvelettes--
Speaker 1: Do you think, when you look back--
Speaker 2: --versus some of the other groups.
Speaker 1: Do you think when you look back on it, if it had not been for Motown [Motown Records] being in Detroit [Michigan] at the time that you came along with your talent and your--you and your [paternal] cousin's [HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal], and your friends' talent, would you have had an outlet for your talent?
Speaker 2: No, probably not.  We would not have flown to California or New York [New York] or even Chicago [Illinois].  So, and if it had not been for Bob Bullock [Robert Berry Bullock] going to Western [Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan], you know, those things just happen.  It was God's will, I believe.  I do believe in God, and I believe everything happens for reasons.  And it--you know, the fact that we didn't make it as big as The Supremes and some of the other people, that was God's will, too.
Speaker 1: So, had you been born in St. Louis [Missouri] or someplace with the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --same talent, you probably would've never have gotten a contract.
Speaker 2: Probably not.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No.  I don't know.  I, I, I feel blessed that he took a chance on The Velvelettes.  Like I said, he didn't have to sign us.  He didn't have to do it.
Story_ID: 656600
Speaker 1: Now, how would you describe the sound of The Velvelettes?
Speaker 2: A lot different from the other--from The Supremes and some of the others.  We had more of a, a jazz type sound, and that's what made us so unique.
Speaker 1: Right.  You were saying that earlier, like--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --okay.  Okay.  I know some groups are compared to gospel singers and--but, you, you--yours, yours is more jazz.
Speaker 2: More of a jazz, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where did the name Velvelettes come from?
Speaker 2: We were in the car, all of us going to a sock--going somewhere and we were trying to come up with a name; and one lady said, "Well, what about v-," you know, all the groups were named -lettes: The Marvelettes, The Raelettes, the whatever.  So, we said, what about velvet?  You know, our--we sound like velvet, smooth, so that's how that came up, Velvelettes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, were you allowed to name the--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We were named--
Speaker 1: You all were (unclear)?
Speaker 2: We were named before we went to Motown [Motown Records].  That's why we--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --legally own our name today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] named, I believe, The Temptations and some of the other groups, so he owned their name.  But, we had named ourselves before we got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, if--in that sense then, if--say, if, if there were--if all of you weren't still alive and performing, and say there were two missing, you would choose the two to perform with you instead of--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When we got back together as a group, I suggested that we hire an attorney and become incorporated, so that's how we own our name.  That's how we protect our name because we're now a corporation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, if he--if Motown owns the name--
Speaker 2: They don't, though.
Speaker 1: No, no, but in the case--
Speaker 2: If they did?
Speaker 1: --where they do and say, you know, someone in the group--you know, I mean, could they fire someone from the group and hire somebody else or?
Speaker 2: We have bylaws, yeah.  The attorney put together bylaws, rules and regulations, what we can do and what we can't do; and I purposely asked him to do that because what--that's why most groups split up.  One person will think they're better than the other and break off, if that makes sense, and take the name.  Now, out of the four, none of us can take the name without the approval of the other three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we can fire, but three people will have to agree--
Speaker 1: To get rid of the other one.
Speaker 2: --to get rid of the other one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But at our death, let's say one of us should pass, which we will eventually, the family members have so many days to respond--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to get--let's say for instance, if I passed away tomorrow, my family members would have to contact The Velvelettes' corporation in order to get my percentage of royalties.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Because we do get royalties every quarter.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a situation where Motown owns those rights and, and the groups don't?
Speaker 2: They own the music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, most of the groups are set up where they own the name?
Speaker 2: The other groups you mean?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  I'm just saying, in Motown generally, do--
Speaker 2: Own the name.
Speaker 1: --the groups own their own names and owns--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're, you're situation--
Speaker 2: Like The Marvelettes--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --they don't own it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Miracles, I believe, won a--when Smokey [HistoryMaker Smokey Robinson] left the group of The Miracles, I believe Bobby [HistoryMaker Bobby Rogers], one of the originals owned--and now he's deceased and I think his wife [Joan Hughes Rogers] owns it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: But, I don't know how that was worked out with Berry, you know, 'cause Smokey and Berry were very close.
Speaker 1: All right.  All right.  So, your situation is, is--
Speaker 2: When we arrived there, we, we, we owned our name.
Story_ID: 656601
Speaker 1: What was the first single released?
Speaker 2: 'There He Goes.'
Speaker 1: 'There He Goes,' okay, the song that you wrote; and how did it do?
Speaker 2: It did very well in certain parts of the United States.  In Washington area [Washington, D.C.], I think it did very well.  Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] was very happy about that because we were on a different label, IPG [IPG Records].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think--I believe he had sold us.  I, I don't know how to explain it because I don't really understand it--just to test us, and then our second release was on that same label and, 'Needle In A Haystack' and it was--it did very well, so he brought us back.  In fact, he called us to his office to tell us how well 'Needle In A Haystack' had done, and took us upstairs to another person's office.  And in the later years, he did say at an event, if it had not been for The Velvelettes and 'Needle In A Haystack,' his record company might not have made it because he had no money to pay his payroll that particular month.  When 'Needle In A Haystack' hit, he had the money to pay his payroll.
Speaker 1: So, this is in 1961 or '2 [1962]?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Sixty--yeah.
Speaker 2: Berth- again, Bertha [Fairhurst's paternal cousin, HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal] is our, our historian.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know exact years.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But, he just admitted that maybe five years ago.  He said that The Supremes had not had a hit, The Temptations--nobody had had a hit.  And so he was struggling to pay payroll, and he did not have the money, he said, "But The Velvelettes had a hit and it gave me the money to pay my payroll," he said, "and I went forward."
Speaker 1: Okay.  I have a note here on this outline that you--that, that 'There He Goes' was released in '63 [1963], right?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Is that, that--you think that's pretty much?
Speaker 2: I have not memorized any of that.
Speaker 1: 'There He Goes' and--
Speaker 2: I'm gonna be honest.
Speaker 1: --'The Reason Why' was on the record, too, on the other side.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  'That's The Reason Why.'  And--okay.  So, this is--this comes along and--so the IPG label--did IPG stand for anything?
Speaker 2: Important people [sic. Independent Producers Group], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, I don't--I don't--you know, I hardly remember that, that label as much as I do, you know, Tamla [Tamla Records] and Motown [Motown Records]--
Speaker 2: Well, those were--yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Gordy Records.
Speaker 2: I don't under- see, and I don't understand, I still don't.  I've never really looked up the history of IPG, to be honest with you.  I guess I could go online and find out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the musicians on your record?
Speaker 2: Stevie Wonder.
Speaker 1: Stevie Wonder played on--
Speaker 2: 'There He Goes.'
Speaker 1: --'There He Goes,' okay.  He played harmonica?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so--and the, the Motown band, you know, people call the Funk--
Speaker 2: Funk Brothers.
Speaker 1: --Funk Brothers, basically (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, they played on it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause we did a PBS special few years back ['Doo Wop Discoveries and Motown: Big Hits and More'] and Carolyn [HistoryMaker Cal Street] was trying to direct the band on how to play something, and the piano player looked at her and says, "I was on the original record," and we laughed 'cause we just hadn't thought about it.  He says, "Trust me, I know what I'm doing.  I was on the original record," one of The Funk Brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 656602
Speaker 1: When did you start touring?  Was that same, same year the record ['There He Goes/That's The Reason Why'] came out?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We did what we called sock hops to promote the record.  And then The Temptations had asked Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] if we could open for them; and we think, you know, now that we're adults, they had other things in mind.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: But then Berry knew that, too, so he sent Mrs. Powell [HistoryMaker Maxine Powell] with us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were five young, nice looking--
Speaker 2: You know, I don't think--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --Betty went with us 'cause he pulled Betty away from the group because--and she started with Martha Reeves [Martha and The Vandellas].
Speaker 1: Oh, he--so, he took Betty--
Speaker 2: Betty Kelly, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Kelly out and, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and assigned her to The--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Vandellas.
Speaker 2: 'Cause one of their--yeah, one of their ladies pulled out, and he needed someone quickly to go on tour with Martha [HistoryMaker Martha Reeves]; and Betty went.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she stayed with The Vandellas for years.  So, it was just Bertha [Fairhurst's paternal cousin, HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal], myself, and Carol [HistoryMaker Cal Street].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--
Speaker 2: Mildred [HistoryMaker Mildred Gill Arbor] dropped out to have her first child, so it was just the three of us that toured; and then I dropped out, then Mildred came back--
Speaker 1: Did--
Speaker 2: --so, it was one of those things.
Speaker 1: Well did it affect the sound very much to be missing one--
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot.
Speaker 1: --more than the other?  (Unclear) okay.
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think.  You'd have to ask Bertha that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause evidently, Bertha would have--somebody took my soprano.  I don't know which one.  I've never asked.  You're bringing up certain things I've never asked.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, the--there were five of you on the original recording, 'There He Goes'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All five?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, so, did The Temptations try to take advantage of you all on the road?
Speaker 2: Ye-
Speaker 1: Or some of them, or?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Powell was with us.  I remember we were in Baltimore [Maryland], I believe, and it was my birthday, so they wanted to surprise me and give me a birthday party, and they gave the birthday party in my room, I think; and Mrs. Powell walked in, and David Ruffin went under the bed and--I mean, you know it was crazy.  I, I--they really never tried any--they had so many women laying in the hallways and--oh, it was awful.  You know, and I was trying to be a mother to them saying, "Don't do that, what are you doing?  That's wrong."  "Oh, Norma [HistoryMaker Norma Fairhurst], shut up," they'd say.  But, no, they probably would've tried different things, I guess, 'cause they were grown men and we were just teenagers.  But, to my knowledge, they flirted but never really tried to do any--push themselves on us or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause Mrs. Powell was there, remember?
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And then she called Berry when she found them in my room.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were reprimanded when they got back to Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: I know when I was in high school, the high school girls were fascinated by The Temptations.
Speaker 2: Oh, they were--we were, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Trust me.  We thought, god, we're singing with the Temp- they were fabulous.  I mean, they were all tall and their choreography and their singing--they were wonderful as far as, you know, being entertainers.  But, you know, I guess they were lonely, too, for family members and for friends.  So, they threw me a birthday party, and we weren't really doing anything, you know, but sitting there laughing and talking.
Speaker 1: Mrs. Powell wa- wasn't gonna have it?
Speaker 2: Oh, she wasn't gonna have that 'cause she said Berry would have her head.
Story_ID: 656603
Speaker 1: But, looking back at that today, I feel good about that--Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] cared enough, you know.  I had the opportunity to talk to some of the other female artists, The Dixie Cups and some of the other female groups from back in, in that--in the day, and one of the ladies said--at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame [Cleveland, Ohio], we all got together in a--in a suite one particular night just reminiscing, and one of the girls said she was raped.  Somebody broke into her room and raped her (shakes head).
Speaker 2: Now, this is somebody with another label?
Speaker 1: Yes, another label.  So, thank you, Berry.  He took darn good care of us.  He made sure nothing happened to us; and I really appreciate that today--
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: --at my--at my age, looking back on that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've heard stories in these interviews about singers being stalked, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You do a gig someplace and the same guy keeps showing up and then--you know, following them around and (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, see, they were wearing low cut things with their boobs hanging out and whatever.  Berry wouldn't stand for that 'cause he knew that our folks wouldn't stand for that.  So, you know, our dresses are, are, you know, like the one that I have on.  You know, we didn't wear all that trashy stuff.  Plus, his lyrics.  You know, remember what his lyrics were like back in the '60s [1960s].  Everything was about love, you know, not like a lot of the entertainers were singing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, we had standards.
Story_ID: 656604
Speaker 1: Say on a--on a given tour, how, how long would you be out on, on, on tour [with The Velvelettes]?  Would it be a week, two weeks, a month (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], I remember we were there with [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler, and The Temptations maybe, maybe a week.  We weren't gone that long, not at all.  You remember the days when they would have--they would show the movie, and then we'd perform; and we'd go right back to our hotel room--maybe go to dinner and go right back to our hotel room.
Speaker 1: Did you ever get a chance to see the movie (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Nope.  Nope.  We arrived just in time to go to our dressing rooms and to go on stage.  It was work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was no play.
Story_ID: 656605
Speaker 1: This is a point we were making off camera about how lonely it is to be on tour as a--as a star even a you know, Motown star in the '60s [1960s], it wasn't all--it, it wasn't all glamour, was it?
Speaker 2: No.  It was not all glamour.  First of all, you have to know what you're doing--your choreography, your lyrics, your, your melody or whatever, you know, when you're singing; and it's just work like any other job.  Then you go and you do your sound check, you rehearse with the band.  You have to know what you're doing because you're getting paid to do a job and you, you want to do a good job and give the people in the audience their money's worth, so that's a little stressful even back in the--in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know Joe Billingslea [HistoryMaker Joe Billingslea, Jr.] and [HistoryMaker] Martha Reeves and others have talked about the professionalism of Motown [Motown Records] in terms of trying to make sure that, that artists, you know, hit their marks in a certain way and--what did you learn, you know, from Motown's, I guess, inner core, you know, to that--that improved your performance?
Speaker 2: Well, Mrs. Powell [HistoryMaker Maxine Powell] made a big difference in my life even though my mom [Earlene Tardy Barbee] and dad [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] taught me wonderful morals and standards and table etiquette and how to dress and so--and carry myself.  But, Mrs. Powell taught us how to get in and out of a car as a lady, how we should sit in a chair, you know, during an interview like I'm doing today, just to be very poised.  That's what Motown did for me.  I can't think of anything negative that Motown did for me.  Everything was very, very positive.  They taught us to be a family, to care about each other.  I'll give you an example.  Let's say, for instance, if Martha Reeves was performing in Flint [Michigan], I'd want to make a point to go see her performance; or if I'm in New York [New York] and The Miracles are performing there, I'd want to make a point to go see their performance and go backstage and say hello to make them feel warm, because we're a family.  That's one thing that he [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] taught us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 656606
Speaker 1: In terms of performance, I mean, what was--I mean, how did you--when you, when you started out with The Velvelettes, did you--I mean--well, what did you learn after you, you got to Motown [Motown Records] that you didn't know when you originally, you know, started with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As far as actual performance on--
Speaker 1: Yeah, how you come on stage--
Speaker 2: --performing on stage?
Speaker 1: --how you perform, how--
Speaker 2: Well, again, [HistoryMaker] Maxine Powell taught us how to sit on--like, if we had to sit on a, a stool to perform, how to get on that stool, how to get off, how to walk on stage, how to hold your mic [microphone]--that came all from Maxine, and she was Mo- part of Motown.  And then later--in the later years, I, I didn't have the opportunity to work with a choreographer.  They had a choreographer that worked with The Velvelettes, with all--with The Jackson 5s [The Jackson 5] and with all--The Temps [The Temptations] and all the performers.
Speaker 1: So, you, you say you didn't get the chance?
Speaker 2: I didn't get that chance, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We pretty much made up our own choreography when I--when we first started out.
Speaker 1: Now, were The Velvelettes known for very smooth chor- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --choreography?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  More so than so- than The Supremes and the other groups.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 656607
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], now this is--you kind of have a--had a chart breakthrough with a song called 'Needle In A Haystack' that's--now, that--was that, was that written by Norman Whitfield?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.  Each group--Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] would assign writers to each group, and Norman was assigned to The Velvelettes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, 'Needle In A Haystack,' is one--I remember that one.
Speaker 2: You remember that one?
Speaker 1: I do.  I--you don't remember every song, but I do remember that one.  And, so--and the follow up for that one was 'He Was Really Saying Something' ['He Was Really Sayin' Somethin'].
Speaker 2: '--Was Really Saying Something,' yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us--
Speaker 2: Well, 'Needle In A Haystack' was much bigger over in England, much bigger than The Supremes' songs over there.
Speaker 1: Real-?  Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause when we go back today, like, we were over there in April, we had more fans than The Supremes.  And I couldn't understand that twenty some odd years ago when we went over to England and they said, "Oh, yeah, you were much bigger over here than The Supremes."  I was pretty shocked--in certain parts of England.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: So, yes, 'Needle In A Haystack' did very well over there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the, the British--I know they bring--they have a Dancing in the Streets festival [ph.] every year.
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, with [HistoryMaker] Martha Reeves and--
Speaker 2: I know she goes over a lot.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean, the appre- the appreciation for that song in itself is much greater than it is here.  You know, the--it was a hit here--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --big hit here, but--
Speaker 2: But twice as--
Speaker 1: But, they--yeah.
Speaker 2: --big there.
Speaker 1: For some reason it was really--I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, they appreciate just Motown [Motown Records] music more so over there than Americans--they really do.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Black music in general, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We have so many fans over there.
Speaker 1: I know it was revealed once in Ebony or Jet I think that The Beatles were inspired by black music--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, and it was like a shocking kind of a headline in Ebony or Jet that--and it wasn't shocking for The Beatles 'cause they, they already--I mean, everybody in England knows--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --knows that.  So, so--well, when did you go over to Britain for the first time, I mean?
Speaker 2: I don't know what year we went over, but--
Speaker 1: Were you all part of the tour, the big tour in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  We never went over to England while we were with Motown.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they had a big Motown--
Speaker 2: We were due to go at one point, but I think I had left the group and Bertha [Fairhurst's paternal cousin, HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal] had left the group and there was just no time to get The Velvelettes together to go on a tour 'cause they were hire- trying to hire to replace us, so we never went over there until when--later years.  And I can't remember what year it was.  We went over with Martha, Marv Johnson, and I believe The Contours for the fir- our first and we were there a month.  But, that's been about thirty years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, it wasn't like in the '60s [1960s], or '70s [1970s] or '80s [1980s].
Story_ID: 656608
Speaker 1: In '64 [1964], you, you all toured with The Temptations with the Dick Clark Caravan of Stars?
Speaker 2: I didn't go on that one (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You didn't go?  Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Bertha [Fairhurst's paternal cousin, HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal] and Mildred [HistoryMaker Mildred Gill Arbor] and Carol [HistoryMaker Cal Street] went on that one.
Speaker 1: So, let's, let's talk about your personal history with the group then.  So, you, you started with them when, when--you know, from the audition; and then you said like one member [Betty Kelly] went to The Vandellas [Martha and The Vandellas] and then--
Speaker 2: Yep.  And then Mildred got out to have her first child.  Because, remember, we were marrying--we were marriage age at that point, and back in the '60s [1960s] that was the thing to do.  You married at twenty and twenty-one [years old].  If you weren't married by twenty-one, you were considered an old maid.  So, Mildred married or was it just the opposite?  At any rate, she left to have her first child and then I left.  I got married and then I left.  So, see--and, remember, these husbands didn't want their wives traveling.  They didn't want us--no.  Heavens no.  They wanted their wives at home.  Again, their thinking about that--their wives out there with The Temptations and Marvin Gaye and all these men and all--I don't know what they thought.  But at any rate, I was tired of the traveling.  It's, it's not a fun life, you know, living out of a suitcase away from your family.  I was getting homesick and I wanted to get out.  We weren't making that much money.
Speaker 1: So, once you left, did you go back at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I mean, during those days?
Speaker 2: Never went--didn't want to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --go back because I had my baby [Jacqueline Fairhurst], my husband [Norman Fairhurst, Sr.].  I didn't want to leave my baby and then I had a second child [Donald Fairhurst].  And then, someone had suggested that I go and try out for--when The Supremes--when Florence [Florence Ballard] left, and I did go down.  But Diana [Diana Ross] and I weren't the best of friends.  And--'cause I looked like Florence.  Florence and I looked very similar.  So, when she got out, they were looking for a replacement.  So, I went down, and I can't even remember who I spoke with.  But, it was--like I said, it was a known fact that Diana and I did not get along, so to speak.  Our personalities kind of clashed.
Speaker 1: What was the problem with your personality?
Speaker 2: I--you know, I don't--now that I look back on it, I have no idea.  I never did anything to her.  I think she was a little jealous, a little bit--not of me but of the group because we did a duel of the stars [Battle of the Stars] and we won.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was this?  Now--
Speaker 2: --she didn't like that.
Speaker 1: --explain what this was.  This was hosted--held by who?  And (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy].  But it was a friendly--it was supposed to--friendly competition.
Speaker 1: Was this a public event, where people--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --showed up--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: Yep.  And they clapped and yelled for the group that they liked the best and The Velvelettes--
Speaker 1: It was like 'Amateur Night at The Apollo' except you weren't amateurs (unclear).
Speaker 2: No.  This is a way Berry--I guess he made money.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, the place was packed full of teenagers.
Speaker 1: Now, where, where was this held at, this duel of the stars?
Speaker 2: Was it--it was one of his theaters.  Was it--
Speaker 1: In Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: In Detroit, yeah, the Graystone--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Ballroom [Graystone Ballroom].  I had to think of it for a minute, but Bertha will have the poster.  And he would--he would put The Temptations against The Spinners or The Miracles or one of his other groups and the same thing would occur.  And they did that with The Supremes and The Velvelettes; and The Velvelettes--we were better dances, we were better singers.  I'm gonna be honest.  Our harmony was better, and so the kids clapped for us.  So, Diana was upset.  But, look where she is today and look where I am today.  I don't know.  She was very upset.
Story_ID: 656609
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967] is when you dropped out to devote time with your family, but you came back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --came back--
Speaker 2: We regrouped.
Speaker 1: --and tried out for--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: --The Supremes, and when was that?  Was that in--
Speaker 2: Ah, whenever Florence [Florence Ballard] left.
Speaker 1: --sixty-eight [1968], I guess, or sixty--
Speaker 2: Whenever Florence left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Whatever year that was.  And, and the pay, they didn't want to pay anything either.  It was like they were gonna pay me a salary, which was not enough money to pay a babysitter.  I can't remember what the dollar amount was that they quoted, but I just remember thinking in the car on my way back home from Detroit [Michigan]: that's not even enough to pay a babysitter while I'm on the road.
Speaker 1: Now, this is--wow, this--a lot of people can't imagine that, that a member of The Supremes would be paid so little that you couldn't hire a babysitter.
Speaker 2: Yep.  They--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --wanted to pay--see, I wasn't a Supreme, keep in mind, so I wasn't gonna get what they were gonna get, what Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Wilson] would've gotten.  Diana [Diana Ross] was already--was Diana still with the group?  Yeah, Diana was still with the group.  What--I wasn't gonna get what Mary and Diana was gonna get.  They were gonna pay me a salary--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that salary wouldn't--it wouldn't be worth me going, leaving my family.
Speaker 1: So, this salary they were gonna pay you is--
Speaker 2: I mean, they didn't pick me anyway.
Speaker 1: --is--this salary would be less than an auto worker would make--
Speaker 2: Probably, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in, in Detroit.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Which is pretty good.  You can pay a babysitter with auto workers--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --workers' salary--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for the most part, but you couldn't do it with what they were gonna pay you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So--yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, The Velvelettes weren't making that either.  So, it wasn't enough to stay on the road is my point.  You know, the only reason I would want to stay on the road is eventually being a star.  But, it, it didn't make much sense to be on a job when you weren't making enough for your gas.  Even now in 2014, if, if you weren't making enough to--for groceries and for your gas, why, why take the job?  Well, let's look at it like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's another reason why I decided it wasn't worth my time being away from my family.  So, I got out of The Velvelettes.
Speaker 1: So, was this when your daughter [Jacqueline Fairhurst] was--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --one of your daughters was born, then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I guess in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in '67 [1967]?  Is that, that it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you went where they told you they wanted you to go.  I just remember coming off of the road going into an area in the office and they had the lists of the artists and what cities and what dates; and I would go in and I'd look at the list and I think, oh, my god, I can't--I'm tired.  I don't want to go anywhere next week.  And, plus, in the back of my mind I'm thinking and I'm not making any money either, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I wasn't paying rent anywhere.  I was living at home.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--yeah, if you had to pay rent, too, that would--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You have to think about that.  You have to be sensible.
Speaker 1: Now--so, looking back on it now, do you have any re- any regrets?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really don't because I didn't want that lifestyle.  I wasn't accustomed to it.  I mean, I'd love to be on the same level as Stevie Wonder right now--I really would.  Maybe we would've reached that heights.  I don't know.  But, you know, it wasn't God's will.  I have to look at it that way, too.  I guess I'm, I'm pleased that we can say that--and I'm including the other ladies, that we can say we're part of the alumni [of Motown Records]; and we'll be a part of history.
Story_ID: 656610
Speaker 1: What did you do next when, you know?
Speaker 2: I was a mother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and a housewife--
Speaker 1: And, and when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) 'cause I had two small children [Jacqueline Fairhurst and Donald Fairhurst].
Speaker 1: --when did you meet your husband [Norman Fairhurst, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: At a wedding here in Flint [Michigan].  He was in the [U.S.] Air Force from Boston [Massachusetts] and we were in a wedding together and that's how I met him.  And we dated and, and I don't know if he was impressed with the Motown [Motown Records]--now that I look back at that (laughter) I don't think so.  I don't know.  You know, like, some people are impressed and some people aren't when you do that for a living, you know.  He didn't like it; and he didn't like for me to--when we'd go grocery shopping and if people would recognize me--and they would back then, of course--he didn't like that.  He didn't like the attention.  So, I can remember him saying, "Well, I'll go get groceries.  You stay here with the kids."  Now that I look back on that, that was crazy that I allowed that, but I was so naive (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you like the attention yourself?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.
Speaker 1: Well, most people like attention, but you didn't?
Speaker 2: (Shrugs).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was tired of that lifestyle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, you're tired of people looking at you sometimes.  You know, it's not all glitz and glamour.  You--sometimes you want to be to yourself.  You don't want somebody looking at what you have on or--I don't know.  Does that make sense?
Speaker 1: It does.  It does.  It does.  You--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: --feel like you're, you're being evaluated all the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Plus, I didn't like leaving tips (laughter).  I don't know why that came out.  But people expect certain things when you're an entertainer.
Speaker 1: So, they think you're making like big money--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so you ought to give them a big money tip.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  And I didn't have the money, so why try to pretend?
Speaker 1: So they think you're being a cheapskate if you give them a regular tip.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  Yeah.  I, I wouldn't even like putting on makeup 'cause I remember Carol [HistoryMaker Cal Street] would say, "Could you please put on makeup?"  "I don't want to."  So, you're being made to do things that you really don't want to do when you're playing that role, let's put it like that, 'cause you're actually playing a role 'cause I'm no different than you or anybody else.  But, when you're part of that label, The Velvelettes, Motown Velvelettes, then you're expected to be a certain way.
Story_ID: 656611
Speaker 1: Now, when did you start working in the hotel industry; and how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Actually, my mom [Earlene Tardy Barbee] visited with me and my hair was standing all over my head and I got the diapers and the whatever, she says, "You need a job.  You need to get out and be among people.  I don't like seeing you like this."  And, so I was really--I started out in retail, but it was always accounting.  I ended up working for a store in the office doing all the billing.  And then I worked in the office, and then I went on the floor and sold clothing; so I was kind of this all around person.  And then I started working for one of our local television stations in accounting and I found out I was really good 'cause I was determined and a hard worker.  I won awards for collect--I worked in accounts receivables, and I ended up retrieving more money than anybody in the whole ABC network.  I was just an achiever.  I wanted to do well.  And working at a TV station was kind of hospitality-ish, kind of singing.  I was around people--flamboyant people, newscasters, reporters, anchors, you know, so that was kind of still in that realm of entertainment.  And then I left there because I got a divorce and I had to make more money, and I think I took a job with United Way, and I was their accountant.  So, I paid all the agencies under the United Way umbrella, which was a, a big job--worked with their CDs [certificate of deposit], their investments, that sort of thing.  And then I left United Way--I could always get jobs, good jobs without a degree, I was very fortunate.  I left there and I believe I went to the--to the Flint area convention and visitors bureau [Flint and Genesee Convention and Visitors Bureau] selling Flint [Michigan] and Genesee County [Michigan] as a destination site for conferences.  And I got awards for that, too.  I brought the biggest group ev- that Flint has ever seen as far as a conference--Benny Hinn's.  I billed all the hotels and, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, the religious--
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --broadcast evangelist.
Speaker 2: Brought him in, yeah, and I brought in more business than anybody in history in Genesee County.  So, I did very well at that job and I guess the owner of the Radisson Hotel [Radisson Riverfront Hotel; Riverfront Character Inn, Flint, Michigan] at the time saw my track record, so when he purchased the building, he hired me as director of sales and marketing.  I did very well with that.  I brought in--'cause I knew the contacts.  So, I did very well at that job and then I was promoted for--what was my next position there at the hotel?  Assistant general manager and then finally general manager.  And I felt very proud of myself 'cause I had worked very hard, many long hours to get to that point (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, how long?  I mean, what, what year is this when you become general manager?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I, I don't--
Speaker 1: Is this in the--
Speaker 2: --keep track of years and--
Speaker 1: --in, in the '90s [1990s] or?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In the '90s [1990s]?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  I don't keep track.  And I felt really good about myself because not only is it--is it rare for women to get a position of that nature, but a black woman 'cause I belong to a national organization, so I know how many blacks were in that position.
Story_ID: 656612
Speaker 1: In 1984, The Velvelettes reunite--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --right?  Now, what happened (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because of Bertha [Fairhurst's paternal cousin, HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal].
Speaker 1: Oh, because of Bertha?
Speaker 2: I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think we, we performed at a black women's conference or something and then a deejay called me and I don't know what year that was, he made an announcement on his radio station, and, "I understand The Velvelettes live in Flint [Michigan], could someone call in?"  And I had a friend to call me and tell me about this deejay, and I really didn't want to be bothered with it, so I didn't respond 'cause I was going through my divorce and that really wasn't important to me.  But, I finally--he kept--he was very persistent, so I met with him; and then he had me get--he wanted to meet the rest of the ladies, and that might've started us again.  I don't know.  It was either Bertha at this conference, or this deejay, one of the two.  I can't remember.  Bertha will know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I hate to keep referring back to Bertha, but she is our historian.
Speaker 1: Well, the conference is the concerned professional black women's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --roundtable [Concerned Black Women's Roundtable Conference of Southwest Michigan]--
Speaker 2: It could've been that.
Speaker 1: --conference.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Long name.
Speaker 2: And, believe it or not, we were all divorced at that time, (laughter) so that gave us more time to get back together to focus on The Velvelettes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, remember, that's why we all--we separated because of our marriages.  That's why we disbanded The Velvelettes, remember?
Speaker 1: Is it--is there--I mean, have you ever thought about, about whether--since you all got--you all were married and then divorced, was--is there--is there any common denominator in, in any of this?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: I mean, a lot of people get divorced these days, but I--
Speaker 2: No.  All of our divorces were for different reasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: We, we've discussed that.  We didn't know it at the time.  But when we got back together, you know, we had to do a catch up night and go around the table and talk about why each one of us got out of our marriages.  I think I stayed in my marriage longer, but we all had issues.  You know, Carolyn [HistoryMaker Cal Street] was married to one of The Temptations [Richard Street].  So, you know, we all had different reasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I think the, the, the men in our marriages just didn't want their wives in that profession.  That's really the bottom line.
Story_ID: 656613
Speaker 1: You recorded--rerecorded--The Velvelettes rerecorded their hits for a company called Nightmare Records, is that true?  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Out of--out of London [England]--
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: --when we went over to Europe for the first trip.
Speaker 1: Well, it sounds pretty scary, Nightmare Records.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: What was that--whose, whose label was that?
Speaker 2: Well, he [Ian Levine] was really a fan and he took the majority of all the Motown [Motown Records] artists over there--Joe [HistoryMaker Joe Billingslea, Jr.] from The Contours, [HistoryMaker] Martha Reeves, just a lot of us went over there and he paid our way and, you know, we worked and made a little bit of money, and he recorded us and we're not getting any royalties.  So, I guess we were cheated a little bit, or a lot.  But, you know, what do you do?  You hire an attorney over in London, you know.  Who wants to go through all of that?
Speaker 1: So, he's actually--is, is he actually using--
Speaker 2: On the Internet.
Speaker 1: --selling--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He is.
Speaker 1: Selling your records.
Speaker 2: You just go online.
Speaker 1: These, these--
Speaker 2: Type in Velvelettes and--or Nightmare Records and--those things happen.  And we--you know, we've discussed hiring an attorney, but we'd have to get one over in London--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and would it be worth it?
Story_ID: 656614
Speaker 1: I know Joe Billingslea [HistoryMaker Joe Billingslea, Jr.] was telling us about how the song 'Do You Love Me' was popularized by the movie 'Dirty Dancing'--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and it--all of a sudden here's a song that a lot of people like a lot--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but, you know, was beginning to fade from the memories of people on some level until this--
Speaker 2: The movie.
Speaker 1: --this movie comes out.  Is there any such thing in terms of your--any--it may not be that dramatic, but was there anything that brought any of your songs--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --back that you?
Speaker 2: No, not to my knowledge.
Speaker 1: Wasn't there a cover of 'He's Really Saying Something' [sic. 'He Was Really Sayin' Somethin''] done by a white female group in the '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: Back in London, probably.
Speaker 1: Could be.  Could be.  Pretty sure.
Speaker 2: Bananarama?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, I think so.
Speaker 2: I, I think they were out of Europe somewhere.
Speaker 1: Right.  It was really popular (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But--now, now, when did you start performing again as, as a group for the--'cause it's real popular now to get all the old groups together again.
Speaker 2: I guess when we went to London--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to record for Nightmare Records.  That was the first time we had actually got really back together and we had to rehearse to get our choreography back together and that sort of thing.  We went to London.  That was our first.  And then it just kind of--snowball effect: people started hiring us here in the states and, you know, we were performing quite often.  In fact, we were at the Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] about three or four years ago--never thought we'd ever perform there, not in the facility itself, but out in the park [Damrosch Park].  And we were at the Montreal festival [Pop Montreal] two or three years ago.  But, now since the economy has taken a nosedive, we haven't really been performing that much.  And we don't have a manager.  So maybe if we had a manager, we'd get more work because, you know, you need someone out there calling people and booking, and I don't do that and none of the other ladies do it, so who's gonna do it?
Speaker 1: Now, so, so you were performing, I guess, these, these--you know, you were performing while you're still working for Radisson [Radisson Riverfront Hotel; Riverfront Character Inn, Flint, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yep.  We were still working.  All of us were working.  That was pretty tough, too, you know, trying to rehearse and we live in two different cities, and have business meetings and, you know, decide what we were gonna do.  It was tough.  Now that we're all retired, we're not doing anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, do you tour more now or?
Speaker 2: No.  We haven't done anything because we haven't had that person to get on the phone and actually, you know, pitch The Velvelettes.
Speaker 1: So, when is the last time you've been on, on tour?
Speaker 2: April.  We just went to England just for five days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, it's been fairly steady, though--I mean, up until now, I guess.  Is that?
Speaker 2: The past couple of years, we haven't really been doing much at all--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I really miss the income.  You know, 'cause that's--we get paid, part of our income.  But, again, I haven't been able to, to do much 'cause of my parents [Earlene Tardy Barbee and Arthur Barbee, Jr.] being ill, and I don't know, Bertha [Fairhurst's paternal cousin, HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal] and Carol [HistoryMaker Cal Street] and Mildred [HistoryMaker Mildred Gill Arbor] maybe that--see, I'm the one with the sales background.  I'm the one that does the contracts and that sort of thing.  Not that I'm trying not to work, but it--I've just been so busy taking care of my parents.  The Velvelettes have not been my top priority.
Story_ID: 656615
Speaker 1: Do the members of the group [The Velvelettes], you know, still get along with each other the way they used to or are they, they have--or, or is it--is it difficult to work with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, most groups don't stay together because of personality clashes (background noise).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What was your question?
Speaker 2: So you were talking about--we were talking about how the members get along and stuff, and you said a lot of--well, you know, you have mixtures of personalities.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of the groups break up because of conflicts because of personalities.  I believe the reason why we have stayed together for so darn long is because we're family.  There are two sisters [HistoryMaker Mildred Gill Arbor and HistoryMaker Cal Street] and two first cousins [Fairhurst and HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal]; and we truly love each other, we really do as sisters, but we are so different.  Oh, we are different.  All four of us have different personalities.  And I get angry every once in a while.  I'm sure we all get angry with each other.  But then I have to come back home after being with them out performing and think to myself, we're different.  So, there--we're all not gonna agree on things.  We can't even agree on what we're wearing on stage, for god's sake; (laughter) s- and we can't even agree with what we're gonna sing, you know, for forty-five minutes.  So, most of the time I kind of just kind of go along with it and Bertha will kind of go along with it, and Carol kind of makes the decision because--and, and I think it's okay because she's the lead singer 'cause she--and--because sh- and I tell the other ladies, back off because she's the lead singer, she's got to memorize the majority of the lyrics, number one because she's the lead singer.  So, just back off.  That's stressful in itself, trying to memorize all those songs.  I get in a tizzy because I'm the treasurer of the corporation and I have to take care of the money and pay the bills and ask for receipts and sometimes people don't have receipts and sometimes they do, and sometimes they don't.  (Laughter) So, I have to do the taxes annually and sign the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] tax return and I have to explain to them that I'm responsible for that, so that starts kind of a debate or argument if you will.  So, when you say about--ask the question about groups getting along, that's my biggest beef is the business end of it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: You know, understanding that.
Story_ID: 656616
Speaker 1: When you look back at, at your career and all the things you've done, is it--is there a highlight to the--your career with The Velvelettes?
Speaker 2: Yes, by all means.  The--there's been several highlights.  When Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] opened--the opening night for his musical on Broadway ['Motown: The Musical,' Berry Gordy], we were invited to go for that.  He, he title--entitled it family night and, of course, we had to pay our own way.  And Joe Billingslea [HistoryMaker Joe Billingslea, Jr.], for instance, says, "He should pay our way."  Well why should he?  I mean, what corporation do you work for that's gonna say, "Okay, let me pay your way."  Not very many.  He doesn't owe us that.  He invited us there for opening night.  We paid our way, paid for the flight and the hotel fee and it was wonderful to be a part of that.  When we received an award from Berry, unsung heroes--that was rewarding, when he got on stage and said, "If it wasn't for The Velvelettes, I might not have had a company [Motown Records]," you know, because of the payroll situation, not having the money until our record ['Needle In A Haystack'] hit number one.  Those are the highlights, you know, as far as The Velvelettes are concerned.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's been some wonderful events.
Story_ID: 656617
Speaker 1: Well what was the--well, I guess you kind of spoke to the worst part of being a performer, which is just being away so much--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and the loneliness of being out on the road.
Speaker 2: And people thinking you're--you have one personality and you really don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Worldly, let's put it like that.  A lot of people would think that you're very worldly, you're a worldly person.  And I'm just like you are, you know, or your sister or your mother; you know I'm not gonna do anything, any different than you would.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, people tend to think that, you know, entertainers are on drugs and drinking every night and that's, that's not the case, you know.  I'm gonna go to my room and relax and watch a movie or go to dinner and, and just be like, you know, your sister or your wife.  I'm no different, you know, because I get up on stage and I'm moving and I'm doing this and whatever.  It doesn't make me a different person.
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done so far in both careers, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: No.  I really didn't.  I believe that my mistakes, and we all make mistakes on our jobs and in our careers, have made me a better person.  You know, I can speak with my children, I have four, and I can give them advice based on my mistakes and the positive things that have happened in my life.
Story_ID: 656618
Speaker 1: If you look back again on everything you've done, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Or best achievements?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, both my careers--both.  In the hotel industry, you know, I set my goals and I achieved them through hard work and, and I guess I could say the same with The Velvelettes.  We worked quite hard to get to where we are today because of Berry [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] giving us that one chance.  And, of course, being around other achievers like Marvin Gaye and The Temptations and these other entertainers that taught us.  You know, we, we did a lot of talking to Marvin Gaye and Stevie, and we were around them a lot like I'm talking to you today.  During lunch break, you know, it was just like any other corporation.  We'd have lunch together down in the lunch room, have a Coca Cola or whatever.  And Marvin would say, "Now, watch it when you go to New York [New York].  Be careful at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]."  You know, Stevie Wonder would say, "You know, when you go to New Jersey--," you know, we would just share and they taught us a lot.  The Temptations taught us a lot.  "Take your frustrations out in the dressing room and not out near the audience."  You know, "Don't let your fans do this--," I had Paul [Paul Williams] tell us that.  And they would give us little pointers as far as our choreography, you know.  So, I have not forgot any of that.  I'll carry their advice through the rest of my life.  You know, these were good friends.  You know, a lot of people have said, well, I never belonged to a sorority when I was going to college and--nor did Bertha [HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal], Mildred [HistoryMaker Mildred Gill Arbor] or any of us.  And I just tell my friends that belong to sororities, the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] or whatever that I associate with now or through the years, The Velvelettes are my sororities.  The Supremes were my sororities.  [HistoryMaker] Martha Reeves, The Vandellas [Martha and The Vandellas]--these were my sorority members.  These were my sisters.  These are the women that I grew up with, you know, the same sisterhood, if you will, so I don't know if that answers your question.
Speaker 1: It does.
Speaker 2: And I--and I'm very proud of--I don't know if we're near the end or not, but I would like to say that I'm extremely proud of, of these sisters of mine, Mildred working in the hospital [McLaren Flint, Flint, Michigan] as a registered surgical nurse for thirty years; and, of course, my dear [paternal] cousin, Bertha.  She didn't quite get her Ph.D., but I don't know how many credits she's missing from having her Ph.D.  I'm very, extremely proud of her.  And Carolyn [HistoryMaker Cal Street], my dear Carol, my star (laughter), I'm proud of her, too, good person.  Have a lot of respect for the three ladies that I--that I've been dealing with or working with for fifty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fifty years.
Story_ID: 656619
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community in Flint [Michigan] and nationwide?
Speaker 2: Nationwide?  Haven't really given that much thought.  I, I had so much going on with my mother [Earlene Tardy Barbee] and dad [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] being in hospice and being the caregiver for them, I just haven't had a lot of thought about the African American people.  I've been mostly just thinking about people in general.  I'm gonna be honest.  For so many years, I've walked around with blinders on, worrying about my people until one day on my job, I had the opportunity to talk to this Hispanic woman.  It was--again, remember, it was my job to bring business to Flint and Genesee County [Michigan], so I went out to talk to the Hispanic community to see what type of conferences they could perhaps bring to the city; and I asked the director of this organization to give me her mission statement.  And then she went on to tell me about their community and their needs and how they had been misused and abused and taken to jail and not being able to speak English, and I thought to myself, I've been walking around half my life with blinders just thinking that the black people were suffering.  So, to answer your question, I haven't really given it much thought.  And maybe I, I should feel bad by saying that, but there are so many other, other people, you know what I mean, in the world, other than just black people.  My son [Norman Fairhurst, Jr.] just did a story [for WJRT-TV, Flint, Michigan] on the Indians [Native American] up north and I, I had tears in my eyes after watching.  It was like a ten minute or whatever spot.
Speaker 1: In the northern peninsula of Michigan [Upper Peninsula]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Chippewas and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so called--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He did a story just two weeks--no, it was only a week ago, and I was teary eyed.  He said he got teary eyed while he was up there doing the story, filming it--that they had put all the children in a home, a place, and they were beaten.  And, you know, so to answer your question, yes, I think about the blacks, but I also think about the Hispanics and some of the whites that have been abused.  I--it's all of us are in this together.  So, I just can't single us out.  I won't do that anymore.  I'm guilty.  I'm really guilty, all those years.
Story_ID: 656620
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  You mentioned your son, your daughter.  How many children do you have, and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have four.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have four.
Speaker 1: And what are their names and what are they doing?
Speaker 2: My oldest daughter, her name is Jacqueline Earlene [Jacqueline Fairhurst], and she is in school and working, finishing up her bachelor's.  My second child is a male, Donald Fairhurst, and he should be back in school, but he's got his associate's degree.  And, who's next?  Norman [Norman Fairhurst, Jr.].  You met Norman.  He works for ABC [WJRT-TV, Flint, Michigan]--he's a photographer.  And the baby is Lisa Fairhurst [Lisa Fairhurst Reed] and she's the one that went ahead and had--got her master's in community development.  And I wanted her to go into law, but she said no.  She has a mind of her own.  So, I have four and that's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Divorced.  My ex-husband [Norman Fairhurst, Sr.] is deceased.  So, all they have is me.
Story_ID: 656621
Speaker 1: And your, your father [Arthur Barbee, Jr.] is still alive, right?
Speaker 2: My dad is in hospice--
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as we speak.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, I suppose your parents are proud of you as a Velvelette [The Velvelettes] and (unclear).
Speaker 2: No.  They never went to any of my performances.  Nope.  Nope.  My mom [Earlene Tardy Barbee] would always say, "Don't like it."  When I would leave to go to Europe, I'd say, "Hey, mom, I'm gonna be gone for a week or whatever."  "Oh, those old Velvelettes, I never liked that, never liked it."  This is just a year ago.  Never--she never, my dad never went to a performance; nor did Bertha's [Fairhurst's paternal cousin, HistoryMaker Bertha McNeal] parents [Emergine Harris Barbee and Rome Barbee].
Speaker 1: So they just associated it with--?
Speaker 2: I guess, you know.  And it bothered me at first.  Carolyn's [HistoryMaker Cal Street] and Mildred's [HistoryMaker Mildred Gill Arbor] family always came to our performances no matter what, within reason, within distance, you know, wherever the--you know, we were performing.  But our parents (shakes head)--I guess it wasn't important to them 'cause they wanted us to have other professions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were they pleased with your career with the--
Speaker 2: My mom would say, "You didn't get your degree, you didn't get your degree and I'm unhappy about it."  I said, "But, mom, I have a good job.  I worked hard and, and this is what I achieved."  "All you do is sit at your desk all day.  You don't work hard."  I said, "Mom, I have three hundred and some-odd employees and I have eight departments--that's, that's a lot of responsibility."  "You don't work hard."  So, I never really felt that I had really achieved what they wanted me to achieve.  But, I knew in my heart that I had worked hard.  In my heart--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I had done my best.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when you do your best, can't do anymore.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Story_ID: 656622
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Whew, you have a last question?
Speaker 1: I do.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I don't--I can't think of anything.
Speaker 1: You sure?
Speaker 2: I'm sure.
Speaker 1: All right.  All right.  The last question is, is similar to legacy.  In fact it's almost the same, but not quite.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How do I want to be remembered?  You know, I haven't even thought about it even though I've had a lot of death around my family this year.  I guess a good mother--that's important to me; and a good daughter.  That's what's important; and a good person, good person, honest.  Wouldn't really have anything to do with The Velvelettes, I don't believe--just a good person, honest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I don't want to get teary eyed.  I'm getting teary eyed--
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: --when you asked me that 'cause I never--you know, people don't think about that.  Do you?
Speaker 1: I think about it probably more than others 'cause I ask it like twice a day--
Speaker 2: So that's made you really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, on--
Speaker 2: --key in on that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've thought about it.
Story_ID: 656623
Speaker 1: Well, I'm glad to get this over with.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Let's go ahead and get started on the photos here.  Go ahead and describe this one.  Larry'll [Larry Crowe] guide you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just--no matter who it is--
Speaker 2: Say her name?
Speaker 1: --give their name, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, like it's a caption for a picture.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: So, you're doing it this way?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we do them all different ways.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It'll get switched around later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Should I start?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, please.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This picture is of my mother, Earlene Barbee [Earlene Tardy Barbee]; and I believe this picture was taken during World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That picture--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, we're going this way, I guess.
Speaker 2: --is [HistoryMaker] Norma Fairhurst.  Actually, my maiden name is Barbee, Norma Barbee; and I believe I must've been probably about six, seven years old.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably--that's Norma Barbee Fairhurst, a picture that was taken to send to my dad in Germany, and I was probably maybe a year?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1944, I guess.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of Norma Fairhurst in her high chair for--celebrating her first birthday.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That picture is my grandparents on my father's side--that's Arthur Barbee [Arthur Barbee, Sr.] and Cliffie Barbee.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That picture is my father's grandmother.  They called her Mammy [Pauline Barbee].
Speaker 1: That picture is my grandfather's picture, my mother's father.  His name is Luther Tardy, T-A-R-D-Y.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on, please.  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That picture is a picture of my father when he was in the [U.S.] Army during World War II. His name is Arthur Barbee, Jr.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Picture is my graduation picture in 1962 of Norma Fairhurst.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And you had graduated from what school?
Speaker 1: From Southwestern [Southwestern High School; Flint Southwestern Academy, Flint, Michigan].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That picture is my grandmother's picture, my mother, Earlene Barbee's mother--I'm--that died when my mother was six months old.  And I've gotta think of her first name, it's terrible.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That picture is my grandfather and my--on my dad's side and his sisters, four sisters.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: You want to name them?  You, you--okay.  All right. I'll shut up.
Speaker 2: I, I probably could guess, but--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: --I might be wrong.
Speaker 1: That is The Velvelettes.  That picture was taken over in Europe.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That' 1984, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear) 1984, when Nightmare Records made several recordings of us.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And name them from left to right?
Speaker 1: One of the songs was 'Running Out Of Luck.'
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And from left to right, I guess starting here.
Speaker 1: That's myself, Norma Fairhurst; [HistoryMaker] Bertha McNeal, my [paternal] first cousin; Mildred Arbor [HistoryMaker Mildred Gill Arbor] and Carolyn Street [HistoryMaker Cal Street], the two sisters.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: The original Velvelettes.
