Story_ID: 57680
Speaker 1: Could you give me your name and spell it please?
Speaker 2: My name is Mary Evelyn Flowers. M-A-R-Y E-V-E-L-Y-N F-L-O-W-E-R-S-.
Speaker 1: Your birth date?
Speaker 2: My birth date is 7/31/51 [July 31, 1951].
Speaker 1: Where were you born?
Speaker 2: Inverness, Mississippi, Sunflower County.
Speaker 1: Can you spell the name of the city?
Speaker 2: MARY FLOWERS: Inverness, Mississippi. I-N-V-E-R-N-E-S-S.
Speaker 1: Your parents' name and their place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother, Lula Mary, maiden name Harper, Flowers and she was born in Indianola, Mississippi.  My dad, Willie Wiggin Flowers, was born in Indianola, Mississippi.
Story_ID: 57681
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food? I really like greens, believe it or not.  You can dress 'em up and dress 'em down, so I love my greens.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time or season of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite season is the fall.  I like the changing of the colors, I like the temperature.  It's not too cold, it's not too hot.  There's a lot of things that you can do outside as well as inside.  And when you're in the fall, it's almost like you can reflect back on what happened the past summer and look forward to the upcoming new year, some changes that you might want to make, so I love the fall of the year.
Speaker 1: On the color wheel, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like bright colors.  Orange is a good color.  Pink.  Yellows.  The tangerine, the coral colors, I love those colors.
Speaker 1: And when you're vacationing, what is your dream destination?
Speaker 2: I don't think I've been there, don't know where it's at, but I know it's going to be warm weather, lots of water, a beautiful hotel, but I've had the opportunity to go to Ocho Rios in Jamaica.  That was a dream and I had a wonderful time.  The scenery was fantastic, the weather was perfect, the environment was great.
Story_ID: 57682
Speaker 1: Could you give me your siblings, sisters and brothers, in birth order, their names.
Speaker 2: My eldest brother, Willie Flowers, Willie's fifty.  Then it's myself.  I have a sister, Betty Jean Phillips.  After Betty is Shirley, Shirley Ann Hyner.  After Shirley is Edward James Flowers.  Then Louis Steven Flowers and my baby sister, Kimberly Sharon Flowers.
Speaker 1: What do you remember most about growing up in the Flowers household?
Speaker 2: Oh, in the Flowers household it was never dull.  Being the second eldest of seven children, we had lots of fun.  I remember as ... younger, when we were younger, we could sleep outside in the back yard. We would make a tent out of old cardboard boxes and we used to be able to sit on the front porch and jump rope and fight over who was not going to, who's turn was it to wash the dishes, sweep the floor, because my mother was very particular about having so many kids and she insisted on the house being clean at all times.  We had a great time.  Didn't know that we were poor.  It took us a long time to figure out that we were poor because the juice man delivered the juice and the milkman delivered the milk.  We all went to a private school and the nuns and the priest and my kindergarten teacher Marie at Hendricks Grammar School [Hendricks Elementary Community Academy, Chicago, Illinois] used to walk us home and tell a story, tell us stories on the porch.  So we had fun despite the fact, like I said, we were poor and there were so many of us.  But there was lots of love in our house at that particular time.
Story_ID: 57683
Speaker 1: What did Mr. Flowers do?
Speaker 2: My dad, my mom and dad separated early so I know he worked in the South and I think he worked at a car manufacturing place but like I said, it's been so long ago and he's now deceased.
Speaker 1: Did your mother work outside the home?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, my mother worked outside the home.  My mother used to work for A. J. Cox and Company which was a bookbinding company.  She worked for the [Chicago] Board of Education, she worked for the [Chicago] Board of Elections and when we were coming up she worked a lot of factory jobs, factories was very popular at that particular time, and that's how she was able to raise us and keep a roof over our heads and food on our table.
Speaker 1: How old were you when your family moved to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: When, I guess I was probably about three, when we came to Chicago, on the train from Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Try to look at life through your mother's eyes, you're a kid growing up.  What do you remember most seeing your mother involved in that impacted your vision of her?
Speaker 2: Now that I'm older and I look back at what my mother had to do to raise seven kids, I don't know how she did it.  I remember my mother, a many a days, having a bag of beans and she would ... we had friends, they had so many kids there was always company at the house and there was always enough food.  One thing I can tell you about my mother, if the TV ever broke, if the vacuum cleaner was ever broken, whatever was broken, my mother could fix it, and I was always amazed at how she could do it.  I'm sure, looking back, there were a lot of hard days for my mother, but she never did allow it to show.  She always made sure that we had a roof over our head and that it was never our responsibility to worry about where the next meal was going to come from.  So I love my mother and she was, she was, she is a very strong woman, considering the obstacles in which she had to deal with when she was coming up because I know if my mother did not have the obstacles that she had to contend with that she too would have taken a different path.  But I try to be the person that I know that she would have been and even better because parents always want to see their kids do better.
Story_ID: 57684
Speaker 1: School?  What was it like, your school years, elementary school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember the first grammar school I attended was Hendricks [Elementary Community Academy, Chicago, Illinois] on 43rd and Wells [St.] and my brother Willie would always have to hold my hand to cross the street because we literally just lived right across the street from the school.  I used to love the peanut butter cookies and chocolate milk and you could smell the peanut butter cookies from the time you hit the school doors and so you just looked forward to break time or lunch time because you knew you had the peanut butter cookies and the chocolate milk coming.  After we left Hendricks [Elementary Community Academy, Chicago, Illinois], we then attended St. Cecelia's [Chicago, Illinois] and that was my first introduction to the nuns.  Nuns were very strict and very disciplined and you weren't supposed to look them in the eyes when you talked at that particular time.  I just had a problem with that.  I used to tell my mother all the time, "I don't know if I can make it through this Catholic school."  I left St. Cecelia's, went to Our Lady of Solace [Chicago, Illinois], then graduated from St. Bernard's [Chicago, Illinois].  I used to hate grammar school but now that I look back I thank God for those mean nuns, those nosey priests that used to walk us home to make sure that we went straight home because the public school kids used to mess with the Catholic school kids.  Every time I would act out in school they would tell my mother.  We had to wear these long uniform skirts and every day I would roll up my skirt and I would tell my mother that the hem would cause my knees to hurt so I couldn't have the hem of the skirt touching my knees or either below my knees.  So oftentimes my mother was called up to the school quite a bit but those were the good old days.
Story_ID: 57685
Speaker 1: The community, the neighborhood you grew up in, tell us a little bit about that.  What was it like?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood in which I grew up in was a fantastic neighborhood.  There were two or three neighborhoods I would like to tell you about, one being on 70th [Street] and Lowe [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  I remember that's where the milkman used to deliver the milk and the juice man would deliver the juice, and it was there that my sisters and brothers and I had to walk quite a distance in order to get to St. Bernard's school.  There was never any thought in my mind that anybody would ever do anything to us.  And in the evenings we would sit on the porch.  One particular evening I'll never forget, Martin Luther King came walking, marching down my block on 70th [Street] and Lowe [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] and I went in the house and I ran, I said "Ma, here comes Martin Luther King, let's go and see where he's going."  And she said, "Mary Evelyn, you can't follow him."  I says, "Why not, they're marching someplace, let's go see where they're going."  She made me sit on the porch.  But I'll never forget that was my first bite of the movement, that was my first introduction that was, I could remember that day as if it was yesterday, seeing Martin Luther King and others marching on to Lowe Park to march about the Willis Wagons [Chicago portable classrooms by School Superintendent Benjamin Willis, 1962-1966] and how the kids that had to go to school in those little houses was being discriminated against.  That was on 70th and Lowe [Chicago, Illinois].  We lived in a house, so I was able to sit on my porch.  Then we moved to 436 W. Normal Parkway [Chicago, Illinois] and there I was so impressed with -
Story_ID: 57686
Speaker 1: Martin Luther King.  What other kinds of things did you see, excitement, what did you see around you?  Was everybody as excited as you were?
Speaker 2: Yes.  When Martin Luther King was marching down the street people were coming all out of their houses looking out the window, the children started running, telling their parents, "Here come Martin Luther King, here comes Martin Luther King."  The police was following him and he was, we didn't know exactly what was going on but it was a very exciting day and then that evening on the news we saw the people saying awful things to Martin Luther King and they was throwing bricks and bottles.  We cried because we didn't understand, we didn't know if Martin Luther King was okay later on because you never heard anything later that day to assure you that Martin Luther King was okay.  It was a very memorial and memorable day in my life.  Move from 7020 S. Lowe to 436 W. Normal Parkway [Chicago, Illinois] and there we lived on the third floor.  Down the street from us there was Vernon Jarrett and his family.  He lived on Normal Parkway and there were some other prominent people at that particular time that was on Normal Parkway.  You have to know Normal Parkway.  Normal Parkway was a very small street.  It was only two blocks long and across the street from my apartment building was the Chicago Teachers College and to be able to look on that campus and to see that beautiful building and to see all the people and different nationalities of people sitting on the grounds reading their books and just walking back and forth, there was a tennis court over there and the adults over there were playing tennis.  It was a beautiful campus and I was always at awe and as a child they had these big old doors and I would try to pull back on these big old wooden doors to try to open the doors and every time I would pull back and try to run in, the doors would close.  And so one day I was pulling back on these doors and somebody came by and pulled the door open and said, "Here, come on in."  That was my first invitation into a college and there I found out that they had a swimming pool and it was there that I tried to first learn how to swim, inside of the old teachers college.  And one day while I was at home looking out my window, because we just had a beautiful sight of the campus, you could see on top of the trees and in the trees and again in the fall of the year you could see straight through the park.  And I remember I saw a crowd of people from afar and I kind of stooped down at the window to try to see what was this crowd that was coming through the park from Normal going toward Stewart, going toward downtown, city of Chicago.  And I looked and I said to my mother again, "Mama, guess what?"  She says, "What, Mary Evelyn?"  I said, "Jesse Jackson is across the street."  She said, "Oh, please."  I said, "I'm serious, Mom, look, there's Jesse Jackson."  Jesse Jackson was marching through the old [Chicago] Teachers College campus to picket the Sears Tower that was not built at that particular time.  He wanted to make sure that African Americans had equal access to work on the Sears Tower and people started, once again the crowd swelled because people were coming out of their houses and once again I tried to march with Jesse Jackson and my mother said, "Mary Evelyn, would you come back here please?"  I said, "Okay." So I found out on the news where he was headed and why he was headed there, so that's how I know that he was marching on the Sears Tower.  That neighborhood, once again we were, I can't say, I guess there I had my introductory to racism because back in the sixties [1960s], that's when the police officers was really harassing a lot of people and my brothers and his friends would stand in front of the house because there was really not too many places to go at that particular time but we did have teen club at St. Bernard's [School, Chicago, Illinois].  At St. Bernard's we were able to roller skate, we had teen club where we learned to sew and just, other teens came and we had kind of a rap session, now that I look back on those days.  We just did fun things.  That's the reason why it was called a teen club.  We would have dances and parties.  We just had a wonderful time.  But again, I saw a lot of police brutality at that particular time so the streets was a safe street but yet it was, you saw the times changing.
Speaker 1: [Chicago] Teachers College, that's Chicago State [University].
Speaker 2: It wasn't Chicago State [University] then, it was the Chicago Teachers College.
Story_ID: 57687
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: Oh, probably not a very good student.  My mother tried to do the best that she could to instill the importance of being a good student but as a child it was difficult for me to see a brighter future.  I didn't know what tomorrow was like, or if there would even be a tomorrow.  Once again, the block which I lived on, Normal Parkway, it was only two blocks long, and then if you looked to the east, it was a railroad track.  It was a wall there.  You couldn't see beyond the wall.  If you looked to the west it was Normal Street and there they had apartment buildings so you couldn't look to the east.  If you looked to the south, you were facing Chicago ... I mean the old [Chicago] Teachers College and then behind you north was apartment buildings.  So you really couldn't see, not unless you'd go to the corner, to know that there was a place around the corner, but I always knew that there was a place in this world for me.  I didn't know how I was going to go there, or by what means I was going to get there, so was it about being a good student?  I guess at that particular time in my life teachers really didn't, they didn't say very nice things to me where it would have given me the push to move on.  Because I came from a family where there were seven kids, I was always put down.  I was pigeon-toed, I was bowlegged and I wore hot pants and miniskirts and I did my own thing and people would say all kinds of things to my mother about me and I would be hurt by that.  And I'll never forget, I always said back then that I would always be careful about what I would say in front of a child because that child grows up and that pain stays there and it's so easy to say nice things as it is to say negative things.  But it was that child within me that made me want to fight, or make a liar, out of those people who said all those negative things about me.  So I wasn't a good student, I did what I had to do because I knew the importance of graduating.  I knew that I did not want to make what everybody said true.  I was not going to have a house full of babies at sixteen because that's what someone said, nor was I going to drop out of school because that's what they said about me.  I was determined to make them out of a liar.
Story_ID: 57688
Speaker 1: During your school years, which high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: [Neal F.] Simeon Vocational High School [Now, Neal F. Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Where is it located?
Speaker 2: On 83rd and Vincennes.  It's still there today.
Speaker 1: What dreams and aspirations did you have for you personally when you were young, in middle school, high school, and what brought that up at that point?
Speaker 2: I remember growing up in the sixties [1960s] there was this poster of this black woman with this natural [hairstyle], she was a beautiful black woman.  I wanted to be her.  I wanted ... there was a certain amount of pride and respect that she had.  Her body was a beautiful body and it was exposed but it was nothing derogatory, it was nothing to put down, it was nothing to be ashamed of.  And so I saw, she was the woman in the picture that I had to hold on to, to know that there was nothing about me that I had to be ashamed of because of the way I walked.  My mother sent me to charm school because she knew I had ill feelings about people teasing me about the way that I walked and so she says, "Mary Evelyn, I'll send you to ballet school and I'll send you to charm school" ... and I'd heel-toe, heel-toe, step it over, I can remember that like it was yesterday.  I don't think it ever helped but still I went there.  She was ... again it was the lady in the poster.  I didn't know what I wanted to aspire to be, but whatever it was, it was going to be respected like that poster, symbolized to me that that female that's holding, she was holding a sword and she was standing there like she was protecting the gates of something and nobody was going to defy her.
Story_ID: 57689
Speaker 1: Who were your influences, teachers, ministers, outside of your mama?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy.  My teachers.  I had quite a few teachers to be an influence on me in several different ways. All of them made me a better person.  Marie was a teacher.  Her last name escapes me now.  She was my kindergarten teacher.  And Marie Henderson, I believe, was her last name then.  She was a German teacher.  She would take the time and walk me and my brother across the street, home, and she would sit on the porch and read us stories and she would bring home some extra cookies and milk.  Marie stayed with us, or stayed in our lives, until 1963, I believe.  She was the one that really introduced me to what a nice teacher was supposed to be like and so whenever I ran upon another teacher I would always measure Marie, or have them to try to measure up to Marie.  I had a music teacher that brought out the best of me, so to say, as far as she thought I'd never be musically inclined, still don't think so today, but she was just a very nice lady and once again, her name escapes me.  My grandmother, Martha Flowers, who is now deceased, when I think about some of the changes that she had to go through, I knew that I had to be a better person and I knew that I was a strong person because she, too, had to be strong.  When I think about my grandmother on my mother's side, Rose Reid, she told me about the time when she had to walk to school without shoes and cross over the railroad track and still work on different plantations and how her mother wasn't there to help her raise her kids and how so much was expected of them, but yet so little was given.  When I think about those types of people, I knew that whatever obstacles was out there for me, I could overcome them because they, too, overcame theirs and sometimes it took me a while to understand some of their bitterness, some of their frustration.  There was a point in my life where I really wanted to be away from both of them because they were always so negative, but now that I'm older and wiser, I understand their anger and frustration, how they were deprived of doing a lot of things, that how so many people were given so much credit for what they did and they could have done it better, but they, my grandmothers and my grandfathers, just were not given the opportunity.  They were very good role models in my life.
Story_ID: 57690
Speaker 1: I didn't realize it but I guess I was married to my mother (laughs).  You know when you look back, because you wasn't going to have a boyfriend or nothing because you couldn't do ... because I had to be there.
Speaker 2: Tell us a little bit about what you did for fun and a little bit about your relationship with your siblings coming up and even now.
Speaker 1: What did I do for fun?  I danced.  I partied all night long.  Let me tell you something.  I did not think that anybody should go home.  There was a group of us and we would just hang out and some of the places would close at five o'clock in the morning and everybody would say, "Oh well, it's time to go", and I'd say, "Wait a minute.  Why?  The sun isn't out yet.  Can't we think of something else to do?  Let's play some cards, play Monopoly."  I just ...life, in my opinion, I had a great time.  My childhood, I used to love to dance.  I would want to dance all night.  Music, there was just something about music that whatever the problems of the day was, if you broke up with your boyfriend or if you had a problem with the neighbors down the street or somebody said something nasty to you that day, you said forget it, I can go and dance it away.  And I used to roller skate.  I used to love to roller skate.  I could go around and around and around in circles and whatever it was that was bothering me, I left it right out there in the middle of the floor.  I just had a great time.  I used to travel a lot.  My aunt had a place in Wisconsin and my family and I, we would just get together and go to Lake Geneva and we would go fishing and kind of get lost in the woods up in Wisconsin and go to the Wisconsin Dells.  We went to Minnesota, almost drowned in Lake Mendoza.  I never did learn how to swim but I did try to swim and wanted to waterski and needless to say, not having a lifejacket, that was a, that was not very smart of me and never would I ever encourage anyone and but for the grace of God I'm still here.  As far as relationships with my brothers and sisters when we were coming up, I was the bossy one.  I was my mother's oldest daughter and to me, I was responsible for taking care of my sisters and brothers.  My mother didn't have to tell me to do it.  You just know it was your responsibility.
Story_ID: 57691
Speaker 1: I remember Betty [Jean Phillips, sister] and I going to Simeon Vocational School and Betty was smaller than me.  Betty was always sick back in those days and we would have to stand on the corner of the bus stop on 69th and Wentworth [Chicago, Illinois] and I would wrap Betty in my coat and I would say to her, "Don't worry, the bus is coming," because as long as the bus is coming from that direction going north, there will be another one to take us south.  And so it was like a little game that I would play to reassure her in the cold that a bus was coming real soon.  Betty was always a little bit more outgoing than me.  She had lots more friends.  Betty was able to participate in a lot of the school activities, I always worked.  I started working at Hilliard Adult Educational Center on 65th and Stewart [Chicago, Illinois].  I worked at Cherry the Tailor's at 6318 S. Cottage [Grove, Chicago, Illinois].  I used to walk from [Neal F.] Simeon Vocational High School [now Neal F. Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] to 6318 S. Cottage.  Because I wanted a class ring for Betty and myself, I wanted a yearbook, and I wanted us to have nice things, so the only way I could get that is that I worked.  And I didn't think Betty should have to work, she was my little sister.  Willie [Flowers], my oldest brother, Willie is a very good-hearted person.  He is probably his own worst enemy.  Despite all the harmful things that he did to himself, Willie went back to school and got his GED.  Once he got his GED he went back and got his AA [Associate's] degree from Kennedy-King [College, Chicago, Illinois].  He was on the honor roll at Kennedy-King [College], on the president's list.  He still have his ups and downs but Willie was a good-hearted person.  When Willie worked for the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] he, too, would bring his money home to help with the family.  So we all knew the importance of family.  Now that we are older, there was two sets of us, the younger kids, Ed [Flowers] and Steve [Louis Steven Flowers], there was never a dull moment with them in the house.  Shirley [Flowers] and Kim [Flowers], those are the two younger girls, Shirley is a security person at Ameritech [Corporation] and Kimberly now is living in Springfield [Illinois] and she has two beautiful kids.  We are not as close as we used to be.  Betty and I have had our differences, but that's life.  It happened with Cain and Abel, it happened with Esau and Jacob and it happened with Mary and Betty.  So that's just life.  And you just take the bitter with the sweet and you hold on to the good times and you just move on and someplace down the line if we can all come back together and be as one, but the reality says we're all grown and we have our different paths in which life has taken us and you may have your opinion about whatever and I may have mine, but whatever it is, we have to move on.
Story_ID: 57692
Speaker 1: Being the oldest girl and having your mother's back, so to speak, do you remember any occasions where you recognized your mother was in a difficult place and you almost knew that she understood that you were really helping a lot, but she never said anything, but you could see or feel ....
Speaker 2: Yes, I saw a lot of that.  It was almost as if she did not want to acknowledge the fact that she needed the help because she's the woman of the house, she's the mother.  I remember one time I left out going to school at [Neal F.] Simeon [Vocational High School, now Neal F. Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and I left school that day and walked to work, Cherry the Tailor, 6318 S. Cottage [Grove, Chicago, Illinois] and there was this gentleman there.  He was asking me out and all kinds of things.  So I called my mother and I told her about what was going on, and my mother said to me, "Mary Evelyn, do you have any kids?"  And I says, "No."  And she says, "So it's not your responsibility to do anything, I'm the mother of the house, I'm responsible, I will take care of my children."  In other words, my mother was telling me, you don't have to go out here and do anything to worry about putting bread on this table or maintain the roof over our heads, you just continue to go to school and do the right thing and this, too, shall pass.  I thank God for my mother a many a days because I know so many others would have done something a lot different and my path probably would have been a lot different had she not been the type of woman that she is.
Story_ID: 57693
Speaker 1: In the college years, did the type of student that you were, did it change when you got into college?
Speaker 2: Not really, because, again, I never thought I was, I hate to use the word, good enough for college, but I never thought I was college material.  I attended Kennedy-King [College, Chicago, Illinois] and Kennedy-King back then it was a different school than what it is now.  It was almost as if it were not a school by today's standards, and then I never felt up to par.  I never felt that I had the right clothes, had enough money to go to school.  And when I tried to, I attended the U of I [University of Illinois], it was the same principle.  I worked there.  I could do that.  But to actually go to school, once again, I felt like I was ... I didn't feel like a student.
Speaker 1: What made you feel like an outsider?
Speaker 2: I guess because you come from a big family and you just knew that you didn't have what you saw other people with to go to school and I knew I had a responsibility.  I didn't see going to school as helping to provide for my mother.  Now when it came down to my sister Shirley [Flowers], that's different.  I insisted that she go to school.  "How dare you not go to school."  I'll do this, I'll do that, I'll make sure.  The things that I knew that I was missing I was going to make sure that she was not deprived of.  You shouldn't have to have these problems that I was having to go to school, so just go on to school.  Needless to say, she did a couple years at Northern [Illinois University] but, you know.
Story_ID: 57694
Speaker 1: Your family life, marriage, children, how did that all come about?
Speaker 2: Whew.  How did that all come about.  Through the grace of God.  I met my husband Dan [Coutee] at the skating rink.  Dan and I dated for years.  One day I found out that I was pregnant and I said, oops, and so we got married and Makeda was born June 26, 1991.  And you talking about the best day of my life, to hold my baby, my baby, this was mine, nobody could take her away, this was my baby, Makeda Iman Coutee.  She was born in Springfield [Illinois].  I did twenty-two hours of labor, had a C[caesarian]-section and because we were still in session I went back to work four days later.  I never once complained.  If I had to do it all over again, I would do it again.  I remember after I had Makeda I was laying in my bed and I woke up and there was this guy sitting at the foot of my bed.  He says, "Representative?"  I said, "Yes."  He says, "Are you okay?"  I said, "Yes, I'm fine."  I said, "Why are you here?"  He says, "To check on you."  I said, "Excuse me, didn't I have a baby?"  And he said, "Yeah."  I said, "Is my baby okay?"  He said, "Yes."  I said, "Why are you here?"  He said, "The Speaker just wanted to keep you abreast of the issues and to make sure that you were okay."  I said, "Oh, okay, I can handle this."  So anyway, my husband and my baby and I, we went back to the Hilton Hotel in Springfield [Illinois] and I stayed there for a couple days and went to the House [of Representatives, Illinois General Assembly] floor with my baby in my arms.  My colleagues, when Makeda and I and my husband Daniel [Coutee] walked on the House floor, everybody stood up and gave us a standing ovation and all I could do was cry, because you work with these people but you never realize how much of a family we are to each other until something happens.  Each of them went through my pregnancy with me.  I couldn't tie my shoes, I couldn't button my dress, couldn't carry all my papers.  They were all there to help me through all of this.  The Speaker [Michael Madigan] of the House, he sent an airplane.  He asked me how did I want my family to come to Springfield [Illinois].  I said, what do you mean, Mr. Speaker?
Speaker 1: Who was the Speaker?
Speaker 2: Speaker Madigan, Speaker Michael Madigan.  Speaker Madigan said, "If your husband is coming along, I'll just send a helicopter to bring him back to Springfield [Illinois] and if your mother and your other siblings would like to come, we will send a private plane.  I said, "Oh, well, you call them, Mr. Speaker, and you find out, because I have no idea."  I was in labor while all this was going on.  And so sure enough, he sent a private plane and he flew my family to Springfield.  [Representative] Gary LaPaille's wife, her name escapes me now, I'll say Mrs. [Christine] LaPaille, she was there to hold my hand until my husband came to help me, until my husband got there to help me through the labor.  So I was just blessed throughout my entire pregnancy and upon the delivery of my child.  She has just been a blessing ever since.
Story_ID: 57695
Speaker 1: Let's backtrack to the point at which you began your career in politics and trace that for me to your actual election into the House [of Representatives, Illinois General Assembly].
Speaker 2: I used to ... how I got involved in politics, I used to read about this man called [Mayor] Harold Washington and Harold Washington was always fighting with Mayor [Richard] J. Daley.  I was reading the newspaper and I said to myself, I need to meet this man [Mayor] Harold Washington because I was not old enough to be a part of the [Civil Rights] Movement with Martin Luther King and with Jesse Jackson, so a lot of stuff was going on that my mother wouldn't allow me to participate because I was too young.  But here's this man [Mayor] Harold [Washington].  He was always arguing; there was something in the newspaper.  So I asked my mother, "Would you please take me to meet this man."  So she took me to his office and we introduced each other and we talked and I told my mother, "You can leave me now."  Then she looked at him and he said, "It's okay, you can leave her, we'll get somebody to bring her home."  And [Mayor] Harold [Washington] and I, we just began to talk and I began to volunteer in his office.  I used to tell him, "If I was a state representative, I would have said this, I would have done that."  I would just tell him all the things that he was doing wrong.  And he would look at me and smile and shake his head as if to say, "hmph, she just doesn't know."  Mayor Harold Washington went on to become the [Illinois state] senator [1965-1976] and then he ran for Congress and then he came back from Congress and he became the Mayor of the city of Chicago [1983-1987].  I was working at the U of I, University of Illinois, Chicago Circle Campus, and I stayed late one evening and when I got home my mother told me that [Mayor] Harold Washington had called.  I said, "Yeah, right, Mama."  She said, "Mary Evelyn, I'm serious."  When she wants me to know the seriousness of her tone, it's Mary Evelyn.  "Mary Evelyn, I'm serious.  He did call and he wants you to call him back."  I looked at her and I said, "Are you serious?"  She said, "Yes, he doesn't care what time you got in, just call him back, here's the number."  I called this number and sure enough, the Mayor wanted to see me the next day in his office.  I said, okay.  I go to his office and when I walked in, and [Mayor] Harold [Washington] was sitting behind this desk, there was a light coming through the window and his hair was gray, a mingly gray and the way the light was shining over his head it was as if he had a halo.  And I looked and I had never saw that Harold [Washington] before.  He told me to have a seat and I sat down.  We laughed and he asked me how was my mother and how was everybody and I told him and he said, "Remember when you used to talk about me when I was a state representative?  I said, "Yeah, I remember some of the things I would say."  He said, "Remember when you said if you were a state representative you would do this and if you were a state representative you would do that", and I said, "Well, yes, Mr. Mayor, but I never knew you were going to be mayor of the city of Chicago.  I probably would have talked to you a little bit nicer back then," and he started laughing.  And he said, "The reason for this visit is that I want you to become the next state representative of the [31st] district."  I said, "I can't do that, you know I don't have a college degree, I can't go to school, I can't become the state representative, I don't have the education, you know that."  He said, "That's not one of the prerequisites to being a state representative.  What's important is that you care about the people and you care about the issues."
Story_ID: 57696
Speaker 1: And so he had told you that all you had to do was care about the issues.
Speaker 2: Care about the issues and care about the people.  He said, "You can do that, I know you can."  And so he says, "I've got to get back to work, get out of my office, and you better win."  That's how he left me, or I left him that day in 1983.  The rest of it is history, well, so to say.
Speaker 1: How did you organized to get launched personally?  I know they must have helped you.
Speaker 2: [Mayor] Harold [Washington] sent Clarence McClain and some of his other workers, Bill Parker and lots of other people to help me.  I remember my first speech.  I looked out in the audience and it was people everywhere and it was so dark but in the whole crowd, as dark as it was, I could see my mother.  And in my mind I hollered, "Ma, help me," and she looked at me and she gave me a thumbs-up sign.  And so I stood there and I don't know what I said to these people, but they applauded, and from that day I was able to call on God and call on my mother to help me whenever I had to, as I say, "do battle".  The campaign, I was running against, oh, God, I was running against - Pouncey Taylor [Taylor Pouncey] and Jim Taylor who were nemeses of [Mayor] Harold Washington.  Now you have to understand the reputation that these people had and here I am, this little girl, this little novice, I mean, I didn't have a clue as to what was going on behind the scenes and all the games that was being played from people that was supposed to be helping me who were really trying to hurt me, and they were not the ones I was running against.  I knew what to expect from the ones I was running against.  It was a hard fought battle from within as well as on the outside because I didn't know what to expect, nobody prepared me for this, there was no school to go to, to prepare you for this game of life.  Those other games of life, the dance, the jumping of the rope, the roller skating, I could handle that, but I was stepping into the big leagues now and people were trying to do some awful things.  They were saying some awful things and I just wasn't prepared, but then,  I just remembered how I dealt with things as a kid, when you heard something that you just didn't like, say to yourself, "Sticks and stones may break my bones but words will never hurt me."  And so that was something I just kind of kept to myself whenever I would run into those problems.  I remember election night, I was sitting in a room with Clarence McClain and Tracey Wiley and Larry Daniels and, oh, it was tons of people there, and I didn't even know that the election returns were coming in.  I didn't know why I was sitting in this room.  There was this young lady, Tracey Wiley.  Tracy was sitting there taking these numbers and at the time Clarence McClain was running for committeeman and he was losing and I was winning but the room, despite the fact there were over one hundred people in this room, the room was quiet.  Then all of a sudden I heard Tracey with this big old laugh, she said "Ha ha."  I said, "Tracey, what's so funny, what are you doing?"  She says, "You're winning, that's why I'm laughing, you're winning."  I said, "How do you know", and she was sitting right next to me taking these numbers down, and she said, "I've got the numbers right here, I'm looking at the numbers as they come in.  You are winning."  I think I probably beat my first opponent, it was ten to one, something like that.  I never did get the opportunity to thank my constituents for voting for me because that night there was no celebration.  There was no balloons, there was no parties.  If anything, I almost felt like I had to apologize for winning because Clarence McClain lost, but, you know, I won, and me and my mother and then my boyfriend, he was then my boyfriend, Daniel [Coutee], and my family, we all went home and we prayed and we thanked God and we celebrated that way.  That was my first victory.
Story_ID: 57697
Speaker 1: And when you got on the hot seat in Springfield [Illinois], "Miss Do-This-Do-That", how did you finagle that?
Speaker 2: Well, now, see, going to Springfield [Illinois] was a different story.  First of all, I'm in the midst of people, people I'd read about, people I'd heard about, and then [Representative] Carol Braun, Carol [Moseley] Braun actually called me and congratulated me and I says, "Oh, thank you", I was just so humbled that she would call me.  So when I first went to Springfield [Illinois] it was all, I mean, these great big old seats and this big old room and these huge chandeliers hanging from the ceiling, all of these white men and white women and, you know, all the stature and, you know, it was just, it was a brand new world, a brand new world.  "Now what am I doing here?" I asked.  And so I sat and I looked around and I observed and I heard the debate and I heard the arguments and I said to myself, "Hm, I could have said that, I could have did that."  You have to understand, I don't have a college degree so I am feeling inferior, you know.  Why am I here?  Every night I would call my mother crying, "Mama, please." Every night, "Why am I here?"  That went on for a couple years, just watching the players, getting to know how this game of Illinois House of Representatives really worked.  Now mind you, I'm the new kid on the block.  Nobody's going to really open doors to me, or arms to me, and say, "Well, I'm going to help you."  First of all, they don't know if they can trust me or I can trust them, and those you thought you could trust you couldn't, those you didn't think you could trust, you could, and it was like you was being bounced off a wall from one side to another, up and down, and on this roller coaster of life, and seeing some things that you never would have guessed and had you tried to go back home to tell somebody about what you actually saw and what you actually heard.  No one would believe you.  So you just kind of kept to yourself and you watched and you observed.  I guess after a while I found out where the bathroom was and how to introduce a bill and go down to LRB [Legislative Reference Bureau].  You introduce a bill and here's a little simple bill about children and people used to laugh at me. As a matter of fact, Senator [William] Shaw said ...
Story_ID: 57698
Speaker 1: You were talking about your first big bill. Introducing your first bill.
Speaker 2: Oh, my first bill. Oh, what was my first bill. Just the process. The bills that I introduced I almost kind of apologized, well, not really, I did not apologize but I was so ... they were children's issues.  Wasn't about the bricks and the mortars and the big contracts.  I wanted daycare in the schools because I remember when I graduated from [Neal F.] Simeon Vocational High School [now Neal F. Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] a lot of my classmates were pregnant and they had to drop out of school and as a result of them dropping out of school, needless to say, they did not finish, and it was always hard for them to come back.  And in my mind I just envisioned that if we had a daycare in the schools, the young girls could come back to the schools and finish school and have a place to bring their babies.  Plus, the people in the community could have a place to bring their kids as another way of subsiding the daycare center in the schools.  I just thought it was a perfect idea.  The next thing I know, all these lobbyists were knocking at my door saying that I was trying to encourage young people to have babies and making having babies glorified.  I said, "But how?"  I said, "It's one thing to pretend like you're holding a baby and taking care of a baby, but it's another thing to actually do it."  [Neal F.] Simeon Vocational High School [Career Academy] was a vocational school.  We were taught cosmetology there, typing, bookkeeping, and why could we not have training for daycare, because there was a shortage of daycare providers.  I do know that if someone had to actually take care of someone's child and know to bathe them, to feed them, to hold them, to nurture them, to clean them, to walk with them, chances are when they go home they're not going to want to engage in activities that will cause them to have to do that for real themselves.  After some maneuvering and whatever, we worked that out and I'm proud to say that the first in-school daycare legislation was my legislation.  In regard to DCFS, the Department of Children and Family Services, I was just at awe one day to realize how many children were coming into the system and were wards of the state [of Illinois].  Now mind you, when I was growing up, if "Sally Sue" wasn't at home with her babies, it was just somebody's responsibility on the block.  We, somebody was going to take care of those kids.  It was no such thing as calling somebody or sending some child away.  It was a community effort to raise children.  It was a village.  It took all of us.  But there appeared to have been a new-found method, in my opinion, of creating dollars to bring to the state and that was to get children, because drugs, drugs was becoming rampant in our community and a lot of families were falling apart and so we started reading about horrible things, women burning babies and throwing babies out the windows and father sexually abusing children and selling their babies for dope.  It was just a horrible situation.  But if that wasn't bad enough, once they get into becoming wards of the state, they were once again in some cases sexually abused and misused and some kids were being sent to five and six and twenty different homes and each home they went to, it was worse than the other, they was further being, they were sexually abused at home with their biological parents and now there's these foster families. They were being sexually abused and there were other siblings there, other children there, that is not of the same family and each is sexually abusing each other and it was just a horrible, horrible situation and it was making me sick.  I looked at the system and I said to myself, "Something is wrong here."  There was no continuity.  There was no way that families were really getting back together, there was no closure in what happened to the child.  We were raising children to become greater predators.  We were having them to leave DCFS [Department of Children and Family Services] and to become wards of the state again for the Department of Correction and it was a vicious cycle that, to me, that needed to be broken.
Story_ID: 57699
Speaker 1: Plus, it has always been my opinion that the children should have a rite, R-I-T-E, of passage as far as what happens in their lives.  Children were being placed all across the state.  They was taken out of their community, taken away from their families, and being placed in communities that they never would have known about.  And it's not that I thought that Caucasian people couldn't raise black folks or black children, but to me, a family, if my daughter, something were to happen to me and my husband, the first person that the state should look at, in my opinion, would be my mother.  Then my sister and then my brother.  Somebody in the community.  And then if no one in the community or none of my relatives want my child, then my child should be put up for adoption for the broader community.  But their family means something.  The genetics means something.  If my family has a history of heart problems and if my daughter is adopted by somebody else and she later has a heart problem but no one know the history, that could be a life or death situation to her.  So anyway, it was then [Illinois Representative] Al Salvi.  It was the bombing of the building in Oklahoma [1995], I'll never forget, and I said to Al Salvi, I said, "In the absence of a will, if you and I had been in that building, what would have happened to your children and what would have happened to my child?"  He said, "Mary, in the absence of a will, your child would have gone to DCFS [Department of Children and Family Services]; because I have a will, my children would go to my brother."  Well, needless to say, I think something happened to me that day.  I said, "How dare you, because I don't have the wherewithal or the tenacity or the know-how to know that I was going to go into this building and something was going to happen to me, you mean to tell me the state law says my mother is not even good enough for you to look at, but because you were smart enough to have a will, yours would automatically go to your family?  What's with these two sets of rules here?  Why could this not be applicable to everybody?  Why is it that children is being taken away because of the ills of the parents, why is it that the children are made to suffer?"  So there was a big debate about that.  I just didn't know that fighting over that issue could be so heart-wrenching and when you think about ... it was to the state's advantage to maintain children in the system longer to capture the federal dollars, it was enough to make me sick, because then you knew there was no move afloat to reunite these families together or to find loving homes for these children because it was not in the best interests of the state because it was their best interest to keep the children in the system longer to capture the federal dollars.  That was my debate with [Department of] Children and Family Services.
Story_ID: 57700
Speaker 1: The most important bill to date that I've had to deal with has been House Bill 626.  House Bill 626 is the "managed care" bill.  When I first got, let me just back, we, the Democrats, lost the House of Representatives in the '94 [1994] election and we got the [Illinois] House [of Representatives, Illinois General Assembly] back in 1996.  When Speaker [Michael] Madigan took the podium and gave his address to the state legislators, he talked then of creating this new committee on health care.  I heard it and I says, "Oh."  I got a call that weekend at home and the Speaker, Speaker [Michael] Madigan said, "Mary, you know I want to create this committee on health care."  I said "Yes, I heard you when you made that announcement."  He said, "I want you to chair that committee."  I said, "Oh, Mr. Speaker, you obviously don't know my background.  I have no history of medical terminology, I can't be no chairman of a healthcare committee, I don't know anything about managed care, what are you talking about?  You know I can't do that.  And furthermore, I had DCFS [Illinois Department of Children and Family Services].  I would rather deal with DCFS, thank you, that's where I'm really comfortable there."  And he says, "No, Mary, I really need for you to chair that committee and I've got some more calls to make so I've got to go."  I said, "Oh, no, I've been to this party before."  And so immediately I got off the phone with the Speaker and I said, "God give me the strength and that thy will be done" because I didn't know what it is that I had to do, where I had to go, but when I sat down and I thought about what it is that I had to do, it is an awesome responsibility.  The peoples' healthcare and the lives of this state were going to be dependent upon how I feel, what I do, the energy that I want to put into this, the sacrifices that me and my family and other people are going to have to make in order for me to be successful at this because I never had any doubt that I was going to be successful, nor did I have any doubt that it was going to be a hard battle.  As a matter of fact, I was kind of offended because I figured the Speaker was giving me something easy because he didn't think I could handle anything hard.  I says, "Okay, I will show him.  I will just take care of this bill and get it out of the way so I can get back to my Children and Family Services."  Well, when the bill was introduced, the bill number that was assigned to this healthcare bill was 626, and I looked at the bill number and I says, "Lord, what is this about?  626 is my daughter's birthday", my daughter Makeda Iman Coutee was born June 26.  "six-two-six".  I said, "Now here I go with another baby I'm going to have to carry.  That's how I looked at it.  I says, "Well, I had a successful pregnancy and I'm going to do it again."  Once again, to me it was going to be an easy bill.  Who's going to fight me against healthcare?  Okay, so to make a long story short, the people that you thought would have been for this legislation was fighting me tooth and nails.  The games that was played behind this legislation, and I had to stop and ask myself, "What is going on here, what am I missing about this legislation?"  HMOs are making business decisions about your life.  Before you could go to a hospital you had to phone first like you were ordering a pizza.  A person with no medical background was making a decision whether or not you saw a doctor, whether or not you live or die.  Women were having babies and being rushed out of the hospital only to have to come back through the back door of the emergency room.
Speaker 2: Who were some of your enemies on the bill?
Speaker 1: Oh, my enemies on the bill were HMO's [Health Maintenance Organization] and the business industry and some legislators who had interests in the HMO's.
Speaker 2: Do you want to name them?
Speaker 1: No, it's not necessary because I beat 'em all.
Story_ID: 57701
Speaker 1: Tell me about the victory.
Speaker 2: The victory.  The victory.  This was a four-hour debate and had anybody ever told me that I would have debated a bill on the [Illinois] House [of Representatives] floor for four hours, and I think every Republican, almost, on that side of the aisle, stood up, and the only thing they didn't throw at me was the kitchen sink.  I just refused to give in.  But when the vote was tallied, we won.  We won seventy-three to, I forget what the other vote was, but we prevailed on that issue.  And so I figured once we got it out the [Illinois] House [of Representatives], it was going to be easy over in the [Illinois state] Senate because they're not going to do the same thing.  These are senators.  They know better.  Well, needless to say, that bill didn't go anyplace in the Senate.  I begged, I pleaded, I cried.  [Senator James] Pate Philip [Illinois state senator, 1975-2003] had me to get up at six o'clock in the morning to meet him at his office at seven.  He said, "Why do you think I should give you, the doctors the right to make decisions on peoples' lives?"  I said, "Because it is a law that you have to have a medical license in order to practice medicine in this state.  These are business people."  I tried to give him all the arguments that I gave on the [Illinois] House [of Representatives] floor in regard to the managed care bill and the reason why that I thought this bill should prevail.  So the next couple years came along and it was then [Illinois] Senate Bill 1904.  There I added on the right to sue because after further researching there was no other industry that could not be sued other than the managed care industry.  A lady had just sued McDonald's for a hot cup of coffee [Liebeck v. McDonald's Restaurants, 1994].  Somebody had stepped on a crack and broke their back and sued the city.  So any other industry could be sued except for an HMO [Health Management Organization].  They had ERISA [Employee Retirement Income Security Act, 1974], that's federal legislation to protect them, and that's not the way this initially should have been.  Without going into the details of it, it was some legislation that the insurance industry, the HMO's [Health Management Organization], were able to craft to protect themselves from being sued, so therefore they didn't have anybody to be afraid of.  If you wanted to sue, and let me just clarify this because the HMO's always say, "Well, Representative Flowers is wrong, you can't sue us, yes, they can be sued, if you died as a result of them misdiagnosing you because they didn't give you a test, MRI [Magnetic Resonance Imaging] that may cost three thousand dollars.  You could sue them for that three thousand dollars but that's about it.  There's no damage, there's no punitive damages that you can sue them for, you can only sue them for the services which they neglected to give you, and that's it.  And so that, too, was a very contentious fight because I was causing the insurance rates to go up and I was causing all kinds of things to want to happen, more people were gonna be uninsured.  As far as I was concerned, more people were uninsured anyway because they thought they had insurance and they didn't because all that HMO had to do was say, "Oh, I'm sorry, we don't offer that service, didn't you read your contract, didn't your employer tell you that when they negotiated in the back room that we wouldn't, despite the fact your family had a history of heart trouble or cancer, breast cancer, you're not covered for that?"  Yes, you're paying for it, yet you think you have insurance.
Story_ID: 57702
Speaker 1: Would you say that in regard to [Illinois] DCFS [Department of Children and Family Services] and managed care, most people are not very aware of the importance of state legislators.  What would you say to young people now, how would you address the question of, why should I be interested in the state legislature and then also answer for me what you think of the history of African American legislators that preceded you. First answer the ... why should I care...
Speaker 2: I often tell people that I'm in the business from the cradle to the grave.  There's a politician that authenticates your life and there's a politician that authenticate your death and all in between there, how much property taxes you pay, the type of vehicle you're going to ride in, the type of road that you're going to ride that vehicle on, how much monies you're going to pay for your schools, your libraries.  Name it.  Your job.  I tell people all the time, look in your president's office or in your business, if you're going to do business you will have to get your license from the state of Illinois.  We make laws to govern everything that you do.  The only someone that can pre-empt us is the federal government.  If we so choose to, we can even pre-empt city government.  Often time the federal government is focused in on national issues, issues abroad, but the state government, we're there, we're closest to the people, we run every eighteen years.  I make the laws that say how difficult your education will be or how easy it will be, how difficult it will be for you to get a job or how easy it will be.  Just name it.  Anything, I just tell them to throw something out and whatever it is that you could imagine in your mind, I push a button to say whether you can or cannot do it.  I'm reminded of a story called "Free Frank [McWhorter]".  Free Frank was a slave here in the state of Illinois.  Years ago Free Frank came to the Illinois House of Representatives to petition us to allow him to work for the freedom of his family [1863].  The [U.S. Civil War] war of the North and South was going on at that particular time.  Free Frank was working downstate in the mines and he found the ammunition that would help us win the war.  But Free Frank had to come before this body in order to get his freedom to earn the freedom of his entire family.  Not too much has changed since then.  As far as my colleagues before me, before [Mayor] Harold Washington died and [Illinois] Senator [Charles] Chew and so many other greats have gone on and some like - [Illinois Representative] Ethel Skyles Alexander that are still here, they couldn't sleep in some of those hotels that I could choose to sleep in or choose not to sleep in now.  The fine restaurants that I can just go to anytime I feel like it, they did not have that liberty.  They didn't have secretaries.  They had to go to the school of hard knocks.  There was a lots of things that they didn't have the privy to do that we as legislators are able to do now.  Thank God that they were there.  Thank God they were the voice.  Whatever you thought of their politics, they were there to tell the story, to defend you, to stand up for you, to chastise you, to do whatever.  We were there irregardless to ...  again, whatever you may think about your politician, it's easy for someone to sit on their sofa, flick their television channel, or sit behind the Internet or their computers and to talk about what so-and-so, so-and-so is doing or either to cast aspersions on what politicians are doing, but it's another to stand up and let the world know how you feel and what you believe and willing to voice your opinion, to take a chance on saying something and doing something if and for no other reason, because we have to stand up and be counted.  We have to be accountable for what we say and what we do.  We have to come back to the people to explain our legislation and the purpose of it.  When you think about the drive-by shootings that we've had in our communities and to know that I as a citizen and you, who try to live right and try to do the right thing, have to give up some of our freedom that we would have to pass legislation that would say that if more than six or seven people standing on the corner that they could be picked up for loitering.  You and some of your other friends may be standing on a corner because you're just leaving church.  The law can be abused and misused.  It's the law.  It's the law.  It's the law that gave us slavery.  It's the law that gave us freedom.  It's the law.  And that's what everybody have to remember.  Irregardless of your opinion, it's the law.  Now if you don't like it you can change it, but in the meantime it's the law and that's what you're going to have to live with.  And remember, we make the laws and if you don't like it, become a part of the solution, not a part of the problem.
Story_ID: 57703
Speaker 1: Over the history of the legislature, there have been various periods of especially African Americans where they have been labeled -- some hacks or some independent or some professional, so on and so forth.  Do you have any stories of -- that you know about, people who were controlled by the machine or some power player or whatever?  Are you familiar with any stories in your own time that would express and explain those various levels of racism?
Speaker 2: You know [Illinois Representative] Jim Taylor.  Everybody used to laugh at Jim Taylor.  Didn't finish school, came from Arkansas.  He was on the back of a garbage truck.  Then he left the garbage truck and he came to the Illinois House of Representatives and he left the Illinois House of Representatives and went over to the Senate.  People laughed at Jim and said he was a [Mayor] Jane Byrne clone and he was a "Uncle Tom" and all this other stuff and also President [John] Stroger, when he was on the Board of Commissioners, people used to laugh, talk about, what is the Board of Commissioners, he's sitting up there, he's the only one there and he's just a flunky for the Daleys [Mayors Richard J. Daley and Richard M. Daley] and whoever else.  I thank God for those people because they took a lot of stuff that I didn't have to take and because they took it, I could stand up and feel free to express myself because they took it.  And if it wasn't for the so-called "Uncle Toms", you know, you walk a mile in their shoes and you don't know what you may do to get over, you will lie, you will cheat and you will steal, but will it bring food to the table.  You want me to play crazy?  You want me to play naive?  We saw those movies.  We read about those people back in the days that they had to do whatever.  A mother had to hide her baby from the slave-master in order to save her child.  Back in the biblical days they sent Moses down the river.  We will do anything in order to better the cause and if I had to be an "Uncle Tom" so my daughter don't have to be, I was a good one.  Look at my daughter.  Todd Stroger.  Look at [former Cook Country President] Todd Stroger.  He's here because his daddy took the abuse and the misuse.  So many of us are where we are because we had the nerve to turn our nose up at those people who took that stuff.  I wouldn't take it.  You wasn't there, either.  Now when you sit in this seat at least you are in the room.  You could hear the story.  At least you can walk up to somebody and say, "You know what, that's really not a good idea, let me tell you how it is going to hurt you, not how it's going to hurt me because I know you don't care about me, but let me tell you how it's going to hurt you if you were to do it by continuing to allow drugs to come into our community.  You think you want to give it to my daughter?  No, yours is going to get it too.  It's gonna happen."  So it's an educational process and we've come a long way but the whole world is a stage and everybody has a part to play.
Story_ID: 57704
Speaker 1: I remember the second election. I told [Mayor] Harold [Washington] you can have this seat.
Speaker 2: What did he say?
Speaker 1: [Mayor] Harold [Washington], when I told him I was angry about some things that were going on with Clarence McClain and a few other people and I went to the mayor, Mayor Harold Washington, and I said to him, Mr. Mayor, you wanted me to keep this seat away from Pouncey Taylor [Taylor Pouncey] and Jim Taylor.  I did.  But now you can have it, because I couldn't have people dictating to me, telling me about what office I was going to be in, where I was going to go, what I was going to do.  I wasn't used to that.  So I told him, "You can take the seat and give it to whoever you want."  I just did what you wanted me to do.  He said, "Mary, did I ever tell you that you owed me anything?"  I said, "No." He said, "You sure?"  He said, "So if you don't owe me nothing, you don't owe anyone else anything, so from now on you can just tell people to go to hell."  And I said, "Oh, really."  He said, "Yes, just tell them to go to hell." And I just started to tell the people, just go to hell, go to hell, go to hell, and then all of a sudden [Mayor] Harold [Washington] died.  I said, "Oh, God, what am I going to do now."  (Laughs).  But that's what I had to do.  Before he died, he instilled in me that I didn't owe anybody anything, I'm not your puppet on a string.  I didn't get to be this age to be somebody's play toy or just to do what somebody said.  This job is not that necessary to me.  I was doing this, I thought, as a favor but now I know in my opinion it's a calling.  Now if somebody tried to take this job from me now, they would have a fight on their hands, because I've got some unfinished business.
Story_ID: 57705
Speaker 1: So tell me whenever you decide, losing an election or get tired of running, what would you like for your work as a state legislator to say to people?  What would you like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: That I tried to make life easy, I tried to do the best that I could for somebody, for a senior citizen, for a child, for somebody, I just wanted to be the catalyst, I want to be the vehicle that they used to make their life a little easier.  I hope that one day somebody will come up to my daughter and tell her, let me tell you what your mother did for me.
Story_ID: 57706
Speaker 1: What did your husband do for a living?
Speaker 2: Daniel [Coutee], he works for the Department of Human Services.
Speaker 1: How is the political life?  How does that affect your family life?
Speaker 2: I'm a very blessed person.  My husband happened to be my best friend and my worst enemy.  He's all of the above.  I remember one time [Representative] Gus Savage [Illinois House of Representatives 1981-1993] had this picnic and it had been raining.  I had to walk across the field in the mud in order to give a speech.  My husband told me to take off my shoes because he didn't want me to mess up my shoes and have to stand in front of these people.  So I took off my shoes and I walked in the mud across the field.  Then I had to stand on this table.  And he told me, just wait a minute.  He went and found an empty jug, filled it up with water and he washed my feet and then I was able to step up on the table with my shoes on with clean feet.  That's my husband.  My husband, like any other husband, he was angry a lot of times because he saw the games that people were playing with me and he didn't think I was able to, he just didn't think I could handle it, but I assured him that I was okay.  Like any other husband he was jealous and he was insecure but I assured him that he really just didn't have those problems, after all, I chose him at the skating rink, he didn't choose me, so there lies the difference.  So he's okay.
Speaker 1: Your daughter, how does being a political wife and mother impact your relationship with your daughter?
Speaker 2: You have to understand Makeda was born into this job.  She was born in Springfield.  Makeda was raised on the House floor.  Makeda was passed around from the Republican side of the aisle to the Democratic side of the aisle.  She used to sleep in Speaker [Michael] Madigan's office or the staffers would take her upstairs for those long nights that we were on the House floor.  My secretary Patches was there when Makeda opened up her eyes.  I was just so blessed.  I read the book about Ida B. Wells and how Ida B. Wells used to put her children in a open wagon and travel up and down the road to do what it is that she had to do.  People used to say, "Well, how are you going to handle it with this baby, and how are you going to do this?"  I said, if "Ida B. Wells could do it, if my mother could do it, I know I can do it."  I strapped Makeda in the back seat of my van and we went up and down the highway.  Sometime Senator [William] Shaw would babysit, sometime [Illinois House Representative] Monique Davis [1987-present] would babysit, sometimes Speaker [Michael] Madigan's secretary would babysit, but we all made it happen.  Makeda has been with me when I met the First Lady [Hillary Clinton], Vice President [Al] Gore, Nelson Mandela, Mayor [Richard M.] Daley.  She's been with me on a many of occasions.  We are about to pack our bags to go to her second Democratic convention.
Story_ID: 57707
Speaker 1: Would you say to young people, give me a synopsis, a summary, a philosophical kind of response that describes Mary Evelyn Flowers.
Speaker 2: I'm okay with me.  I like me.  I didn't have to sell my values, I didn't have to trade off parts of me in order to be who I am and where I am today.  In this game of life as well as politics, it's about giving and taking and negotiating, but you still have your soul, you still have your spirit, you still have you values.  In order to be a public servant, which is a title that I humbly embrace at all times, I'm still a lady throughout it all.  I don't have to be one of the boys, I don't have to drink with them, I don't have to do nothing that I don't want to do.  And I'm blessed.  I have a family that I can depend upon.  I have a mother who I know that loves me, a husband who I know that loves me, a daughter who I know that loves me, so therefore I know I've got a God who I know that loves me.  I just can't go wrong.  I've been a very blessed person.  And to the young people, you can do the same thing.  All you have to do is keep your mind made up on what you want to do and make sure you're doing it for a good reason.  Make sure that you're doing it to better somebody else's life.  If you're looking for some personal gains in this job, this is not the one you want to apply for.  You will not get rich.  There will be a lot of sleepless and thankless nights.  If you're looking to be applauded, if you're looking to see some nice things written about you in the newspaper, do not apply.  If you're willing to take some bumps and bruises for what you believe in and stand on your conviction, I say, go for it.
Story_ID: 57708
Speaker 1: This picture was taken probably back in 1985.  I forget what the mayor called us all together for that day.
Speaker 2: Where was the location?
Speaker 1: At the Yacht Club of Chicago, Chicago Harbor Yacht Club.  That's [Representative] Carol [Mosely Braun] and Senator [Ethel Skyles] Alexander, Senator [Charles] Chew, Senator Emil Jones, Senator [Ethel Skyles] Alexander.  That's me standing right next to [Representative] Carol [Moseley Braun, 1979-188, US Senator 1993-1999].  I forget the name, Senator, the guy that's standing right behind [Mayor] Harold [Washington], that is, oh, my Lord, forgive me, I can't think of his name.  That was in '86 when we were, [Mayor] Harold [Washington] and I were at one of the lunches and the banquets and it was always like that whenever we saw each other.  He was just a bundle of joy.  That was the first year I was elected, back in 1985, and [Mayor] Harold [Washington] came down to the Illinois House of Representatives to talk to the Speaker [Michael Madigan] and the Governor [James Thompson] on some issues.
Speaker 2: But like you said, he had asked you into his office.  This is that year that you got elected?
Speaker 1: Yes, this was the year I got elected.  This was after that.  He was in Springfield [Illinois] at that particular time.  I think I might have a picture of me in his office.  This was 1991.  My daughter was born in June.  That was probably in October or November of that year and Senator Margaret Smith and I were campaigning for re-election and Makeda went everywhere that I went.
Speaker 2: --
Speaker 1: That was my re-election campaign.  The slogan was, "Send Flowers to Springfield" [Illinois] and starting from the left was Marlene Carter, she was the alderman of the 15th ward, Richard Dent, one of the Bears football players, myself, and of course Mayor Harold Washington.  That was on 70th and Ashland [Chicago, Illinois] at one of my campaign offices.
Speaker 2: That was, again, what year was it?
Speaker 1: That was in year 1986.  That was in 1991 when {President] Bill Clinton was running for President of the United States.  He was not the nominee, he was still trying to talk to everybody, to convince everyone to make him the Democratic nominee for President.
Speaker 2: --
Speaker 1: We were talking in Governor [James] Thompson's office, Governor Jim Thompson.  That was back in 1985, '86 [1986], and Jesse Jackson came down to talk about some affirmative action language that we were going to put in a bill, probably dealing with roads and bridges, and that's Reverent [Charles] Koen.  Reverend [Charles] Koen was an African American activist who was locked up down in Cairo, Illinois.  He's been a Civil Rights activist for a very long time.
Speaker 2: How long was he locked up that way?
Speaker 1: Oh, for a while.  He's been locked up for several different reasons since then.  We weren't too particular about what the Governor [James Thompson] was talking about.
Speaker 2: --
Speaker 1: I think this was probably in 1996 and Governor [James] Edgar [1991-1999] had just finished giving his State of the State address as to the condition that the state was in.  I sit on the aisle seat so I get a chance to shake everybody's hands.
Speaker 2: --
Speaker 1: This was probably in 1993 whenever Nelson Mandela was released from prison.  We were waiting for him to come in that day from the airport and my daughter Makeda was telling the Mayor [Richard M. Daley] that her daddy would like that tie.  I said, Makeda, "Please."  Okay?
Speaker 2: --
Speaker 1: This was taken last year when we had the dedication for Northwestern Hospital and [First Lady] Hillary [Clinton] came in for the opening of the new wing.  Hillary was telling my daughter Makeda, "Hello little girl, how are you," or something like that and Makeda said to [First Lady] Hillary [Clinton], "Don't you remember me?"  And [First Lady] Hillary [Clinton] said, "Excuse me, should I remember you?"  She had been seeing [First Lady] Hillary [Clinton], I had been taking her around everywhere ever since she's been in the world.  She's been there.  Everywhere.  Can I give you these also?  This is when I brought my daughter to the podium.
Speaker 2: We'll go ahead and finish this.
Speaker 1: This was last year, coming out of the Monica Lewinsky saga, he had just finished testifying and he came to Chicago to campaign and we just tried to make him feel like the great person that he should be [President Bill Clinton].  So this was 1999.
Speaker 2: --
Speaker 1: This is Mayor [Eugene] Sawyer and his daughter.  This had to be in 1987 because that's the year that [Mayor] Harold [Washington] died.
