Story_ID: 17783
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson. I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And I'd like you to start by stating your name and spelling it, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: I am Richard Leonidas Fairley. I spell Richard, "R-I-C-H-A-R-D" middle name Leonidas, "L-E-O-N-I-D-A-S" last name Fairley, "F-A-I-R-L-E-Y".
Speaker 1: Okay. And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: July 16, 1933.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the sixth, June 6th--
Speaker 1: First.
Speaker 2: June 1, 2003.
Speaker 1: And our address that we're at?
Speaker 2: We're at 34 Williams Drive, Annapolis, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your profession?
Speaker 2: I am an educator.
Story_ID: 17784
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is chicken.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year is summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Favorite place to vacation I like to take cruises.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Let's do it."
Speaker 1: Okay. Well let's do it (chuckling).
Story_ID: 17785
Speaker 1: I'd like to start out by asking you about your parents. And I'd like you first to talk about your mother. And give her name and what you know about her background.
Speaker 2: Okay. My mother's name is Gladys Wilkerson Fairley. She is an educator. She is from the Washington area, Washington, D.C. area. She attended Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio]. Excelled there as a Phi Beta Kappa. And she entered the teaching profession. She taught first at Hampton University in [Hampton] Virginia. And then she spent a career in the Washington, D.C. school system. Retiring as principal of Dunbar High School in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Did she talk at all about her growing up and her family? Do you know much about her family background?
Speaker 2: I know quite a bit. She was an only child. Her father was a postman. Her mother was a schoolteacher. She grew up in Washington, D.C. Her father's origins are South Carolina--Charleston, South Carolina. I don't know quite when they moved to Washington. But they held from there. Her father had three brothers. And most of my mother's time was spent in the Washington, D.C. area.
Speaker 1: Okay. How would you describe your mother? What kind of person?
Speaker 2: I would describe my mother as a very strong person, a very strong black woman that sort of ran the family. And just had a tremendous impact on my life and the decisions that I later made.
Speaker 1: And your father? Can you give his name and--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Sure. My father's name is Richmond Alvin Fairley. He was born in Greensboro, North Carolina. Came to Washington after attending Johnson C. Smith University [Charlotte, North Carolina] and the School of Theology at Lincoln University [Lincoln, Pennsylvania]. He was a minister and started three churches in the Washington, D.C. area. His father was also a Presbyterian minister. So that side of the family lends toward the field of religion.
Speaker 1: Did your father--Do you-can you describe what kind of person he was?
Speaker 2: My father was a person committed to the ministry. Committed to helping people. Committed to mentoring young ministers. But just a very fine man who believed in the Lord, the church and his ministerial work.
Speaker 1: Did you--Do you know yourself much about the black Presbyterian movement having grown up in that environment?
Speaker 2: I know something about it. I grew up in the church. I guess after I went to college I was not as close to the church as I would have wanted to be. I know that the Presbyterian church has started any number--start the black colleges and universities. They were somewhat helpful to me in going to Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire] and supporting my being there.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. Now when you--Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't. I know they--My mother had recently moved to Washington from her first teaching assignment at Hampton. And I think she saw this handsome struggling minister starting his first church and wanted to be a part of his life.
Speaker 1: So they met in Washington?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.
Story_ID: 17786
Speaker 1: Now tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memories of growing up? I grew up in a section of Washington--in Northwest Washington, D.C., then an all black neighborhood. I went to a segregated elementary school. The Bruce School located maybe three blocks from my home. I then went to [Benjamin] Banneker Junior High School, then segregated. And I went to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School. Which is just a very fine high school in Washington, which sent most of its graduates onto colleges. What I remember about my neighborhood was the fact that then it was very much it takes a village to raise a child type neighborhood. And the support that I got as a young person from my neighbors and from elders in the community.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well I guess you would call it Upper Northwest at that time. But it was called, "The Hill". But that didn't denote any sign of wealth. Just a nice neighborhood to grow up in.
Speaker 1: Can you just--What street did you live on? And can you describe your block?
Speaker 2: Yes I lived on--I lived at 1028 Park Road, which was a block of row houses. I guess today they're called townhouses. But it was a street of a row brick homes maybe three bedrooms and one bath with an alley running behind it. Trees on the street, a little triangular playground at the end of the street and not a busy street.
Speaker 1: How about your neighbors?
Speaker 2: My neighbors were of all ages. There were children in the neighborhood. And there were elders in the neighborhood. And this made for a good mix of the people in the community. It was a middle class area. And--But most of the people were very supportive of youngsters in the neighborhood. And I think that was--made it a good place to live.
Speaker 1: And when you think about that sort of neighborhood--I'd like to sort of take you back. And I'm wondering if any sight, smells and or sounds remind you of your growing up?
Speaker 2: No. Well the smell of fried chicken always makes me remember growing up. Fried chicken because not only is it my favorite food sometimes I wonder why. And as a youngster growing up the son of a Presbyterian minister most Sunday afternoons were spent at the home of a member of his congregation. And chicken just seem (chuckling) to be the favorite meal to feed your minister and his family. So that smell of the chicken sort of rings a bell. Other than that I guess you said, "Colors or--."
Speaker 1: I said, sights.
Speaker 2: Sights. The sight of The Capitol and the buildings that symbolize Washington, D.C. I guess I was born there. I loved the city. I loved the city even when it was very segregated city. But that one that lives there and grew up there can always feel a sense of power and sort of what it symbolizes. And when I'm away now I always like to come back and look at the city that I'm landing in by plane.
Speaker 1: And what about sounds?
Speaker 2: Sounds? Well I sort of grew up on jazz. And whenever I hear good jazz I remember my growing up in high school and just having not a jazz club. But there being a lot of interest in jazz, you know, in our high school.
Story_ID: 17787
Speaker 1: And your siblings? Can you give their names and, you know--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: Birth order?
Speaker 2: I had an older brother. His name was Alvin Wilkerson Fairley. Alvin attended Lincoln University after my father. He passed at a very young age. My younger brother is Paul Laurence Fairley. Paul is six years my junior. A graduate of Morgan State College with a masters and doctorate from the University of Miami. And Paul and I am very close brothers. We've been very supportive of one another. But being the older brother I have been very, very supportive of him and have tried to play a big role in his career of which I think I have.
Speaker 1: Now I want to ask one question about the origin of your--Do you know the origin of your name Fairley? Do you know any--What it's based on or where it came from?
Speaker 2: No. I just don't know too much about that name.
Speaker 1: Okay. Let's describe--If you could describe family life--You know, what was the family, you know, life like? Whether meal times or--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Family life was--for me was pretty structured. My dad's work and we used to tease him later was primarily on Sunday. And weekends were a very busy time for him. During the week he would spend a lot of time as a minister ministering his flock, visiting the sick and that kind of thing. My mother was a schoolteacher most of her life. So her hours were very similar to our hours going to school. Later she became an administrator; this took more time. But generally we ate meals together. My brothers and I went to the same schools not necessarily at the same time. But life was pretty structured in that we knew what time dinner was. We ate together as a family. And we spent a lot of time together as family, listening to the radio. There was no TV then. And we had just a very good family life.
Speaker 1: Do you know had your father just assumed that he was going to be a Presbyterian minister because his father had been one? Do you think he enjoyed what he did?
Speaker 2: I'm sure that he enjoyed what he did. And he enjoyed it so much that he thought that one of his three sons would be a minister. But none of us quite found our way there. Not that we don't do a lot of things that are similar to the kind of things a minister might do. We enjoy teaching people. We enjoy helping people. I do a lot of public speaking, which I enjoy. But how he--I think he was sort of track to that ministry by his dad. As maybe my brothers and I enter initially the teaching field. Because of our mother.
Story_ID: 17788
Speaker 1: Now what kind of person would you describe yourself as a young person? Were you quiet? Were you rambunctious? Were you, you know, someone who lived inside their head? Were you, you know, there would be a great imagination?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Or you--?
Speaker 2: Well people don't believe this that know me. But as a youngster I was a very shy person. I was very shy. I never quite knew why I was so shy. I knew that during my early teenage years I grew very rapidly. And right now I'm 6'6". But I must have grown maybe at four inches in less than a year. And this made me a pretty gawky kind of guy. And I was shy. And this was something that I had to outgrow. Now people have to tell me to sit down and shut up . I mean it's just been a complete sort of reversal of being shy. And those that know me well including my wife say, "I can't imagine you a shy person." But I was.
Speaker 1: So what'd that--Did you live a lot in your head? I mean did you sort of, you know, think a lot to yourself? Or were you a dreamer? Did you--?
Speaker 2: Yes. I did and do a lot of stuff in my head. And I need time to think and to think things through. As a professional having a pretty big job, a very responsible job I find it necessary almost everyday to close my office door for 10 to 15 minutes and just think. Just think about that day and what I was going to do. I'm not withdrawn. But I do need time just to think. Think things through.
Speaker 1: And what were you thinking as a young person?
Speaker 2: Well I was thinking that my mother had very, very high expectations for us. And I guess a lot of thought went into living up to those expectations. And never, never letting my parents down. And I've tried to do the same thing with raising my kids. Setting high expectations for them and assuring them that they can live up to it.
Story_ID: 17789
Speaker 1: And so what was your mother--What was some of her messaging to you? And, you know, about her expectations about your roles then? You know, what she wanted for you?
Speaker 2: Well. Number one I was giving some responsibilities at home, you know, as a young person. And those responsibilities were responsibilities that I assumed not necessarily because I had to. But because I felt that this was a good role I could play to contribute to the family. It was expected that I would do well in school. And that was monitored from elementary school right through high school. And I attended the same high school where my mother was the assistant principal. So this put sort of an undue burden on me to not to get caught  getting into trouble. Because I was a typical kid and I was a good student. But I was a pretty regular guy. Every now and then I would skip a class and I was--could very easily be caught. Because everybody knew me as the principal's son. And I was a good athlete and  (chuckling) I'm 6'6".
Speaker 1: Now what things were influencing you? I'm talk--In elementary school you went to Brew? You said--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Bruce School. Bruce.
Speaker 1: right?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Bruce.
Speaker 1: Bruce School. Okay. And that--Is that "B R E W"?
Speaker 2: "B-R-U-C-E".
Speaker 1: Bruce! Okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes, Bruce Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And were there teachers that influenced you there?
Speaker 2: Yes. I--My favorite teacher, I had in the second grade. And I think she was my favorite teacher because I think that she recognized that I might be a little shy. And she pushed me. And as I grew up I'd always say that she was my favorite teacher. And when I would talk to her she would said, "And he was my favorite pupil." And she later taught me again in the fourth grade. And I would tell her that, "Yes. See you enjoy teaching me so much that you came back to teach me again." But she was just a very supportive kind of person that sort of reach out a little more to me than most teachers reach out to a student.
Speaker 1: And did you--Were you attracted to certain subjects? This time were you more writing and reading--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: or--?
Speaker 2: I was attracted more to social studies and English rather than the sciences. And I just did not like the foreign languages at all.
Speaker 1: And your friends at that time who--What were they like? And, you know, who--Do you have, you know, the names of the them or--
Speaker 2: Let me say this. The neighborhood I grew up in was most of us went to the same elementary schools, same junior high and same high schools. And at least five guys that I know and we're still very good friends--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Hmm.
Speaker 2: seeing each other at least once every two months.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Hmm.
Speaker 2: We started way back then, I mean I have friends ever since I was three years old. And these are still very, very good friends of mine that I see often. And we stay in touch. We get together and we have lunch. And our friendships have remained. And we've all done different things and gone different ways. But those friendship things are still there.
Speaker 1: That's nice to have--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Childhood friends--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: That go back that long.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Yeah.
Story_ID: 17790
Speaker 1: But I'd just to like know some, you know, some memories of your youth?
Speaker 2: Well one thing I remember growing up this coming from Washington, a segregated city with only two public swimming pools, only (unclear) that blacks could go into. I remember on vacations coming to Annapolis to Highland Beach, which is a private beach. And spending time with my friends whose families owned vacation houses here. I liked the water. I spent a lot of time in and around the YMCA in Washington. It was here that I learned to swim. It was here that I learned about their summer camp. And spent many summers there as a camper and later as a counselor. And I learned some skills there that stay with me today. And I'm just an advocate for the YMCA and the role that the YMCA can play in the lives of young people. For example I learned to swim. I learned to canoe. I learned to row a rowboat. These are skills that a lot of people don't have but I just picked up as a camper at the Y. I learned about snakes. I learned about nature. I learned a little bit about leadership. I learned to get along with other guys. And these have played a major role in formulating my character.
Speaker 1: So you would go to the Y  camp from age--What year--What age were you when you started?
Speaker 2: Oh. I was--I probably started to go there at about age eight. And I went right through high school. Working later on as a camp counselor.
Speaker 1: Were you ever a Boy Scout?
Speaker 2: I was a Boy Scout as--Let me put it this way. I was a Cub Scout at age nine. And then at age twelve I became a Boy Scout. But I also discovered two other things. Basketball and girls. So my caress a Boy Scout was not a long one.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It was a little short lived .
Speaker 2: That's correct. That's correct.
Speaker 1: So you didn't make it to Eagle Scout  right--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No. No.
Speaker 1: (laughing) (unclear) ?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Girls were much more fun.
Story_ID: 17791
Speaker 1: Do you remember her name, the one--the second grade teacher?
Speaker 2: Her name was Hilda Cobb. And in the summers she would come down to Highland Beach.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Hmm.
Speaker 2: Where she had still--Well she's moved on now. But her daughter has maintains a home there. And her daughter's a little younger than I am. But we have worked together at the same university and share a friendship. And we often talk about our mothers.
Speaker 1: And your--In terms of your, you know, school and, you know, the things that you set--were set early on. Were you encouraged? Was there a discussion around the dinner table? Was there, you know, talk about what was expected of you? And, you know--And your performance in school? Were there discussions about what you were learning in school?
Speaker 2: Well there were discussions I guess centered around homework. And this would set the stage for example; "Have you done your homework?" would lead to, "What are you doing in school? What is your homework? And have you done it? And how this applies? And what subjects will you be taking next? And what are your grades?" And those grades had better be pretty good.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Hmm.
Speaker 2: There was never any threat of punishment for poor grade. Yeah this was just something that was expected. And it was something that was sort of drilled into us and we did it because we were supposed to do it.
Speaker 1: And did you--Do you remember any subject being particular hard? Or that you, you know, didn't particular like or didn't do well in?
Speaker 2: Yes. And that subject is German, which is the only foreign language I had studied. I studied it because it was a requirement at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C.] and later at Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire]. And it was a (unclear). It was the most difficult subject I've ever had.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Hmm.
Speaker 2: And I'll never take another foreign language.
Speaker 1: So German, you had in Dartmouth that was a mandatory at Dartmouth?
Speaker 2: Yes. It was.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact one had to pass a proficiency examination in it.
Story_ID: 17792
Speaker 1: And tell me how you were aware of the larger community? That's--You know, you talk about I grew up in segregated Washington. Were you--I mean what age were you really aware that you were in a segregated?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that's a good question. Because I think at that time our parents did a lot to protect us from being hurt by racial discrimination. Most of what we did was in that black community. We went to black schools. We went to black movies. We participated in black athletics. And I guess the only time that we really got out of the community was to go downtown to buy things. And there were some issues there in terms of trying on clothes. I just remember that my mother would never give her full name to white people. She would go by her initials G. W. Fairley. She would never put herself in the position of having somebody white not knowing her--call her by her first name. And she taught us these things. She told us why these things were going on. This was gonna really affect me in later life to go from an all black community to then an all white college where I was one of twelve black students at this college. And I went there. And I described it as leaving an all black high school in a prominently black city and getting on a black train and going up to White River Junction. To this world of whiteness which was just entirely new to me. I didn't know a white person. I did not know a white person, personally until I got to college.
Story_ID: 17793
Speaker 1: I'd like to talk, you know, about your high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Sure.
Speaker 1: Years and, you know, what you were like at that point--.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: you know--I knew you were into sports--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Playing sports but which--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --One? Basketball?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let me say about my high school. It was as I said, a segregated high school. And Washington [D.C.] was--had four high schools. One for those kids going on to college and academic school; another one for those who wanted to go into vocations. And they had a technical high school and one to train clerical people. And so students came from all over the city to one of those high schools. Which was good. Because we got to know students from all over town. My high school would send about 95 percent of the students there went to college. And the school had a reputation of sending its graduates to colleges like Dartmouth, Harvard. The first graduate of the Naval Academy was a Dunbar graduate. And there were a lot of first. But it was expected that some in every class would go to some of the finest colleges in the country. And most of the kids would go to college. Usually the city teacher's college. And become teachers. And that was sort of the--that was sort of the  path of a bright black youngster during that time. I guess there weren't that many fields open. I'd like to say that we were limited to teaching, preaching, pleading, medicine or burying people in those five professions. And so one did not think much beyond well which one of these things are we probably going to do? A doctor, a lawyer, undertaker, teacher? And so I went on to college. And I guess became a teacher because number one that's what I knew best in terms of about a profession and number two I was limited by a lot of other things.
Speaker 1: But what else although high school--Can you just give some of your memories of high school? Or some of the teachers--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay. Well yeah.
Speaker 1: The coach, you know, that--.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. In our high school again this thing of high expectations was important. Our teachers were very supportive number one. And they held us to high standards. And they just had very high expectations for us. The thing there was that you were told, "When you get out in this world you gotta be good." And because of segregation we were taught that, "You have gotta be twice as good as a white person to get the same job." This was very, very--made very, very, very clear to us, "That you just had to be better to get the same kind of position." And it stuck with me later and was just very helpful to me.
Speaker 1: And what about your coach, you know, in playing sports?
Speaker 2: Yeah. In high school I played basketball. And I played under a coach by the name of  Lewis Williams. Coach had been trained, I'm pretty sure at a white school somewhere else. And most of the teachers at Dunbar were very, very qualified teachers. Because back then teaching at Dunbar High School was probably second to teaching only at Howard University. It was Howard--in this cou--nationally. It was Howard first and Dunbar High School second. So we had great teachers. Coaches then were very interested in getting their players that graduated into colleges. So most of the kids that finished--athletes that finished in any sport went on and got an--took a scholarship to college. However most of these colleges were historically black colleges and universities. So if one was a good student and one was a good athlete, one could get a good future that was very bright for such kids. So I got a scholarship to Dartmouth. It was purely academic--Dartmouth didn't know I played basketball until I got there as a walkup.
Speaker 1: So were you a good basketball player? 'Cause you said, "You were gawky as a child?" had you gone pass that gawky period?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I was a--When I got to Dartmouth we all had to play freshman basketball. So I was on the starting freshman team. And I was on the starting varsity team.
Speaker 1: Hmm. And who--Did you have any people that you looked up to at that time? You know, like I'm going back, you know, any people in basketball that you looked up to? Or people in the community that you looked up to? You know, that sort of were also influencing you besides your parents?
Speaker 2: Well I like to think that I was influenced by my parents and then I most influenced by institutions and the people there. Maybe that's a different way to look at things. But my parents and then the institution of the YMCA and what that was all about. And what I learned there, and the people that I met there. I can't single out one person. But I just remember the whole climate was an opportunity. And then my high school and the good teachers that were there. And what they stood for. And what they sort of instilled into us. And then at Dartmouth I learned a few lessons. I guess because I was protected from segrega---I mean from discrimination. When I got there I got my eyes opened a little bit at the beginning then.
Speaker 1: Now I just a few more questions about, you know, high school and sort of growing up.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: I just--I'm wondering how--Were you ever sort of resentful of having to be a minister's son? And, you know, and were you rebellious what--in that? Or did you-You know,  Because there're expecta---there're--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Responsibilities--.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And you had it from really both perspectives--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: You have your mother, you know--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Whose assistant principal. And you've got your father. And, you know, there're added responsibilities when kids are children--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Of people, you know, both ministers and--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: So on.  a teach-You have someone that's managing the school. (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I'm wondering if that, you know, influence--You know, you had said, "It created some added--"
Speaker 2: Well. I--Yeah. Some added responsibility. And I think of myself as a regular high school student. And I think a regular student is going to do some things that might be mischievous. I mean I would hook school occasionally. And I guess if you're under that limelight you lead a normal student's life. But you do everything you can, not to embarrass your mother and father. So I think my school life was more normal. And I guess it's because I was able to do these things and not get--not embarrass my parents.
Story_ID: 17794
Speaker 1: Now you talk also about, you know, liking jazz. Or being attracted to jazz, you know--.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And that occurring during your high school years. And I'm wondering did you have any favorite artist? Or how did--You know, what--?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: First attracted you to that genre  of music?
Speaker 2: Well I guess the person that stands out most in my mind is Charlie Parker. I in high school tried to play the saxophone a little. And I guess I lost interest in the sax because of some other interests basketball and in sports. But I had tried to play the sax. And I was--I knew the difficulties; the challenges of playing a sax and how you need to practice. And here comes Charlie Parker and he does this so easily. And that just sort of made me look at the whole jazz scene and what was going then. It was pretty popular in our high school to develop an interest in jazz. Not from the school but just the students there, that's all. They'd just--.
Speaker 1: There were a lot of your--.
Speaker 2: They were--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) friends into that--.
Speaker 2: Into it. That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Did you ever go see any performers in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes. I did. In the Howard Theater that was theater in Washington [D.C.] where most jazz musicians, and singers, and Duke Ellington, and Charlie Parker, and Dinah Washington would appear. And interesting anecdote in terms of high school. Sometimes they say, "Dinah Washington was appearing at the Howard Theater." And one-day word got around school, "Let's hook school in math and go to see Dinah Washington." And mother the--who was assistant principal then learned that this was gonna go on. And she and the principal came to the Howard Theater got the manager to turn the lights on and asked all the Dunbar students first to stand. And then to leave, and, and believe it or not, the son of the assistant principal was in the audience!  But sure. We saw lot of good jazz, rock and roll players a lot of--at the Howard Theater in Washington D.C., which was an institution at that time. 'Cause under segregation that's where we went.
Story_ID: 17795
Speaker 1: Were there other people in the community that either were, you know, viewed as sort of heroes or, you know, people would talk about or--?
Speaker 2: Well, there were people in the community that were viewed as heroes. And these heroes probably were those people that had gone from [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington D.C.] again, and done well. Because of the--because of the  segregated nature of our community. No television so these people became local heroes. And you didn't get much further than your community. But because they had gone to the same schools--And then the school had a way of bringing in black folks that had done well in other fields to talk to us as students. And sort of stimulate us and serve as our heroes. On the sport scene in basketball, the NBA was all white then. There were no black players until I guess I went to college. So you'd read about these people in the newspapers. But my community was full of professionals in the fields that I mentioned that had done well.
Speaker 1: So who were some of the heroes (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well I have to mention my Dartmouth's hero Charlie Duncan who went on to become a--to sit as a judge on the international court. [Dr.] Charles Drew went to Dunbar. Judge [WIlliam] Hastie went to Dunbar. We had a lot of high ranking military officers that had gone to Dunbar. Dunbar would send at least one student to West Point, the Naval Academy. And these guys usually stayed in the army and did very well. Shirley Horn was a classmate--not a classmate. She was one year behind me at Dunbar, played the piano there. Walter Washington who was the--later the mayor of Washington had been a Dunbar student. We had several judges. But most of these people again were right after me. Going to Baltimore [Maryland] back then which was thirty miles from Washington. You know, it was a big trip. You just didn't know many people that were in that weren't in that area. And I see this so true of young people today. Especially low-income youngsters. They don't know what's out in the world. And back then we didn't either. So I think it's so important to get young people exposure.
Story_ID: 17796
Speaker 1: Now do you know much about the history of [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington D.C.] ? You know, about when it got started? Or, you know?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you talk--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: A little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Dunbar got started around the turn of the century as the "M Street High School" it was called then. And Dunbar was--It could be the--one of the oldest high schools in the country. As I mentioned because of segregation, it was thee school for black youngsters to go that aspired to go to college. So it got a pretty selective group of youngsters to go there. These were kids that were--whose parents in many cases were professionals. But that didn't matter. It didn't matter whether your parents were professional or not. If you aspired to go to college, Dunbar was the place to go. Dunbar was a school that sought colleges that offered scholarships. So the counseling and guidance department there was very good. And if one came to the school and did well--And it was a pretty competitive black school. I say that because in a segregated society you really have nothing to compare your performance in a segregated situation to a white school that might be in the same town. Because you don't go to school with these people. So you don't need--so if you can't compare your performance with whites in the same town, you have no idea what's going on in other school systems like New York, California. This is why I guess going away to college later was so important to me. Because what I found was that where as I went to probably the finest black high school in the country, when I got to Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] it was a whole new ballgame. Here I go now with kids that went to prep schools. And it was very, very difficult for me initially. But I say initially. Because I had a whole new world to learn. And I did.
Story_ID: 17797
Speaker 1: Now why did you end up going there? Because you--your brother--your oldest brother went to Lincoln, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Which was your father's alma mater?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Now your mother had, had a similar experience though in going to Oberlin [College] sort of. A white institution. But it had have a history. Well--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean maybe you should answer that.
Speaker 2: That's okay. But--.
Speaker 1: But I'm just wondering how was that even chosen? And was even Howard University in the ballpark?
Speaker 2: Okay. Let me go back to my mother first. I had--my mother's uncle was a gentleman by the name of Garnett C. Wilkerson. Garnett had--This is my great uncle, her uncle. Garnett had gone to Oberlin very early on. And had graduated from Oberlin distinctive. Which is why I think my mother was sort of slanted to go there.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Do you know what year that may have been when he graduated?
Speaker 2: No. I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Garnett again was an educator. And was the highest-ranking black educator in the Washington D.C. school system--under segregation the white system. And the black system. He was sort of was head of the black system. I'm sure that had a lot of influence on my mother's choice of Oberlin. You know, opportunities weren't that great for  a) women and b) black women in particular. Now concerning my going to Dartmouth? I did well in high school. And again, because of this limited world that I lived in to me it would have been great if I went to the local teacher's college. Because I thought I should be a teacher or to Howard University. And it was my high school that said, "Well maybe you should look--" and the people who had gone before me, "Maybe you should look and go into another school. A more competitive school in New England." I applied to two schools. I applied to Tufts College in Medford Massachusetts. And my mother insisted that I applied to Dartmouth. And I applied to Dartmouth. And then just because she suggested that, that might be someplace to which I apply.  I'd received a letter and a scholarship from Tufts and I went to my mother  and I said, "This is where I want to go to school. She said, "That's great but we haven't heard from Dartmouth yet." And maybe ten days later I get this letter from Dartmouth that offered a scholarship. And I said, "That's great mother but I want to go to Tufts." She said--She looked me dead in the eye and said, "Son if you're going to college, you're going to Dartmouth. And that's the end of this discussion." And rarely did she do anything like that. When she said that I knew that was a non-negotiable (chuckling). That was a non-negotiable. Then she had me talk to Charlie Duncan who had been a graduate. Maybe Charlie is seven years older than I am. And I went into the Dartmouth's sight unseen.
Story_ID: 17798
Speaker 1: I was put, with this very small trunk, on the train at 5:00, one Monday evening and I went to New Hampshire. And I went the White River Junction, Vermont, which is right on the border of New Hampshire and Vermont. And I arrived there the next morning. And got to this great world of whiteness! And in every sense white mountains, white snow, white folks!
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) (chuckling).
Speaker 1: When I go there now, at this point, I have never--I have never known a white person by name in my life.
Speaker 2: So when you get there can you just describe what your whole sense about things were? I mean because you're saying you're sight unseen. You're going--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm sure your mother has packed a little, you know, food and things for you.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) On the train, yes.
Speaker 2: On the train--.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Well I mean I went there. I had been given a room with a roommate. My roommate was black. He was from South Bend, Indiana. His--He came from a pretty wealthy black home. He grew up. His mother and father were attorneys. And it was Dartmouth's policy to put the three of us black folks, either three in one room or two in one room and one in one single. So the two of us--it was just three in the class. So, you know, you get there and you have to learn the game real quick. For example the room had no--It had a bed in it and that's about all. So I had to go out first with very little means and I had to buy a mattress. I had to buy whatever--a desk. And these were things that I didn't know when I got there. You know, until I got there. So I guess this was a great lesson for me to--just to become independent and fast at the age of eighteen. Learning how to provide for myself. Learning how to live on a budget and a very small budget. To learn how to sacrifice, to learned how to make friends that were strange. And just to survive in my first year it was--pretty difficult.
Speaker 2: Did you wanna ever come home during that first year?
Speaker 1: I wanted to come home  that week! If you want to know the truth. Why? Because it was very, very challenging school academically. It was challenging to me because, oh I went--And this is what I used to tease my principal about. Though I went to the best black high school in the country I still was not as prepared as some of my white classmates. I had to work harder. And then I began to see what segregation was all about. Things weren't equal in my high school and with other schools. But now it was a year of scuffling for me. Probably was good for me because it taught me something.
Story_ID: 17799
Speaker 1: Did the other two black students feel a lot of pressure to study and perform also?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was a lot of support among the twelve of us. And which we passed on. I mean when I became a sophomore I sought out the freshman. And then somebody--the kid--The older guys sought me out and they more or less said, "You're not gonna fail here."  And it was the blacks that sort of took care of the blacks.
Speaker 1: Now what was life like that first year? Can you sort of describe it in a little more detail?
Speaker 2: Well number one, I did not have the financial resources that most of my classmates had. There were a lot of things that I couldn't do. This was an all male school. It's kind of funny because the closest school for females was Smith [College] and Mount Holyoke [College]. And they were at least--They were at least  125 miles away. There was Boston--I don't know whether Brandeis [University] was around at that time. I guess not.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Maybe at that time.
Speaker 2: So we had to if we wanted to date we had to seek out black women at these schools. Those schools two or three two or three black women. And this was a very expensive thing. You had to have the money to get where you were going, to date. So there wasn't a lot of that. So there was a lot of studying. Because--probably more because I had to catch up. I found out that most of my classmates had the edge on me. I had to work harder, which was good too. And I guess after a while I was able to catch up. Not that I was failing. But I just had to work harder. Then I was able to say to myself, "Well I could do what these guys do." That was important to me. Because I hadn't had that experience before. So what did I learn? I learned first that I went to the best black high school in the country. But the best black high school was not equal to the kind of schools that my classmates were going to. And this is going to stay with me the rest of my life. The second thing that I learned was that after I got--after I learned the system that I could compete. And I could excel. And I could beat most of these guys out. Not only in the classroom but on a basketball court. And it built up my confidence. So I could say. "I'll never have to worry about this again." And it's helpful to me the rest of my life.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any experience of racism at the college?
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes--.
Speaker 1: But not overt.  Not under barrage. Not--?
Speaker 2: Well again I was--I'm beginning now to sort of get over my shyness that I wanna go back to. Because if you take a person that is shy anyway. And then you take this person and put him into this kind of situation. It's just, you know, double dose! So I guess I began to get over this. And I began to get over this because I was an athlete. And because I got known over the campus. Because I was able to play basketball. And people knew me. And people would speak to me.
Story_ID: 17800
Speaker 1: At Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hapshire] from the administration there was not a lot of racism, from the administration nor from the faculty. But a lot of subtle things. For example I had a geography professor that asked me, "What I want to do when I finished Dartmouth?" And I would say, "You know, I don't know. I might wanna go on to law school. I might wanna teach. I might wanna do this." And he would imply, "We'll there's not really much more you can do as a black man  than to go back and be a good teacher". Not that this is something that I had ruled out. But it was just the idea, These are the things that you can do and you should not expect to do anymore. During the fall--during the spring of each year a number of the big companies would come on campus to recruit. blacks weren't even invited to interviews. Then there are--There were the fraternity rushes. And this is a --I had an experience that I thought a bit about. I was rushed by a fraternity called Sigma Chi. And I guess Sigma Chi is one of the oldest white fraternities in the country. And I was rushed by this fraternity because of a lot of the members of fraternity were athletes. And I knew them and that connection. And we'd spend a lot of time together. And we got to a point where my name came up. And someone in the fraternity said, "Well if we take Dick we'll have to go local. National forbids blacks from being in here." And I found this out. I wasn't suppose to know this. And just didn't think this was fair to my--the members of the fraternity. So I said, "No. I'm gonna withdraw. I'm gonna withdraw from this." When I did that, indicated that I was no longer interested I joined a fraternity called  Pi Lambda Phi which is a Jewish fraternity, because Jews were suffering the same thing at Dartmouth as blacks. There was a code of system however more Jews got in. But there were two Jewish fraternities there. One was Pi Lambda Phi  and the other one was called Tau Epsilon Phi. So the blacks more or less said, "What we'll do is sort of divide ourselves up." And that was the one of the (unclear) that was a local chapter--I think it was Gamma Rho or something--And so we sort of distributed ourselves between those three fraternities. Which to me was a great experience. Because my Jewish fraternity brothers were very, very good and helpful to me. They knew that I did not have the resources that they had. And so they admitted my roommate and myself in without having to pay any dues, which was just a minor thing. But I knew that anytime that I wanted to borrow a car, you know, I could go to--these were real, real honest to God fraternity brothers. And I just felt very, very at home there.
Speaker 2: Now did you start playing sports the first year?
Speaker 1: Yeah. One had to play. Yeah. Freshman basketball.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Freshman--.
Speaker 1: That was a requirement.
Speaker 2: Freshman basketball. Oh. Okay.
Speaker 1: So I played freshman basketball. And I did well. And I think it was the last game. The track coach whom I didn't know came to the game and said, "You played a great game." He said, "I'll bet I can make a high jumper out of you." And I said, "I'll  bet you can't." And he said, "Why don't you come on out for track?" And I did. And by the end of that year I was jumping about six feet, which back then was a pretty good jump. And so for the next three years I joined the track team. Then I--my senior year I was jumping about six feet six. Which was my height and was a good jump. I could--I won the most of the dual meets and went to the IC (unclear). Came down here and jumped against the--our Navy in a pretty significant tournament. So this was good for me. Because it got me off the campus a great deal. Because Dartmouth is a very isolated place. And I think that athletics was very important to me to have a diversion from studying and having something to do. But--Other than spend just being in the-spending  time in the dormitory.
Speaker 2: Now how--basic things like getting your hair cut and things like that? What was that? Did you--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well that was a real problem. I mean--So we didn't get haircuts often up there. We had one barbershop that we'd go to. And we'd laughed about it. And I don't think we were too welcomed. So between vacations, that's when you basically got your haircut. But what difference did it make when you're gonna be up there with a bunch of old guys anyway. You see? But no, those kind of things didn't happen.
Speaker 2: Now had you--did you develop friends--friendships there with white guys that had been (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yes I did. Developed a lot of friendships there and we're still close. But not as close as the black guys that I grew up with. Now with the black guys at Dartmouth spend a lot of time now. We were very close. And I guess I developed them, primarily over bid whist games during--on weekends and when we had time in the day. But, you know, there're a number of Dartmouth alums that I-we're very close now.
Speaker 2: Can you talk about the twelve guys? Do you remember all their names? That were there? Or--?
Speaker 1: No. Because there would be more. Because some would leave and some would come.
Speaker 2: Oh. I see. But what about the ones that you're still in touched with? And the ones--?
Speaker 1: Sure. My roommate I guess I spent the most time with was a guy by the name of Garby Clark. Garby went--finish Dartmouth and went on to become a lawyer. And headed up an organization called, Leadership, Education and Development. Again a nonprofit program that takes youngsters in the eleventh grade--the summer that they're in eleventh grade and takes them to Ivy League school usually--to learn about business in corporate America. And I served on that board for a number of years. (unclear) He's recently retired. The other two guys in my class one passed on. He was an attorney from South Bend, Indiana. My other classmate is in Atlantic City [New Jersey] where's he's done very well in business. The three blacks in the class ahead of me all became judges. One here in D.C., one in Atlantic City and one upper New Jersey. The class ahead of that one--I think two guys dropped out of that class (unclear). Behind me, there were I think four students in that class and then one dropped out. And one's a minister and still around.
Story_ID: 17801
Speaker 1: And then during the 1958, in the class of--I was class of '55 [1955]. In the class of 1958, they took in twelve blacks which doubled the number. And they it began to go up. Carl McCall is a guy that was comptoller and ran for the governor of New York, was in my class. And a number of--By then things are breaking and blacks are able to--things sort of moved fast after '58 [1958] And I think that's why Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] decided to move to take in so many in one class.
Speaker 2: And what was Dartmouth's culture in some respects? You know, in its history? And did they teach you--did they go about actively trying to teach men how to be men in some respects? Were there sort of any (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Well, I guess Dartmouth was founded in 1769, as a school for Indians. Believe it or not, for Native Americans. I don't think the first Native American actually graduated from Dartmouth until 1923. I found that very amazing to me. Basically they're philosophy is they're a liberal arts college. And they try to develop the whole man back then. And I think it's the best liberal arts college in the country still. And then in 1976, they graduated they're first class that had females in it. And my daughter was in the class of 1978. So she went there not to long after that. But it was still--It was a liberal arts college. Most of the students there either went on to graduate school or had a family connection into business. Okay? So for example one year a student one year ahead of me was Rodney Rockefeller. Well what the heck you don't need to go to graduate.  The Hecht Company was in Washington [D.C.]. Ken Hecht was a, you know,  had his own company there. Pete Leiberman had Leiberman Breweries in Chicago [Illinois]. I mean these were some pretty wealthy guys.  Now not everybody was--Not all the students came from wealthy families. There were a number of poor white students there. Not too many Asians. Just not too many minority students. But there were a number of poor white students there that were on scholarships.
Speaker 2: And did you--let's talk about the team some.  Were you guys traveling at all?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Can you talk about, you know, when you would go away on a you know, road trips and what that experience was like?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  I could tell a story or two. The first trip that I took with the varsity, we were going up to Cornell University [Ithica, New York].  And we stopped at a lodge called Bear Mountain Lodge up in New York state. And it was where the Knickerbockers [basketball team] used to practice.  So we went in to have dinner.  And this is my first trip with the varsity. And we were in this dinning room.  And I just happened to be sitting at a table with three other guys.  And we were sort of off in a corner, just 'cause that's just where we were.  And we had, we had--we always had steak, baked potato, peas and carrots and tapioca pudding.  Well, I was the first at my table to be served.  And everybody--and my back was to everybody else.  In other words, I'm just seeing the four guys that (unclear).  And they brought this huge steak.  And I knew that all that steak was not for me.  And what I did was I began to take my knife and fork and cut it in fourths.  Because I knew that that just wasn't my steak.  I mean this is my--this is my homecoming back.  You know, we never had steaks that big.  And today, those guys all tease me about that.  And at least two of them say they would have done the same thing.  But I never had any, you know, any real trips--behavior problems on trips.  I have--I have been--and this is hurting.  I got hurt a couple of times.  And I--and there was a pause.  You know what I mean?  This bothered me a little bit.  And I didn't know whether It was 'cause I was black  or because they were just glad that I might get taken out of the game.  But I went to places that had never seen somebody black play.  We went to some small colleges up in New England.  And--but basically that was good.  I had a good white roommate.  And I was the only black on the team until my senior year.  And then another black by the name of Gene Booth joined me.  And Gene and I are good friends until today.
Story_ID: 17802
Speaker 1: Now its' time for graduation.  Now what are you majoring in?
Speaker 2: I'm majoring in sociology.
Speaker 1: And why did you decide on sociology?
Speaker 2: Because--and this is what I like about a liberal arts college.  Because during my first two years, you know, you take courses from different departments.  I just enjoyed sociology.  Because it was about people.  The study of people.  And I just liked people.  This--my shyness is going away now and I'm sort of finding myself.  I could feel myself growing through school.  And I--and that's the best experience that I had with this shyness thing was with my senior year, I did student teaching.  And I student taught at Hanover [New Hampshire] high school, where all the professors' kids were.  So these were some real bright kids.  And this was a challenge. And to get before a group and talk to teach kids--I mean this was--this was very, very helpful to me in, you know, in developing.  So when I left, you know, I felt very comfortable teaching.  Still shy though socially.  Remember now, here I am eighteen years old.  This is when guys and girls date.  I was denied, not denied this.  I didn't have the resources to do this.  So I thought I was a little socially behind.  But not really.  Because I'm learning about another world that I didn't know about.  So it's a good trade-off.
Speaker 1: And you were saying earlier that you learned there that,you know, put you in good standing--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: For the rest of your life. And I'd like you to address--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.  So what I learned in high school was that I had to be better than the average white person just to get the job that they had.  Or a job similar to theirs.  So that made--that let me know that I had to work doubly hard.  And then I'm forced into this world of very, very selected--selective white students.  I mean I'm dealing up there with some of the best brains in the country.  Competing with the grades.  And I learned that I was able to achieve and do better.  I learned academically.  I said, "You know, I'm not the dumbest person in the world.  Maybe I'm pretty smart to be able to negotiate this system here."  I learned that on the basketball field I could play pretty good.  'Cause I never played against a white basketball player before.  I'd never run track.  So I learned that, "You know, I came from that little segregated city.  I came from a low income family."  We were poor, but, you know, in terms of our expectations we were rich.  We were rich.  In terms of what-those things that were important to us.  It wasn't money.  And I just learned that I could do anything.  You know.  If I can compete with these guys, and these are the best-some of the smartest white folks in the whole country, you know, I can be successful. What's gonna happen later when I get into my career? I found myself doing some things that I didn't know I could do. And I just learned that I could do just about anything that I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother--did she ever, you know, during this time or later in her life, did you guys ever compare notes between what she experienced at Oberlin [College] and what you experienced at Dartmouth?
Speaker 2: No. We didn't. And I'm so glad that we didn't. Because to this day, I know that I could never walk in my mother's shoes.  She's much smarter. She is. I mean I have people today that, you know, remember. 'Cause she influenced alot of lives at the school, you know, that remember her.  And I can't hold a torch to her.
Story_ID: 17803
Speaker 1: Now when it's time to graduate, what are your thoughts about things? And do your--does your family come up for the graduation? And--?
Speaker 2: Yeah. My family would come up to the closest basketball game which was at--usually at Penn [University of Pennsylvania] or at Princeton [University]. So they would come up for those games. And one thing I'll never forget. We played at--we played at Princeton [University]. And after the game, Right after the game my brother, while I was still in my uniform, came up and said, "Nice game." So I said, "Come on down to the locker room." I mean this is new to him. So he went down to the locker room. And I introduced him to some of the guys. And we were walking out and we were walking back to the bus. And he said, he said, "That overcoat you have on is mighty raggedy." I said, "This is all I got." Well Tuesday--he didn't have a lot of money. I mean he was working hard to support a family. Tuesday, I had another overcoat. I mean that meant a lot to me. But yes, they came up for graduation. And--
Speaker 1: And were very proud.
Speaker 2: And again my fraternity was sort of the center for my graduation social activities. So we went down there. They didn't know a lot about Jewish food (laughs). By this time, you know, I'm one of the Jewish boys (laughs).
Speaker 1: At this point.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause all--.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I'd been in the fraternity for three years. Yeah. And I spent a lot of time there on weekends 'cause there was nothing else to do there.
Speaker 1: So you graduate in 1958--.
Speaker 2: Five.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry 1955.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 17804
Speaker 1: Is it already decided that you're gonna go back to [Washington] D.C. and teach?
Speaker 2: Yeah. That I'm gonna go back to D.C. and teach yes. Yes. Why because there just--there weren't a lot of things that I saw myself doing at that time. And there were a lot of pressures too. I mentioned my mother wanted--she just thought teaching was something that I should do. And I had this great uncle who with my mother an administrator and this guy up there, I mean I'm gonna be on the fast track to something. But I sort of got off the track. But I enjoy teaching.
Speaker 1: So now what school? I know you were at the D.C. school system.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to the D.C. school system. And my first year was very good. I taught what I call atypical students. An atypical student was a student that had an IQ of 75 or below. Because I was the only male in this school that taught these kinds of students--and IQ was very important back then. The IQ's that I had ranged from forty-six to fifty-five. I had the lowest IQ's in this junior high school.  And I had thirteen students. And what I found was that these kids--most of these kids were in my class because they couldn't read. And how do you take an IQ test? You have to read. So if you got--if you can't read, what are you gonna get? You're gonna get a low IQ. So when I looked and got to know these kids, I found out that these kids were there primarily because they couldn't read. Now to make matters worse, Dartmouth [College,Hanover, New Hampshire] only had two education professors. They never taught me how to teach reading. So here I am with these kids that can't read, and I don't know how to teach reading. They were poor kids. I had the nicest little girl in my class. She was thirteen years old and she became pregnant. And I found that this girl was impregnated by her brother because they had to sleep in the same bed. Then when I began to see things in the real world, it was just a good way to start teaching. Man, this is nothing like Hanover High School [Hanover, New Hampshire] when I had the professors' kids. And I began to see what some of the real education problems were.
Story_ID: 17805
Speaker 1: Then I--the Army called me. I had been in ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps]. So I went in as a second lieutenant in the Army. Another learning experience. When I was at Dartmouth, I had to work every summer. So normally one goes to ROTC training between the junior and senior year. And they're commissioned right after graduation. Well I had to work during my junior year. So I didn't go to ROTC camp until the summer after I had graduated. And I found myself--I was in what you call the ordinance corps. And it's a pretty technical branch of the service. And I went to ROTC summer camp at Aberdeen Proving Ground [Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland]. And I was in the summer camp with 1600 cadets. And most of them were from the South. The city guy--I was the only black in this whole camp. And I was in a barracks with guys primarily from Georgia Tech, [the] Citadel. I mean they had never gone to school with a black dude. So now I got to go through this thing all over again in the military. You know. But the military makes you get together. I mean if you're in a platoon, you got to pull together. So it wasn't long before, you know, they forgot that. The fact that I was black was overlooked. If I didn't do my job, it was reflected on everybody. If they didn't do theirs--so we developed pretty good relations. So good that in five--it was a six week training thing. In five weeks we went to--we went in the field for two weeks. And after that two week experience, we went to a little town called Chambersburgh, Pennsylvania having a weekend leave. And we were sitting around a table about to order beer. And the waiter was taking table--was taking orders. And when he got to me he said, "You've had too much." (laughing)  You know, we'd all walked in together. But that was the way of not serving me. So I--the guys didn't get it. So I just casually got up and went outside. And one of my fellow cadets came out and said, "What's up?" I said, "They're not serving me in there." So the guy said, "Well if they're not serving you, they're not serving anybody." So he went back in and they turned the table over. It was a place full of cadets. So I had to go in there and say, "Please don't!" To protect the very guy in the establishment that wouldn't serve to me. You see. So that was the lesson to that. You know. I appreciated that. But I didn't wanna--see sometimes you find yourself in a position where you can ruin everybody else's fun. These people wanna support you. But that was good.
Story_ID: 17806
Speaker 1: You were talking bout teaching--so the schools wee-The classes were smaller then. Thirteen--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, no. These were certain-These were atypical students. These were not normal students.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: So the class--
Speaker 1: So you had a special class.
Speaker 2: I see. Okay. Okay.
Speaker 1: yeah.
Speaker 2: Was that typical that you didn't have--they--?
Speaker 1: We--.
Speaker 2: This is before having special training for special needs children.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Right, right. I didn't have any--but why? Because I majored in sociology and education. So they figured that, you know, I ain't gonna teach that much. But I'm gonna hand hold these kids. But so I did that for five months. And then went in the army for six months. And then I came out of the army. Now this is what I want you to-I wanna go back to that experience of Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] when I really found that I was pretty capable. I mean I had to become aware of that. So I come out of the Army. And I see that the--they have a competition for teaching position to teach the military science. And I had taken military science in high school. So everybody--all the teachers that did this were at least a lieutenant colonel in the reserves. You know. And here I am a second lieutenant. And I've taken this test with them. I don't think many second lieutenants would do it. But I was right out of the Army. You know. These guys were older. I took the test and I knocked the top off of it. So here I am in this teaching job, which I kept for another four years. And I was the only second lieutenant. All the guys were lieutenant colonels and majors. And really I'm on the same level with them. Because they're at different schools. But we all got there. And then it's kind of hard for them to take this poor little young second lieutenant. And again I learned that, you know. I could work with these guys and they had much more years of experience than I had. But I could cut the mustard with them. And so I just learned early in life that there are a lot of things that if challenged, I could live up to. Which could take me to my next job.
Story_ID: 17807
Speaker 1: So I taught for four or five years in that. And then I needed to make some decisions. I said, "Teaching is a lot of fun and I enjoy it. But I gotta think about my future." And I thought about becoming a guidance counselor. Which again is what my mother was after she taught. And I got a fellowship to the University of Minnesota. So I went out there to study guidance and counseling. And I met a fellow that worked with the governor. And he was a GS-13 in the government. And that was a big job for a black person to have. And I spent time with him. And I said, "You know, I'd like to maybe develop a career in the government.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I liked--I began then to consider a job in the federal government (unclear) blacks. And so when I finished my training at the University of Minnesota, I decided I wanted to join the federal government. And didn't quite know how. Now here I live in Washington. And John F. Kennedy was President. And I read in 'Jet Magazine' that they're looking for blacks to go into government. Now this was what he was about. And I read that once you go to Louis Martin, from Chicago who was special assistant to the President--at the same time that I read this, Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] came out with this magazine. And I found out that there were thirteen black Congressman in office from Dartmouth. And I decided that I should contact Louis Martin. And also contact each one of those Congresspeople and tell them that I wanted to get into government. And I wrote each of them a letter. And heard from most of them. And--but all steered me to the black Congresspeople. [William] Dawson from Chicago [Illinois]. [Charles] Diggs, [Robert] Nixs from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and Adam [Clayton] Powell were four of those guys. So then I went to see them. Even the white congressman said, "Dick, better to go and see them." So I went to see them. And I saw each one of them. And they told me that they were gonna hook me up with Louis Martin. So I call Louis Martin, whose office was in the White House. And I said, "I am referred by these four Congressmen." And got in to see Louis Martin. He said so--just a wonderful man. He said, "Now what am I gonna do with a teacher that majored in sociology?" I said, "But Mr. Martin, I wanna serve my country. And 'Jet Magazine' said that I should come to you. So here I am." "Give me your application." So he took it. The next thing I know, he's calling me back. And he says, "I think I might have a job for you. But it's gonna be working in New York, Brooklyn, New York." I said, "Mr. Martin, this is the seat of the government and I gotta go to New York to take the job?" He said, "Yeah. This is where the job is." And he said, "That's a good start."
Story_ID: 17808
Speaker 1: I took a job there at the Office of Civil Defense Staff College. And I was teaching civil defense officials about what would happen if there was a national emergency in this country. Well it just so happened that we got in a big fiasco with Cuba. Okay. And from a defense point of view, and civil defense point of view, the national policy was that if there was an attack on this country, that people would go into fallout shelters and stay for two weeks. Okay. And here I am at the staff college. And this whole new concept of people living in fallout shelters is new. And so my boss a white guy--four years, just about three or four years older than me said, "Dick, we have been given the assignment to develop a course to train people how to manage fallout shelters." I said, "We have?" He said, "Yeah. I think we got about six weeks to do it. And then put a course on at this college." Now, see I'm learning that I can do just about anything. Nobody--nobody knew this field. Just Paul, Bill and I. We were the only ones. So we got research and we did things and we put a course together. Now this course--now this little course that we put together was gonna be taught after we trained the trainers it was gonna be taught all over the country. So once again I learned that I got the stuff. I can just about do anything. From, you know, I didn't know anything about managing fallout shelters. I had to learn about radiation, people, management. The whole thing and put this together. And we began to train government officials and civil defense officials, military people from all over the country. I mean I had--I had to run a class. And when I do it, we would take 'em into a simulated fall-out shelter and keep them in there for three weeks, eating biscuits and water. I mean it was-And we put this together as part of our training. And about once every three weeks I'm in a fall-out shelter for three weeks. I was skinny as I could be, eating biscuits and water. And I trained generals. I mean it's nothing for me to have a class and I would have-you know, how some generals can be generals. So I--and I had all kinds of people. And so I would say, "Well what do you want to be called?" You know, Jim? Do you wanna be called James? And one guy said, "I wanna be called General." So I said, "Well you can't be called General. Because we got a couple of other generals in here. And I get you all mixed up." You know what I mean? I forced them to be peers in this thing. Which was a lot of fun. And that worked for me very well. So as I was teaching this course, I was sort of developing a reputation around the country.  And later I had a student--a student (laughs) much older than me. He came up in the U.S. Department of Education. And at that time, the government had decided that we needed to develop some more courses in civil defense education, and had given that responsibility to what was the Office of Education at that time. And this guy said, "We want you to come down to Washington [D.C.] to work for us." And that's how I got to Washington. So when I got down there, they wanted me to develop a new course. And it was called Civil Defense Adult Education. So, you know, I'm hot now. I mean I--see I had to know that I could do this. Something that had never been done before. So this, this gets easy. And so I put together a manual with them and a course to do that.
Story_ID: 17809
Speaker 1: And at that time it's about 1964. And the Civil Rights Act passed. And I said I wanted to, you know, this is something I want to be a part of. And so I had a funny experience. One of my bosses in the DC school system came to work with (unclear). Well the Office of Education had asked me to-if I knew any credentialed,'cause I'm a (unclear) from Dartmouth. They wanted some credentialed black educators to go South and begin desegregating the schools. And that they should have a PhD. So I knew one. A guy that I had worked with. And I got him. And asked him to come down and be interviewed. So he came down. (unclear) had asked me to bring him down. And so after his interview, I went over. So he said, "How did it go?" And the guy that was gonna hire him said, "It went well. But there's one condition." I said, "What's that?" He said, "he will come to work for us, if you will come in and be his deputy." And that's how I got in. But the territory was Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, South Carolina, Tennessee and Florida. And this was in 1965. and once again the government had no guidelines about how you desegregate the schools. And so I jumped at this opportunity. Just to put together--how do you write a desegregation plan? You know. How do we get this done? And (laughs) the first thing we had to do was write some guidelines. And then we had to take these guidelines and we had to take them South. Okay. And meet with the school superintendents. Our plan was you meet with the school superintendents and tell them what they say. And then you meet with the civil rights people. Or you might meet with them together. So I put together this plan for him to do this. And it started with the state of Tennessee. Because it's a northern state. The most northern state. And probably was the easiest state to talk about this with. And so I went down and I ran the first meeting. And I got to know the South. And got to know some of the civil rights people. And I just went from state to state.  And I said, "Ben," His name was Ben Hutton. I said, "The next one is--I've laid the model out. Mississippi is yours." He said, "Well Dick, you're not gonna be--?" I said, "No. I've got to go and do one," I mean I'm a deputy . I've got to be in South Carolina. So he went there. And he got caught between the school superintendents and the civil rights people. Okay. And the civil rights people did not thing that he was forceful enough. So they began to wrtite letters and that sort of thing. Well the next thing I know I have his job. I mean they just 'cause there weren't many of us. And so I began then to be responsible for desegregating schools in those states.
Story_ID: 17810
Speaker 1: Can you put this is in some historical context. This is like almost ten years after Brown vs. Board of Education [Topeka, Kansas] was passed.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is probably the amount--maybe of the time that it's taken to put, you know, some regulation in place.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well here's what happened. When Brown occurred, Brown said that the dual school systems were illegal. But that was on a school system by school system basis. There was no federal law. That was just a case. Okay. So that just applied to those school systems. And from '54 [1954]--and it said, "With all deliberate speed." Okay. So any time a school system was desegregated, it was the result of a suit. There was nothing to--there was no law for the whole land. And this is when [U.S. Congressman] Adam [Clayton] Powell was trying to get that Powell Amendment, and all the federal money going into schools. So during the early '60s [1960s]. The marches and all of that was going on down South, resulted in the passing of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Which had one part Title 6. Which said that you cannot received federal funds and discriminate. So this was to apply to the South. But first they found out that there were-there wasn't that much federal money going to the South. So in 1965, they passed the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. And a lot of people think this was done just to help the schools. It was also done to put some money in the South. So that they could either desegregate. Or the money could be taken away from them. So that's when I got involved in administering Title 6. So we said, "Okay. In order to get this federal money, you gotta desegregate." And our job was to go down and try to work with school officials, and work with the community to get these schools desegregated.
Speaker 1: Now what did Title 6 say?
Speaker 2: Title 6 said that if you are going to receive or if you do receive federal money, that you must desegregate the school system. You must put an end to this dual school structure--a system for blacks and another system for whites. So then our jobs were to write plans for those school systems that wanted to desegregate, or terminate the federal money.
Speaker 1: Now when did Title 6 pass? Under what administration?
Speaker 2: It was the [President Lydon B.] Johnson administration.
Speaker 1: Under Johnson.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And who was instrumental in its, you know, working on it and its passage?
Speaker 2: It was Powell.
Speaker 1: Powell--?
Speaker 2: Powell. Yeah, Adam Powell.
Speaker 1: Oh Adam Clayton Powell?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had been working on it for years. He was trying to put an amendment on everything that went through the congress that said, "If you take federal money, you can't discriminate." And finally after the '64 [1964]--I mean after all the riots and everything it was able to get through. But then they had to put some money in. They did that in '65 [1965]. So the southern school systems got started, and they didn't wanna lose the federal money.
Story_ID: 17811
Speaker 1: Now the problem was that how do you desegregate these systems? And that was--and we had to. And this--this was a real hurting thing later. It didn't bother me at first 'cause I just thought we were all doing the right thing. These systems were desegregated by freedom of choice plans. Which meant that somebody had to go into a community and meet with a black family and encourage that black family to send their child to the white schools for the first time. So I had a staff of people. And we had civil rights groups the American Friends Service Committee, the Quakers, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. They were all involved in this getting these families to send their kids to white schools with my staffings. And now we would meet with families. And I would come into your house. And I would tell you as a mother that we wanted your kid to, you know, be the one to do this. And we would go to the first day of school. And we'd stand on the street corner with U.S. Marshals or lawyers from the Justice Department.  See those kids going to schools. And you know some of the things that happened to those youngsters in that school. And then I began to think. I said, "This is a heck of a thing. The United States government is putting the burden on black families and black children to desegregate these schools. This is a terrible thing." Think about it. We had cross burnings. I mean--I remember my first Ku Klux Klan cross!  And I was with some guys from the NAACP . And I said, "Mike, that's a cross. It's been burned." "Yeah." And a guy looked at me and said, Yeah. And that's not the cross Jesus Christ died on either (laughs) I want you to know." You know. But, you know, blacks lost jobs. Their houses were burned for sending a kid to a white school to get a quality education. The government see, put the burden on folks. But this was not right. And this thing sort of began to bother me. Well we only had two remedies. Either desegregate your schools or we take the money away. Well we had a lot of cases where I just had to take--recommend that the money be taken away. It got so bad that we had more than half of the school systems in Alabama without federal money. And I had a little problem with Governor [George] Wallace. He sent state--had me taken out of the state. I was escorted to an airplane. Mississippi we did the same thing. So finally I got what was called hot down south. I mean there were-It would be good if I were gotten out of there for a while. So (unclear) national Institute of Public Affairs fellowship to go out to Stanford [University] and study for a year. So I did. And I came right back to the same thing. I mean that's what I wanted to do. But while I was at Stanford, I got a different perspective. I said, "We have got to get rid of this business of freedom of choice. It's not fair to black folks. It's not fair to these kids." So I wasn't but three weeks before the--I think it's the 5th Circuit Court in Jackson Mississippi said that required the government to go down and develop desegregation plans for thirty-three school systems in Mississippi. And my boss called me in. A heck of a nice guy. His name was Greg Anrick (ph.). He said, "Dick, This is gonna be your baby." I said, ""Man, I'm just getting back!" He said, "That's why you're going." So I had a staff of maybe forty people. And we had to do this in three weeks. So I got people from universities all over the country.
Speaker 2: You had to do it in three weeks?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Under this court order. I mean the court order was frail. It was a Mississippi court. So I was determined that the plans that we wrote would not be freedom of choice plans. That they would be plans to desegregate the whole school system. They would assign kids by geographical boundary. This takes the weight off everybody and spreads the kids around. And we didn't--there weren't that many plans like that. But I said, "We're gonna do all of this that way." So I flew down. I had the group to meet in Mobile, Alabama. 'Cause I didn't want them working in the same state that they were staying in. And I'm down there in a meeting with them. And two guys come in that were strangers. They were FBI telling us that we needed to move. Because of the hotel we were in. So I moved our persons to Atlanta. A little expensive for the government. Anyway we--we did this. We developed these thirty-three desegregation plans. Not freedom--not the freedom of choice way, but by forcing these kids to be assigned to each school. So that there was no--everybody was involved. And I got back. And I was pretty happy about what we had done. And about a week passed. And I get a call from Mr. Greg Anrick who's my boss and he said, "Dick, we are due in the secretary's office the next morning." Which was a Friday. His name was Robert Finch. So I said, "What's up?" and he said, "Well you're gonna have some decisions to make. And I don't want to talk about it." I mean we were pretty close. So I went down that Saturday morning. And as I got to the secretary's office, he was coming up. So I tried to stop him. And he sort of waved me away.  And didn't wanna talk to me. So I went in to see the secretary of Health, Education and Welfare. And he said, "Good to meet you. I've heard wonderful things about you. I've got your personnel records right here. You've got a pretty good career in government. You've got a bright future here." He said, "Well I want you to do something for us." And he said, "I want you to go appear in Jackson [Mississippi] as a government for the,as a witness for the government." And I said, "Yes, sir." "And I want you to testify that these school systems that you wrote plans for really need more time to desegregate." "More time, sir?" He said, "Yeah." He said, he said, "Really, I think they need more time." I said, "Well I developed the plans with my staff." I said, "They were approved by Greg Anrick who's an educator. They were approved by [Leon] Panetta who was the director of the Office for Civil Rights, and they were approved by the Justice Department." And I said, "Mr. Secretary, to ask me to do that would be you're asking a federal employee to go into a federal court and perjure himself." I said, "That's what your asking me to do and I won't do it." He looked me dead in the eye and said, "You're dismissed." I didn't know what that meant. So I knew that meant to get the heck out of his office. I didn't know whether I was fired or what. So I left. And I went on up to Atlantic City [New Jersey] to visit one of my Dartmouth [College]  friends. And I didn't go back to work until Wednesday. (unclear) had no office. Taken all my staff away. And now this guy Greg Anrick who was my boss did the same thing. He's a white guy.
Speaker 2: He said the same thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah. He wouldn't go. And--but they did find three white guys from the South that went to testify. And the school systems were given a year and the government appealed. Leon Panetta led the government and a guy named Paul Lynbar in appeal. And the next year, not only did the Supreme Court uphold what we had done. But they said, "Okay, we're gonna use these plans as a model. And we're gonna establish the deadline for all school desegregation in the South." So, you know, it delayed it for a year. But it paid off.
Story_ID: 17812
Speaker 1: But now what am I gonna do? Well it's kind of funny. And this is a good story. So I had nothing. So a friend of mine that was a--in the department in the Office of Education asked me if I'd come and work with him to set up a new program called the Career Opportunities Program which I did for about six weeks. And then Leon Panetta, this guy Greg Anrick and a guy named Tim Worth. Tim Worth later became a [U.S.] Senator. I mean these were some fine people in government to work with. Had been asked to take a look at a program called Title 1. It was the largest federal program to education. And so I had nothing really that I was, you know. Really doing. I was helping a guy set up a program. So they asked me to look,"This programs needs to be studied. And we wanna get a taskforce of people to look at it. And we'd like for you to be the director of the task force that's Title 1." And I said to Greg, whom I knew. I said, "You know, I don't do--not gonna participate in the study of something that might never change. You taking the results of the study (unclear)." I said, "I'll make a deal with you. The pro--the position has no director now. I'll be the staff director of the study. And I'll be acting director of the division." He said," Let's think about it." So they went to the Commissioner of Education. And he bought into it. And the Commissioner of education was a guy named Jim Allen. Jim Allen says, "Well that's a great idea. What do we do now?" And they tell him, "Well you've gotta take it to the secretary (laughing)." Now this is the same secretary that I refused. So I just laughed. I said, "This will never happen." But they took it to him. And they said, "Well this program is really all screwed up. And it's gonna take a man like that to get it straight." And they put me in the job of running at that time about a $6 billion program in all fifty states and five territories, until I was able to run the program. Work with this task force. We made a lot of improvements and everything. So I did that for eleven years. Incidentally, every time I would make a job change, I would call Louis Martin. And Louis told me, right after I got the first job, he said, "Dick, you are one of the few people that I helped out that tells--stays in touch and tells me what he's doing." So (unclear) Louis Martin. And I knew I could always call on Louis Martin for help. And he used to refer to me as the only black billionaire in the world because I was running this $6 billion program. So I did that for eleven years
Story_ID: 17813
Speaker 1: But in the mean time I--when I was doing the Title 6 work, I got a lot of support from liberals in government. Like my boss. I'd say, "Okay. You know, what we really need in the South, we need to--we can get more support if we can get the athletic teams desegregated. And if we can get student teachers placed in-across-black student teachers going in white schools. And white student teachers going in black schools." And so during the summer we couldn't do much, because the schools were closed. We could get the kids to choose. And there wasn't enough-We had to count kids when we went down. So I said, "This time I'm gonna work on the colleges and universities." And I went and I told my boss (laughing) that this is what I wanna do." And we had a commissioner then by the name of Dock Al. And he was a pretty popular guy. And I said, "I'm gonna do this. And you guys don't have to know anything about it." I said, "If we get in trouble, you don't know what Fairley is doing." So I went down. I went--my first school was the University of Alabama. I went down there. Bear Bryant was the football coach. I mean he was a national legend. I wanted to pick on him, you know, somebody that get a lot of publicity. So I went down thee and I sat with Bear Bryant. And the President of the University of Alabama was a guy named Frank Rose. And we talked about desegregating the football team. There were already (unclear) to the University of Alabama. But (unclear). So I said to the president--I said, "Mr. President-I said, "You, you know, if you don't do this, you stand to lose $30 million in federal funds." So they had their little meeting. Bear Bryant came back to me and he said--I'll never forget it. He said, "I'll desegregate my football team, but I need a year to do it." He said, "This is summer," he said, "I can't do much about fall." He said, "Let me have next year. And I will go out next year. And I will recruit some of the finest nigras in the United States." I said, "Coach, you're on." And I said, "Next September I expect tickets to your first game." I said, "Now let me give you a little lesson. I don't like your word  'nigras'." I said, "Now what I want you to do is this is called a knee. Okay. And I just want you to say 'knee-grow', 'knee-grow'."  And I said, "You say that for me." He did.  I went down there (unclear).  Went over to Mississippi that summer, and picked on every major state institution in the South.  It worked.
Speaker 2: Now why was, you know, with the Title 6, the first--why were those states chosen?
Speaker 1: Oh no, no, I just had six.
Speaker 2: You had six as a--okay, I see--
Speaker 1: And then there were other people who had other--and then we even had somebody in the North.  But I had the worst--my states were the most racist states.
Story_ID: 17814
Speaker 1: When you went to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] during that time, were--you got your masters.  It was in Education?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That--and did that give you--did you feel that was sort of necessary to give you, you know, more--remember how you were saying I just had a--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It--.
Speaker 2: Well it did.  And when I went to Stanford, it wasn't a program to get a Masters.  I had to make that--I had a year out there.  It was a great year.  And the purpose of the program was sort of the--pick you take a mid-career person that had done well.  And to sort of go back to school to recharge your batteries.  And I had a colleague in the Department of Education who knew the dean out there.  And this was a real supporter of mine.  And he said, "Dick, while you're out there you should get your masters degree."  And he set that up for me. So I took a special program, which resulted in my masters.  And since I, you know, had been there, I decided later that I was gonna go on and get adoctorate. But I wasn't interested in school.  And because there was so much action out there without it.  And when I was in the Department, I was the youngest person at my grade level--black or white.  Again, going back to this thing where--this confidence thing. That if you--and I feel that way today. There--there's not too much that I won't take on that's in my area.  That's been very good for me.  And I--it just worked.
Story_ID: 17815
Speaker 1: So let me just get this correct.  So you started out doing these, you know, for bomb shelters training?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. And then, you know, you are inventive, I would say.  You know, in looking for a job.  And find your way to Louis Martin.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And--.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't get--Louis Martin got me in the fall-out shelter business.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) that's--Oh that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Louis Martin  got you to the fallout shelter business?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then you end up--You know, there's this opportunity that opens?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I taught--I was teaching a guy.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he was in the Department of Education.  And he--.
Speaker 1: Oh,okay.
Speaker 2: By then, you see, they're saying that we need to get this all over the country. More about civil defense.  So he asked me if I would come from New York back here and put together a course to do that.  And I said, "Sure."  So I wrote a pretty extensive manual that went out to all the states and to every state Department of Education to begin training these people.
Speaker 1: And then you worked with the Title Six programs.  That last for about--you say six--?
Speaker 2: That lasted for about five, six years.
Speaker 1: Five, six years.  But you get--This is what I don't understand.  So the secretary who fired--who let you go--he dismisses you, right?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't let me go.  'Cause you couldn't--I mean--what do--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) He couldn't 'cause you were protected.).  But you said--I was trying to figure out what--?
Speaker 2: I (unclear).  So he said, "You're dismissed."
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Hmm.
Speaker 2: That meant out of my office.  So I went back to my job, which they had taken from me.  But I still had a job.  I mean I was detailed to work with this guy that I knew.  But that was just for a short while.  And then they decided--And my supporters were Leon Panetta, who had been the director of Civil Rights and who knew that I did the right thing down there.  And then when they took us back to the Secretary.  It just goes to show you sometime that if you do the right thing--You see if you do the right thing--I mean 'cause that man--that Secretary Finch was saying to me, "Look here, you go down there and be a witness for us, and your career will be enhanced."  I said, "Oh she's right.  Now this is all right.  I mean I can put too much into the struggle to do that.  And so I think doing the right thing pays off.  That's what I'm saying.
Story_ID: 17816
Speaker 1: So what was the team?  Who was this whole--Who were sort of the leaders at that time in the desegregation effort?  You know, in this--I mean you mention--?
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: And who were the--also the people on the--you know, between--Well the Civil Rights people who were-?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, active at that time?  I'm just trying to--.
Speaker 2: Well in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], they were playing the leadership role.  The NAACP legal defense were.  Okay, not--They had the legal part of the NAACP.  Then Marian Wright Edelman--she was Marian Wright then.  She had finished Yale [University], joined NAACP, and she was in Mississippi.  And so I worked very closely with Marion Wright.  And then her husband--And this was amazing.  Not at the time was [Peter] Pete Edelman.  Pete was also a civil rights attorney.  Now here's this black woman and white man living together in Mississippi in 1965. Now that was like (unclear) (chuckling).  They were a brave twosome.  Then there was a lady by the name of Jean Fairfax, who also was with the [NAACP] Legal Defense Fund, who was sort of responsible for their activities all over the South.  Then there were organizations--It was the American Friends Service Committee.  There were the Quakers.  And they had representatives in each state.  Then there were some state commissions.  A guy named Allen Black in Alabama.  Then there were the state Teacher Associations.  Like the NEA would have a--And these were segregated.  But they, you know, they were quite involved in (unclear) in what was happening.  Because what we found when we got these desegregation plans often, they would close the black schools.  They would fire the black principals.  See there was a lot of retribution for what we did.  I mean you take the state of Kentucky, which wasn't my state.  They fired 212--I remember the number--black principals in one summer.  You see. Now that's to send the word  to people like me, you know,"We'll get your people."  So then as they began to send in plans, we learned that we had to try to protect these black principals, that were very important role models in the South.  But what did we do?  We lost a lot of--we lost a lot of black administrators through this process.  Because there wasn't a heck of a lot we could do to protect them.  They were local people.  And Title Six does deal with employment.  So then you had to try to negotiate these people.  And so I had to work with state organizations and just to try to protect as many principals and teachers as we could.  Because we had--naturally, they weren't gonna--they weren't gonna place a lot of white teachers--I mean black teachers in the white schools.  They wanted to go the other way.  So you get involved with all of these other organizations as well.
Speaker 1: So do you have a situation of --You considered completely sort of horrible? You know, you mention the Kentucky situation. But were there others where it was particularly difficult or, you know, states that were, you know--?
Speaker 2: On teachers?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, most of--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Teachers or just the whole process.
Speaker 2: The whole process.
Speaker 1: I mean that where someone would--you know, particularly (unclear) you would do this.  But they would totally--.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let me give you an example of--And this is well documented.  I worked with the American Friends Service Committee.  And we were in-We were in Drew County, Mississippi.  And there's a family there.  And this is written about in a book by Connie Carrie.  The Carter family. Okay.  And these people were committed civil rights people.  But they also were determined to desegregate the schools in Drew County.  They had six kids--six girls.  And the guy worked for the Head Start Program--federal funded.  So when he sent his kids to that white school, they naturally fired him.  The NAACP found something for him to do.  They burned a cross on his lawn.  That wasn't enough.  They burned his house down.  And these people hung right in there.  They went through literal hell.  Now I want you to know that that Carter family sent all of their kids to desegregate schools in Drew County.  Every one of those kids now is a graduate of the University of Mississippi.  Went right through.  Now this is just amazing.  And Connie Carrie, who was a field worker for the American Friends Service Committee--when she left the civil rights work, she became a writer.  Which is interesting. Because when Martin Luther King was assassinated, after the funeral, I found myself with three white civil rights workers.  A lady named Winifred  Green, who worked Mississippi for the American Friends Service Committee, Connie Curry, who worked at Georgia, and a guy name (unclear) Myzell.  And we were marching in the processional.  And Stokely Carmichael's thing had come up then. He was starting this black power.  And we spent that evening talking about, "What are whites gonna do?"  I mean they were--I mean they just felt that with Martin Luther King dead and Stokely Carmichael on the rise, that white folks had no role in the Civil Right's movement.  And here I am saying, you know, "This--you do have in--how badly the government needed 'em and everybody need--."  Within five years they were out of the Civil Right's movement.  But they were all--But they all did something in education or something.  'Cause (unclear) the whole thing changed after Martin Luther King died, with whites in the civil right's movement in the South.  They just felt--Stokely Carmichael was talking that black power stuff.  And it was just a new day.  It was a new day.
Speaker 1: You're saying that they did continue to be involved on the education of--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were involved in other parts in of the--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And (unclear) Civil Right's workers?
Speaker 2: No, they began to do--I call them equal opportunity things, rather than-rather than  the kind of things that they were doing.  'Cause I mean their necks were really--I mean--I'd been--For example, this lady, Winifred Green (chuckling) used to write complaints to me all the time.  And the government. I mean she'd just give the government heck.  And they'd-things would come to me.  And we were good friends.  So I was in a staff meeting one day, when she had written a letter about some things that my staff had not done on a compliance investigation.  So I had a big staff meeting going.  And I was getting reports.  And I'm looking at this thing that she had written and my staff hadn't done. They just hadn't done it well.  I said, "If y'all don't get this thing straight, Umma have to go myself."  Well I had a pretty good staff of folks.  And (unclear) you go, you know, you go. So I ended up--I mean I hadn't done a compliance thing in a long time.  I got all these people, well.  They were taking me on.
Story_ID: 17817
Speaker 1: So I went down to (ph.) Watonka, Alabama.  And we did this investigation there.  And we--You know, we was--It was horrible, some of the things that we found.
Speaker 2: Like what?
Speaker 1: Well we found--this was Watonka, Alabama is where the guy--the black guy got killed in Vietnam.  And they wouldn't bury him in the white cemetery.  We just found out that things in the black school were just awful.  They didn't have the equipment.  This is--but number one, they're segregated.  And even if you go to black schools, it's not even equal.  And then we found an interesting thing about black folks.  I mean we went into the black high school.  And we went into the cafeteria and this--and the places where they stored food.  Because one of the things that the complaint was about was, they're feeding the black kids bologna and the white kids chicken.  Okay. So that was the na--one of the things that was in the complaint.  So I wanna see the freezer at the black school. So I go in this freezer --this walk-in, huge freezer--Man I'm looking at steaks .  I'm looking at lamb chops (laughs).  I'm looking maybe even some salmon there.  I mean this brother--this principal of this school. Now this was--this wasn't a typical thing.  But damn, he's getting--I mean they were, you know, don't you--you know, don't you make too much noise.  'Cause we know that you're putting some things in school.  So anyway, that--.
Speaker 2: That was at the black school?
Speaker 1: That was a black school.  The principal was, you know, ripping off of the--anyway.  So--and the next thing that happened on that visit was we were supposed to have a meeting of the black parents in the black school one evening.  And the--either the superintendent cancelled it or they got this black principal to cancel it.  Well they didn't let anybody know.  So parents were all there, schools locked.  And so Winifred Green, the civil rights worker was there.  And she said, "Well we gotta have this meeting."  So we ended up having cars on the parking lot turn the lights on.  You know, we made a--put cars on four sides with their lights on.  We had the meeting there.  And we just got more complaints.  So anyway to make a long story short.  The next morning I went in to meet with the--Woody Frank and I was staying in a little town called Marin, Montgomery.  But we had to drive about forty miles to this little--Watonka, Alabama.  And when we went in and had a meeting with the school superintendent, we told him that--I just told him--I said, "I'm gonna have to recommend that your federal funds be terminated."  And I said," I'm gonna try to expedite it 'cause things are awful here.  Unless you want to comply with the law, this is what I'm gonna do."  So he didn't give in.  So we left there to go back to the airport.  And Woody had forgotten something in the hotel.  So we had to go another route to the airport.  And when we did get to the airport--It's good we did, because they were gonna pick up for something to be (unclear) and take us (unclear).  So when we got to the airport, I went in and (unclear).  And we were stopped by these two huge patrol guys.  And then asked us to identify ourselves.  We did.  And then the captain of the state troopers came in.  And said we--he wanted to take us in for some questioning.  So before he could get it out good, I said, "Am I under arrest?"  And it took him for a while--He had to think for a while.  He said, "No."  So I made a beeline to the telephone.  And I called the FBI immediately. Now that was just standard procedure.  And so by this time a crowds gathering.  And so they passed me right through.  And I ended up talking to John Doe, in the Justice Department.  I said, "John, we have this big suit against Alabama--the whole state anyway."  I said, "If I go with these guys," I said, "You know where I am. You know, will this help our case?"  He said, "Yeah, try to get 'em to take you along."  So I went back in at--In the mean time, the captain of the state troopers was in the next phone booth.  He was calling the governor  down there.  So what I said, "We'll go."  He said, "No, I don't wanna take you."  He said, "But next time it's gone be different. Next time we're gonna lock you up.  We'll get you one time."  So here, we get escorted to this airplane in Montgomery. Everybody's on the plane.  You know, we get escorted out there by these state troopers at the ramp.  And people on the plane must thought we--two crooks.  I got some articles in--right out there about that. But I mean I was down there ten days later.  And I couldn't do that for my staff sake.  'Cause they running around--I mean I had a staff of young people that were committed.  They were more civil rights types than they were educators.  But they were bright. (Unclear) And I had some law students. And that--what they used to do is a whole 'nother story.  They were just committed.  It was like some of the people that rode on the Civil Rights riot.  But they worked for the government.  They were educated.  So that was--I mean I just saw things change in the South.  Now my wife is from Mississippi.  Okay.  Charlotte (unclear) is from Mississippi.  We go to Mississippi now, I mean it really makes me feel good to see the changes that are brought about in Mississippi.  And I just think the kids of today don't know the sacrifices--Not the sacrifices that we made.  We are government.  We--this was a job to us.  But the sacrifices that families made.  I mean I've seen houses burned down.  I've seen people lose their jobs. A lot of dues were paid to get kids, you know, into decent schools.  And I've seen the schools that they were in.  And most of them that--I mean I must have closed more--When they didn't comply with the law and we would take their federal money.  Then they had to come back to us with the plan. And I know I must of closed one heck of a lot of--when they came in with a plan that didn't make sense to me.  And I'd look at some of the black schools.  I just closed 'em. Now that--sometime that's come back to haunt me to.
Speaker 2: Why?
Speaker 1: Because you see the facilities that are bad.  And you don't think anybody should go to these kind of schools.  And then when you think about the fact that this school has a principal and it has black teachers in it.  And you got to wonder what's gonna happen to them. You see.  So you try to make sure that good things happen.  They get reassigned.  But sometimes just doesn't work out.  But you don't want kids in those inferior schools.
Story_ID: 17818
Speaker 1: So the whole Title Six Program--how long do you think was its most aggressive affective sort of period?  Was it over--A period of how many years?
Speaker 2: Oh from '65 [1965] 'til--See I wrote those plans in Mississippi in 1969.  And they were in court a year.  And then those plans just--by court order said, "This is--you can't stretch this out any longer."  They set the terminal date.  So I--I'm not saying that there was--there wasn't discrimination.  But there--The plans for desegregation had a terminal date.  You have to-you have to--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.  So that was--a geographically zone things.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five to--?
Speaker 1: I would say '65 [1965]  to around '73 [1973].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And then you had your whole North.  That was a whole different thing.  You still--see, because Title Six only referred to the South.  The fifteen Southern and border states.  The defacto segregation.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now what--When did that--But that happened within this--You know, by '74 [1974] period to the North?
Speaker 1: Then see--and by--but see that was like a different law. And it was real, real--you--because there were never dual school structures there.
Speaker 2: Right, so that's harder
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) That--you--that's harder--.
Speaker 2: To (unclear)'em monitored?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So maybe some place--That's harder to monitor.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: That's probably like--the places like Boston.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Right, right.
Speaker 2: You don't keep 'em long and--the bussing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No bussing (unclear).  The bussing wasn't really a part of your--Did it play a role?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but where you could prove that those schools were created for black folks.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: See in the South, it was clear.  That's why they--That's why you have historically black colleges.  What that means is that those colleges were created for black people under law.  That's what makes them historically black colleges.  And sort of protects them.  Because they were created for a class of people.
Speaker 2: Now when you start working as--was it the associate commissioner where--you know, where--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's when I was--.
Speaker 2: You want to say you were the 4 billion dollars.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Or the billion dollar man.  Now this was--this is different.  Because it's aid to students.
Speaker 1: Aid to state students.
Speaker 2: Students.
Speaker 1: Local school districts.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 1: To students.
Speaker 2: But it's to try to get more minorities into the school?
Speaker 1: No, it's to--It's to deal with the education problems that disadvantaged kids had.  It wasn't a racial thing.  But if you correlate low income and race, you find that it's the same kind of kids.  So now you're trying to get--you're trying to give these kids supplementary money or supplementary services so that they can do better in school.  And it--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) But this allow--?
Speaker 1: It still goes on.
Speaker 2: Right.  And this allowed though a lot of minority students to get into school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, to--.
Speaker 2: Financial--right--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, to supplement what goes on.
Speaker 2: Right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: And then what's--see that's the problem right away. Because it--the money is to be put on top of state and local money to provide extra services for these kids.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: And there are a lot of places that didn't wanna do it.  They wanted to take that money to do what normally do.  They'd put it on white students.  And--but--federal money.
Story_ID: 17819
Speaker 1: Now over that eleven-year period, what did you accomplish that you're proud of?
Speaker 2: Well I guess the one thing that I really am proud of is that when I worked with these families, okay, in Title Six in the South, getting these parents to send their kids to the white schools, I realized that parents play a big role in the education of their kids.  Poor parents can really change education.  Okay. So when I began to administer Title One, I found that parents of poor kids traditionally do not relate to schools.  Okay.  And we have this money being spent.  I said to myself," The best way for me to find out what's going on around the country is to start dealing with parents."  So I went to the Commissioner of Education. And I said, "What we need to do is to have a requirement that wherever Title One money goes, in any school or school system, parents must be involved.  And that school system must demonstrate that they're involved."  He said, "Dick, you are crazy.  We can't do that for the whole country."  I said, "Well that's the only way we can clear up a lot of these problems.  We need to get parents involved in these kids' education."  So I couldn't get it to fly.  So then we had a--this commissioner left.  And we had an acting commissioner.  A guy named Bill Pierce.  And I knew Bill a little better.  So I went to him.  I was persistent.  And I said, "Bill, look--." I said, "We gotta get these kids' parents involved in education.  And we can get this program--we can get--it's just gonna be--It's gonna be good.  And we can find out more that's going on.  And we can encourage states to do this." So Bill--I said, "Look, you're the acting commissioner.  You are not gonna be here but a couple of months."  'Cause I knew what job he was going to.  I said, "Let me get this regulation out."  He said, "Well Dick--." He said, "You make a good point."  He said, "You put the regulation up, but you sign it."  Usually they had to be assigned by the Commissioner.  He said, "You put it up with your signature."  So that I--He could disavow it at any time.  So I did.  And it went out.  And all hell broke loose.  State commissioners are calling him (chuckling). And it got worse.  Well he left.  But guess where he went.  He went to a job as the Executive Director of the State--Chief State School Offices.  All the state superintendents, he becomes their executive director.  'Cause I get a (unclear).  So then, he begins to harass me.  I learned a big lesson.  So I said--I called him.  I said, "Let's have lunch."  So we went out to lunch.  I said, "How could you do this to me?"  I said, "You know what I was doing."  And I said, "Now you're joining the congress people."  Had a new commissioner  (unclear) there.  He said, "Dick," he said, "Let me tell you something."  He said, "It's not me."  He said, "It's where you sit that determines where you stand."  Okay.  I'll always remember that.  When something that he felt a lot about anyway.  Then--I'm in a new hat now.  He said, "You know, on this one we're not on the same side anymore."  Well I did that.  And another thing that I done--I'm gonna tell you where that ended up.  Another thing I did was I found that schools attended by poor kids get fewer state and local resources than schools attended by middle class kids.  They just don't get their share.  They spend per--less per pupil.  I said, "Now if this program is really to supplement--to go on top of that thing.  We gotta make sure that the schools are getting their fair share of state and local money."  So I called it comparability.  And I said, "Okay.  In order for a school system to get Title One money that school system has to demonstrate that it's showing--it's spending its' share of state and local money."  And I did that on my own.  Couldn't get a commissioner to sign-to adopt it.  Well the legislation was being reauthorized in about four months.  And we were able to get both of those things written into legislation that became law.  And so often when I worked with the government and took chances like that--I did it later with the historically black colleges.  We got something written into law for them under Title Three.  And that's the way I would operate.  And it worked.  It worked with that. You know, working with congressional staffs.  I mean I guess there's a lot that I learned that you could do that ain't--that's not in your job description.  And it just worked with me.
Story_ID: 17820
Speaker 1: But let me talk just for a minute about, you know, why the schools are--one of the reasons why the schools are in the shape they're in now.  Okay if you take school desegregation, and you open up opportunities for kids to go to integrated situations for the first time.  And then if you take unemployment--employment discrimination--and that's sort of dying out.  And more opportunities being afforded for black young people to get in to.  Now remember earlier I said that we could only go into teaching law, medicine and burying and that sort of thing.  Now all these opportunities opened up.  So what happens to those people that would of gone in teaching--those real bright people that would have gone in teaching.  The good thing is they're doing something else.  The bad thing is that teachers are not what they were.  As a matter of fact, there are studies that show that teachers--especially teachers in schools attended by disadvantaged kids, score lower on the SAT that they would use to get into college.  Their grades in college are lower.  And they score lower on the National Teacher exams than teachers that are at more advantaged schools.  So what you have is--you got a--teachers now that are not trained as well as teachers back under segregation.  Now the question is, "What do we do about it?"  Well they're there.  So my thing is, what you gotta do is spend millions and millions of dollars giving these people professional development.  They can become good teachers.  But right now, they just need a lot of help.  They need a lot of work.  And this is all over the country where we have trouble schools.  The teachers just need more help.  We can't say that they're bad teachers.  But they are teachers that need more help.  And money's gotta be spent.  And there are some federal dollars to do that. Just not enough.  But it's interesting how you can trace that through desegregation, through equal employment opportunities to fewer good teachers.
Story_ID: 17821
Speaker 1: In that process when you were, you know, the Associate Commissioner that was under--Who was--Who was president during that time?  Is that--Is that '69 to '80 [1969-1980].  Is that--?
Speaker 2: That must--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) [President Ricahrd M.] Nixon?
Speaker 2: No, '69 to '80 [1969-1980] would have probably been [President Ronald] Reagan?
Speaker 1: Reg--. A: '60--Yeah.
Speaker 2: Part Reagan, right?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah, part Reagan and part--.
Speaker 2: [President Gerald] Ford?
Speaker 1: Ford.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And--But that--during that time you went and got your Doctorate?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right?
Speaker 1: But I did my doctorate working.
Speaker 2: Working.  Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah , yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's what I mean. You were--Okay.  And then what happens?  How do you end up then going to--as Deputy Assistant Attorney.
Speaker 1: That is when Jimmy Carter became President.  And the Department of Education was created.  And they asked me to become the first Deputy Assistant Secretary in charge of all the higher education programs.  And there were some challenges there with the black colleges.  So I accepted that assignment.  Now I wanna get back just for a minute to this confidence thing that you have to develop.  Now here I am have--I've spent all my career in Elementary and Secondary education.  And here I go take a top assignment in Higher Education.  I mean I don't know a private college from a public college--a community college (unclear). I just felt it. And, you know, as an administrator I can run these programs.  And I had to learn.  And that's what I'm--that's what I enjoy.  I had to learn all about higher education.  Right up to the point where I could become an Executive Vice-President of a big university.  I haven't trained in that.  But you learn.  And you just don't say no to anything . And that's the way I feel.  I still feel that way.  I consult now.  And I do things that I never thought I'd be able to do.  But I--.
Speaker 2: Now what were you--what was surprising about--What did you learn that maybe surprised you?  Or what did you learn period about our higher education system in this country?
Speaker 1: Well really, I had to learn--I had to learn how colleges and universities work. I had to learn, for example, the biggest problem that we faced back then was a program called Title Three.  And this was a program for what are called Developing Institutions.  And the debate was when is an institution developed--fully developed?  Well the answer to that question is, it's never fully developed.  'Cause they're always changing.  But all of the historically black colleges were covered in this legislation.  But what they had to do was Every year they had to compete for funds. They had to write proposals for their money.  And it wasn't fair.  So I went back to my Title One thoughts.  And under that program there was a formula that went--that sent the money out.  So they didn't have to write any applications.  They didn't have to compete.  So my thing was, "How can I take that formula program and apply it to colleges--especially the historically black colleges."  And I was able to get legislation through.  Now I'm at the--a  pretty low level in the government to be getting this.  So I gotta work with staff. I gotta do things to get this legislation through that always didn't represent the interest of the administration.  But I was able to work with people and get them to see this.  Give you a good example.  Lou [Louis]  Sullivan was the dean of the Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia].  Okay.  It was a two-year institution.  I didn't know Lou Sullivan from Adam.  Lou Sullivan came to visit me one day.  And he said--And he said,  "Dr. Fairley, you know, I'm Dean of Morehouse School of Medicine.  And we have a two-year institution.  We'd like to make it a four-year institution."  And he said, "I'm wondering if they're funds available?"  And I said, "There aren't at this time."  And I saw that look on his face. And I said, I said, "Dr. Sullivan, that doesn't mean we can't create something."  Just like that.  And I got a smile. And I said, "Let's you work on the outside.  And I'll work on the inside.  And we will create some legislation that will get through the Congress to get your institution funded."  And by doing that--now we just can't say it's gonna go to Morehouse.  We created some legislation.  And we got through to Congress some legislation that would go to graduate and professional schools that knew would get--and that's how Morehouse got more.  And when I see Lou today I mean--you know, we always embrace.  And he always tells that story of how the two of us working together, you know, sort of unofficially were able to create that.  So--I mean I never thought I'd be creating legislation either.  But--And these-are-you know, these are things that you learn to do.  And I like to do new things.  And that's how that started.
Speaker 2: And were there other things that you--you know, are proud that you accomplished as Dep--you know, Deputy Assistant during that time?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I administered programs called the trio Programs. These are programs to get more kids going to college.  There was a need to get more kids in Science Programs.  And without legislations, I was able to get a program started to get more kids in Upward Bound Programs going into Math and Science.  And it ended up--And we did that without legislation, without a special budget.  Now that program has been passed by the Congress.  And we have legislation to do that.  Just more and more money going into higher education.  I'm glad--I'm proud of that.  I'm proud of the fact that we have a graduate fellowship programs in areas where minorities are under-represented.  Fellowship programs for the kids to go on and get their Doctorates in areas such as Business Administration.  And we had a lot of MBAs.  But we got very few PhDs of Business Administration.  Even Public Administration--We don't have any of them.  Take your scientists--we don't have many PhDs.  It's still a problem.  We were able to create graduate programs and get fellowships.
Speaker 2: Now then--tell me then--you left there in '84 [1984]?  I have--That's what-.-
Speaker 1: I think in '84 [1984], what I had was probably a job title change.  But basically did the same thing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Basically I did the--
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Basically I did the--.
Speaker 2: So you were there really from a--for ten years?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh I see.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh I see.  Okay. Okay, I see.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: For about maybe--Yeah, eight or nine years.
Story_ID: 17822
Speaker 1: And then I went up to the University of the District of Columbia.  And that's a--that's an odd one too.  They were having a problem with accreditation and--in developmental education.  And developmental education is remedial education at the college level.  That's when we got--and that's a national problem still.  We got kids going to college that--
Speaker 2: Are not prepared.
Speaker 1: Weren't--yeah, unprepared.  So I went up there and basically at the request of the Board of Trustees up there.  And I wondered why I hadn't had much contact with the President.  The Board of Trustees asked the Secretary if they could borrow me for two years.  And so I wanted something I wanted to do.  I'd never been at a university before other than teaching in (unclear).  So I went up there.  Met the president. A week later, they fired him.  So here I am as acting president of this institution.  And then I'm on loan to them. Now here I am administering grants or responsible for grants at the institution as the chief executive there.  And these are grants that I made from the Department of Education. Which is a little conflict of interest here.  So the lawyers sort of got together and said that I had to either resign or go back to being Executive Vice-President. Which is what I chose to do.  But I had a wonderful almost two years up there doing that.
Story_ID: 17823
Speaker 1: Really you had been operating at a higher level.  Sort of not--I mean you had gained appreciation for historically black colleges and their problems through your--you know, the ten year period before.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But you had not been an administrator--
Speaker 2: I had not--
Speaker 1: You had--Right.  So you were on the ground this time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I had taught--But I hadn't--As a matter of fact, I hadn't taught at a historically black college then.  I had taught at George Washington and Nova University, the university that's in Chicago--National Louis University.  But I did, I did working with HBCU presidents and visiting in the schools and what not, I really got a good feeling for why these institutions are so important to black youngsters and to this country.  Because they turn out so many good people that might not have gotten the chance to go to college.
Speaker 1: Now can you comment on that a little bit?  Because you did not come out of a, you know, a HBCU environment. And there have been people who say that, you know, HBCU's should either collapse. There doesn't need to be as many of them.  Or that they are--you know, they are not serving all the purpose that they sh--you know, were intended to serve.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm, Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And maybe there too many.  Maybe people talk about there being too many of them. And since a lot of them struggle for dollars.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering if you have any comments on that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You got a lot of 'em struggling now.  The thing about HBCU's or difference is that they enroll students with a wide range of abilities and needs.  You got some of the smartest black folks in the country coming out of the HBCU's.  You got some folks coming out that aren't so smart.  So you got this wide range. And then you have support systems for all of these people that maybe are not as smart as the Harvard types.  But who can benefit A from a college education needed some help.  And in four years can be a qualified college graduate.  And this would not go on at a University of Maryland.  It would not go on at some of the state schools.  Because more re--more support is required. Support in terms of relationship building of faculty.  Food they don't--and money and resources.  So these institutions played just a very valuable role in the lives of blacks and in the lives of this country.  I mean I just had dinner the other night with the president of the board of Talladega Institute, who's Executive Vice-President of a big bank up in Delaware.  I mean this is a very polished, successful man that went to Talladega on a scholarship.  He couldn't've gotten into University of Alabama.  And so we have a lot of places like that.  My wife runs a college here, Sojourner Douglas College. A site in Annapolis. Where you'd be surprised that the students that come into that college to get in here it's basically adults.  And get their BA degree and go on to improved opportunities-- enhanced opportunities in the work place.  These things are not gonna go on at many majority schools. Because the support isn't there.  The relationship building. Which is very important in a college.
Speaker 1: So do you feel--what do you feel about the history of the historical black college will--I mean the future.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Not the history, But the future.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Well I think that they're gonna have some problems.  And they might require some changes in legislation.  For example, let's take Morris Brown that you read about now.  Okay.  Now Morris Brown has lost its accreditation.  Now they lost their accreditation not based on anything academic.  They lost their accreditation because they were not fiscally sound.  The reason that they aren't fiscally sound, the president made some bad decisions.  But it's nothing wrong with that school academically.  Okay.  Now in order to get federal funds, you have to be accredited.  Which means that nobody's gonna go to Morris Brown right away.  A. why would you go to a school that's not accredited?  And B. they can't get any federal money to give those kids Pell Grants.  So over the next year, until they get re-accredited, that school is gonna suffer.  So you say well why doesn't the government do something about that.  Well they can't.  Because they don't wanna put their money in places that's not fiscally sound.  So that's gonna have to be dealt with.  Now there are about fifteen HBCU's on that list that haven't lost their accreditation.  But are on their way. Talladega was one of them, for example.  That's why I met with that guy.  But we need to take a look at that and see how those institutions can be helped.  Because academically, they're fine.  But we got a bad economy now.  Every institution is having some problems.  I mean, I'm getting letters from Dartmouth. I know how much their (unclear).  And there had to d--They're rich.  All of it is having some problems.  But when you're a poor school and it's hard times, you apt to go out of business quicker.  And that's what's happening to our institutions.  Because they were poor to start with.
Story_ID: 17824
Speaker 1: in 1992 to '94 [1994], you went with USAID [United States Agency for Internationa Development].  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that was a whole different--I mean that was another--.
Speaker 2: That's more of my thing about learn--.
Speaker 1: That you're going and --.
Speaker 2: About trying to learn something.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You feeling that the--So I left UDC [University of the District of Columbia].  Because they were searching a president.  Remember they needed a president. When they got their President then I--my thing sort of ended.  And I'm getting toward the end of my career.  And I had done everything I wanted to do in the Department of Education. I had worked in just about every part of it.  I said, "I wanna do something new."  And so I went over to US--I went over to USAID where I had a contact.  Not a--not even a good contact.  And I said, "I'd like to find something over here to do."  And I met a wonderful guy named Jim Anderson. He said, "Dick, we could really use your experience."  Well I'm pretty well known in the department.  I said, "I'd like to go over there for the rest of my career, which is gonna be a couple of years."  And I went over there.  And I worked in a sit--in a part of the AID that dealt with bringing international students here.  And I had been there six months.  And a guy the ran a thing called the University Center had been a--he had been a republican.  And this is a ju-- [President] Bill Clinton came in.  He had to go.  And so they asked me if I would take his place running this University Center.  Okay, now our mission there was to link universities in this country with universities in developing countries around the world.  What do I know about international relations?  But, you know, there's nothing--my thing is that there's nothing that a person can't learn in a hurry. I'm not gonna go there--And I tell kids, "Don't say you haven't had any experience.  Make--you have some experience that you can apply to this."  And I stayed there until it was time to--for me to retire.  And what happened there after I worked to put this thing together, the administration decided they wanted to do it another way.  And I had made commitments to colleges and universities all over the country to get them involved. And I'm told to, "Undo what you did."  I said, "This is a good time for me to go and retire.  Get me a new hip.  And take it easy."  But that didn't work.  Because I got my new hip.  And I started a little consulting business.  And it--you know, it didn't turn into a part time thing.
Speaker 1: So talk about the types of things that you're doing.
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you how I started in consulting. You got to meet a need.  So I had the choice of going back to Elementary and Secondary or staying in Higher Education.  Which I was in.  So I decided to do a little of both.  And then I found that I liked Elementary and Secondary Education better.  I liked the people a little better.  You don't have all these PhD's with--and arrogance.  I'm just being perfectly frank.  So I began to work with superintendents and principals and administrators doing leadership training.  Okay.  And then--'cause I had taught Leadership training at a university.  And I had my experience. So then I found out that their main problem was these tests--standardized tests--getting these kids to pass 'em.  So I said, "Well I'm gonna find some courses.  And develop some courses to teach administrators how to get kids to pass tests."  Okay.  And it--And I started doing that--worked with a number of school systems. Some of the stuff is common sense stuff.  We found teachers that had never-They've been giving tests to their--in fourth grade, they had never taken themselves.  So I began to develop these strategies.  And then I discovered technology.  Just by--at a meeting.  By accident.  I ran into a lady there that worked for a company called Light Span.  And they were selling to school superintendents.  And I said, "You know--And it was a program that would work for parents as well.  I said, "You know, you need to take this program to parents."  See parents have always been my thing.  I started to mention--I didn't say this--and when I was with Title One, I started a national organization of parents.  So I said, "You need to market to parents."  And then I got involved with how technology can be applied to test scores.  And so I began consulting for a number of corporations that were developing technology programs.  And then I would do things like--These technology programs had never been evaluated.  Now I do some work in eval--I'm evaluating a number of technology projects now.  So I called on--just called on some evaluation skills that I had learned in graduate school, but never used.  I just completed a pretty extensive study for the Weekly Reader.  So as opportunities come up, I mean I feel comfortable in taking on things that I have not been directly-'Cause some of it is just nerve, I guess. But I don't--I wouldn't do anything  that I didn't--that I felt that uncomfortable about.  But a lot of it is just calling on skills and doing things that have--that haven't been done before.  And finding a way to it.  And that's what I like.
Story_ID: 17825
Speaker 1: Now you were talking earlier about what you thought was needed for, you know, education.  And you were saying that, you know, there had been a talent drain.  And that really the emphasis and money needs to be put on training for people who have committed themselves--.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: To a profession. And probably bringing more training of, you know, (unclear) teachers in.  But I would like your--you know, some other sort of comments and observations about the U.S. Education System.  Because it's changed dramatically, you know, in the time that your mother was even--.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Teaching.  And even from the time that you first entered.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, education is a push to charter schools.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Home schooling, in some cases.  And so I'm just wondering what your--you know, some challenges to our--?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm--
Speaker 1: Whole public education system.
Speaker 2: Well see, people like the two of us and people that have seen schools  another way think that we're still teaching the same kind of kids that we had back then.  We're teaching hip-hop kids now.  And I would say that these mothers--teachers complain about the kids.  These mothers send their best children to school every day.  They don't keep the good ones at home.  And just send those that are problematic.  So our schools have to be responsive to this new kind of kid that's coming in from a single-family homes.  You know, with different kinds of problems.  And the traditional school hasn't done this.  And I was--I used to think that charter schools were just awful.  And you needed to support public education.  And then I said now--I put myself in the place of that poor parent.  Suppose I had to send Sharon to a school that had been failing for five years--six years. Had a record of failure.  And people are saying, "Well you gotta trust and believe in the public school system and support 'em." Not with my kid.  So if a opportunity in a charter school comes along--If an opportunity and a voucher comes along, parents need to be entitled to take that.  So I just see education changing to doing it different ways.  And their gonna meet the needs of the kids. 'Cause the public schools aren't.  So I think charter schools should be tried.  I think all these different things should be tried out.
Speaker 1: So where are the funding mechanisms gonna come.  Since schools are still primarily--You know, our whole public education system is tied to the government.  And, you know, a large--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Government support.  So where with this--you know, sort of meeting diverse needs--you know, schools meeting diverse needs or specialized needs or--and when I say that--meaning that, if I don't like, you know, the school in my area, I can send them over here.  And it doesn't have to be a private school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) But with all that, I mean how are--you know, how is the system gonna sort of support itself?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Schools are supported by--primarily by state and local taxes.  Now the fight is on to try to equalize expenditures for schools within the state.  In other words, give me a suburb of Chicago (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: A rich suburb.
Speaker 1: The worse suburb?
Speaker 2: No, a rich suburb.
Speaker 1: A rich suburb. Kenilworth
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Now, kids going to Kenilworth schools have more money spent on them than kids going to Chicago schools pri--primarily.  So what this means is that where you live or where you were born, which you had nothing to do with determines how much money gets spent on you.  Okay.  And it's--And education is a state responsibility.  So the first thing we need to do is equalize.  And that's happening.  I mean there've been lawsuits. Dis--So then you get--You start getting at least equal resources spent on the kid. And then you have to try to improve those schools. And this is what No Child Left Behind is designed to do.  Either improve it or find an option for that parent to send that kid to.  And hopefully that's gonna work.  But it--It's probably--It's gonna have some more challenges.
Speaker 1: So do you believe that it's the next important initiative that existed since the Federal desegregation efforts?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that desegregation is probably the most important thing.  And then I think the federal aide to education with elementary and secondary education--Title One back then and this reauthorization is the most important reauthoration--reauthorization that we've had since Title One passed.  But it's got flaws.  And how those flaws are gonna be handled is very important.  I do a lot of work in that now.  And, you know, you just have to wait and see what happens.
Story_ID: 17826
Speaker 1: When I was with Title One, I started this organization of parents called the National Coalition Title of Parents.  So when I retired from the government, I said, "I wanna pay back.  I want to do something to help this organization.  This a poor organization. It's a national organization of poor parents."  So I went to them.  Their big need was to raise money.  And so they really didn't have any--You know, to raise money you gotta have something attractive.  So what they would do--they were doing a lot of training and a lot of good things.  But they didn't have anything that I thought would have appeal.  So what I did was in my consulting, I found out that, you know, we had a lot of kids that weren't doing well in school.  And you look a little further, you find they are, because they don't have the tools at home to do their homework.  They don't have pencils.  They don't have an encyclopedia.  They don't have rulers.  They don't have just basic things.  So I created a homework kit.  And for them to really use as a gimmick for them to raise money, as well as help kids.  So through a friend I was able to get an audience with Don King.  I wanted him to see my homework kit.  And I met him. And I didn't know him from Adam. And I showed him my homework kit.  And I told him what I was gonna do.  And within fifteen minutes, he committed a hundred thousand dollars to me to get this thing started.  And so I took the hundred thousand dollars.  Ordered the kits.  And I had my first distribution of those homework kits to kids in Washington, D.C.  And I decided I wanted to invite Don King to come and see this distribution.  So I called him on the phone.  And he said, "You know what Dick?" He said, "I give a lot of money--I give away a lot of money."  But he said, "Rarely do I get an invitation to see where my money is going."  Well if you know Don King, those are not the exact words he used.  So I invited him to come to Washington.  And he was delighted to come.  And so I met him for breakfast that morning.  And so we're talking.  And this is when we got to talking about the U.S. constitution.  And I didn't know Don King knew as much about the Constitution as he does.  The man's brilliant.  So he said, "You know, Dick--." He said, "We should start teaching kids about the Constitution at--when they're in the second, third grade."  So being a consultant, I processed it.  Said, "Well Mr. King, what we need is a primer or a guide to reading the Constitution for the early grades." "Yeah, that's what we need." I said, "Well, I'll write one for you."  "You will.  Good."  So I did that.  He said, "Now that should go with the homework kits."  "Fine, we'll do that."  So then I took him to this distri--this school where were giving away these kits.  And he saw these parents, these teachers and these kids getting these kits.  He got carried away. He said, "I commit to a million dollars to do this."  And so we got started.  So about a month later he called me.  And, you know, to a promoter like Don, everything is a show.  He said, "I want you to come down here."  He said, "I wanna do another show like that.  Come on down here.  Let's talk about it."  So I flew down to Florida and met with him.  And he said, "That little show that we had--."  He said, "I wanna do another one."  He said, "And I want this one to be in New York."  And I said, "When?"  This is Thursday.  He said, "Tuesday."  I said, "Mr. King, this is Thursday."  He said, "What you think I brought you down here for?  Do it. You know, take care of it."  So how am I gonna negotiate--And he wanted kids there.  How am I gonna negotiate that in New York, you know, by Tuesday?  No way.  So I had a buddy that was superintendent of schools in Hempstead [New York].  So I called him. I said, "How would you like for your kids to get a free lunch, meet Don King and Mike Tyson?"  Now the reason for doing this, Mike was gon' have a fight.  And he wanted to--you know, this was gonna be a promotion thing.  But it was a great opportunity for the kids.  Superintendent jumped at it.  I said, "Don, don't care whether these kids come from New York or Hempstead."  So that was Thursday.  So Friday I said, "We can pull it off."  I said, "But the only thing I'm not sure of is--." He said--and this is when--this is--say something about him.  I said that, "You said that the thing had to be at eleven o'clock.  If we bring the kids at eleven,"  I said, "We gotta feed 'em."  And he said--And I said, "Well maybe I can make a deal with the McDonalds."  He said, "You eat that McDonalds crap?"  I said, "Occasional." This is awful for John [ref. to superintendant friend].  He said--I said, "But--." He said, "I want those kids--It's gon' be in a nice hotel.  And I want you to arrange a very, very healthy buffet for those--." I think it was about three hundred kids. "For those three hundred kids."  And we did that.  And he could have gotten away with, you know, McDonald's hamburgers.  But kids came and it went well. Then about a month later, he called me.  And he asked me to come down and meet with him.  So he said," I'd like for you to do some work with me."  I said, "Doing what?"  He said, "I give money away."  But he said, "I never knows--I never know what it goes for."  And he said, "I'd like for you to make some recommendations."  And he asked me if I had heard of Dorothy Height.  I said, "Well everybody had.  And I know her."  I said, "She was a good friend of my mother."  And she was.  So he said, "Well I want you to give her a hundred thousand dollars for me."  So I wanted to make sure.  'Cause all the--no paper.  You know, we don't have any agreement.  And so I said, "You're authorizing me to give Dorothy Height the--to make a statement to her that you will give her a hundred thousand dollars."  He said, "Yeah."  So he said, "And I'll probably give her a little more."  So when I came back, I met with Dorothy.  I said--told her what Don wanted to do.  And I said, "Dorothy, if you play your cards right--," I said, "I think you can get a little more from him from him."  I said, "I want to get the two of you together."  Well just in conversations, I found that they both liked jazz music.  So I arranged a meeting of Don King and Dorothy Height in the hotel Cargyle--Carlyle in New York where Bobby Short was playing the piano.  And that was the beginning of their friendship.  And since then he's been giving money to Dorothy.  And he's been giving money to a lot of other stuff.  But that's how they got together.  And then he raised that money.  He and Oprah Winfrey raised money.  And that's a story in itself.  When the--when--it was a building.  But now the mortgage is buried.  Don was quite involved in getting other people to contribute to the burying of that mortgage.  Now that mortgage is buried.  But I've taken Don to a number of schools.  I took him up to Dartmouth [College]. Where he spoke to students.  And he's been to a number of colleges and universities.  And he gives money to good causes.
Story_ID: 17827
Speaker 1: You've continued to be involved with Dartmouth.  Your daughter went there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: My daughter went there.  And my granddaughter will go in September.  Yeah.  So we've--I've got a little legacy going there.  And who gets the credit for that?  My mother.  I don't take credit for that.  She made--She said, "Son, if you're going to college. You're going to Dartmouth."  Now when it came to my daughter, I took her up there.  No pressure on her to go.  She wouldn't go anywhere else. That's where she wanted to go.  And now her daughter wants to go.  And so I give all that to my mother.  She was the wise one.  Not me.  'Cause I'd of been somewhere else.  Up in those woods for four years.  Wasn't' good.
Story_ID: 17828
Speaker 1: When did your mother pass away?
Speaker 2: She passed away in 1970.
Speaker 1: So she--Oh so you were still early in your career?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In some respect.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And your father?
Speaker 2: 1965.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh so you were--oh so they never--So your mother never got to see your--all the work you've done in education?
Speaker 2: No.  She didn't.  She--no.  As a matter of fact, when I got my job at Title One--the billion-dollar job, she knew about that.  But shortly after I took that job in '69 [1969], she died in '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Well so she would've been really proud, actually.  At taken to--Ddo you think she would've been proud?
Speaker 2: She would've said to me, "Well I told you, you could do it."  That's what she would've said.  And that would've been that.  She would've been proud.  Let me say that. But she would have said, "This is what I expected of you."  Yeah.  And that's what I tell my kids.
Story_ID: 17829
Speaker 1: Well so when you look back over your career and the--you know, the role you play, because you had thought, you know, at the beginning, that you would be a teacher.  Because that's what you could envision at that point.  And that really lasted a very short time.  Though you've taught, you know--.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Throughout.  But you really became sort of an administrator and sort of change agent in many respects.
Speaker 2: But all that--you do that through teaching.  You know what I mean.  You do.  You really do.  Because I like to do-it's been new things.  And then with people, you have to get them involved in, you know, thinking like you think.  And wanting to be a part of what you're doing.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And it's worked.  It's worked.  But I think the thing is, it started at a black school where I was told, "You can do this.  And you must do this. And you got to meet these kind of expectations."  And then I was put in an environment where I saw that I could do these things.  And then I just seemed to be challenged after challenge.  After that, that I have no problem feeling that I can't do this.  I never felt that I can't do something that is in my field.
Speaker 1: And in terms of, you know, where Dick Fairley is right now in his career--you've retired, but you're not really retired.  And so my question is, what do you--what do you want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: I don't know what it is.  But it will be something.  I mean I--Something always comes up that I see a challenge. And right now. My challenge is to hopefully work more in education in getting schools--getting these test scores up so that these kids do better in school.
Speaker 1: And--.
Speaker 2: And all that goes along with that.
Story_ID: 17830
Speaker 1: So you believe in the test score?  You're not a believer that there should be no testing? Or that tests are biased?
Speaker 2: No. Let me--I wanna answer those individually.  1. I believe in testing. And I believe in testing.  Because you've got to find out where you are.  See, when I was at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington D.C.], that was the best black high school in the country.  But still I was down compared to white kids.  You see what I mean? This is where--and I didn't know that.  Because they didn't give no (unclear) test.  I didn't know that I wasn't up there. I mean I was maybe number fifteen in my class.  But I was at the school that was a little bit--the best we had.  But is was a little inferior.  So you gotta know where you are.  And the only way you can know where you are is to test.  That's number one.  So it's a good indication of how well or how poorly you're doing.  2. And we've gotta let kids know this. It's the game.  You see? I can fight to have tests thrown out and changed all I want.  But if this is what's--what I've got to pass, and I taught the admin--Look, that is your license to get in college.  So you need to master test taking.  You need to master that stuff.  And until it's thrown out, I don't know what we'll substitute.  But you've gotta--it's the game.  And it's what they measure you on. Now we were talking the other night about cramming and all that business.  And the fact that you have to do a lot in education that doesn't make a lot of sense, anyway.  Think about some of the courses that you had that you don't remember anything about.  But also think about the course that you took that made you--guided you into law.  Maybe it was a government course.  But it was something that was good for you.  So you gotta take--you gotta see where you fall out in these things.  And you gotta--if the game is testing, well you gotta--you gotta play that game.
Speaker 1: So now what in terms of the black community--Because it's still--it seems to be that no matter what the socioeconomic group that blacks still are lower on the testing pool.  Why is that?  What is your theory about that?  When--?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: When there a lot in you generation who would go from one school to the other, and they would be high.  You know, I mean once they got--You know, they could com--still compete.  So I'm just wondering why--?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Why--I mean--.
Speaker 2: Well--see it could take literally generations for a disadvantaged population to make the same grades on a test that a--that an advantaged population has.  Let's assume that you have this black family where both parents went to college. Okay.  And you have this white family that's been a two-generation college family.  Now with the black family where both parents went to college, the grandparents didn't.  Well maybe in the sum, it's a pattern of this family to send this kid to the country.  You know, we have--we still have that.  And we have a black kids where we have two people that have finished college. A lot of time they're around other blacks that haven't.  They're in situations that don't stimulate them as much as the two-parent--two-generation family.  So it's gonna take a while.  And these are things that kids learn.  And they acquire skills and different things.  And the more that they are around those kind of things that are gonna help them do the test on, the better they're gonna --that they're gonna do.  And it's gonna take a while.  Now we know that it takes two generations.  That--there's enough data to support that.  The question is--and getting back to the point about what good is testing.  Let's take affirmative action programs.  This is what we missed in this country. We have never studied students that got in colleges under affirmative action--how well they've done in college and how well they've done after they got out.  They might not have had the best test scores.  But they're in college doing very well, or aren't doing well.  So --.  We needed to look at that.  But this is the name of the game.  You gotta be able to pass the tests.
Speaker 1: So you see testing, testing, testing, reading, reading, reading.  Because without being able to read you can't test well.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And the test is what gonna--that's what gonna be the thing that separates you.  You gotta know how to do it.  But you also need tests to see how you stack up against other people.  For example, when my kids were in school I wasn't interested in their tests and when you compare those tests with those kids--with other kids in that school.  I wanted to--a norm reference that show how they were doing nationally.  See?' Cause I didn't have that at Dunbar.  If I had had that at Dunbar nationally, I'd of been maybe the--at the best black school in the country?  Best black school in the country.  When I got up there with heavy hitters (pause), see. I needed a little more.  But I caught up.  See that's the thing about affirmative action. You get in these situations where high expectations for others.  And then you become a part of those high expectations.
Speaker 1: Now what in your mind makes a good educator?
Speaker 2: What makes a good educator?  What makes a good educator  is a person--and I'm gonna be very specific about this.  That can teach children what it is they are in their classroom to learn.  Now that sounds, that sounds a little funny.  But teaching is one thing.  And learning is another.  Now how do you measure the impact of teaching?  You measure that by how well kids learn.  So that should be--And so this is when we get to these standardized tests.  Test me and find out how well you taught me.  Okay. I mean that's just going at it backwards.  But that--that's what's gonna indicate a good or bad teacher now with this accountability thing.  So there is some accountability now in this new legislation with schools--with teachers. 'Cause we have--most of our teachers are very good committed teachers.  Many of them don't know their subject content.  You see what I mean.  So they're not--You know, they're not the best teachers.  But they can be trained.  They can be given professional development.  And become good teachers.  And I think we oughta do that.
Story_ID: 17831
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Hmm.  I want my legacy to be that I made a difference in the lives of a lot of people.  And I choose to do this on a national basis.  And I guess it all depends on how you see yourself.  I guess my career--Because I had worked for the Federal government for so long.  My contribution can be hopefully impacting national programs.  And so most of the things that I try to get associated with are national in scope.  For example, there's a organization called The HistoryMakers that's starting out in Chicago with the Chicago Public schools and then on to the state.  Now I think it should be national.  But I mean that's just the way my thinking is.  I mean a lot of people will like to be the mayor of Washington D.C. or the mayor of Chicago.  And that's great.  But I--my thing is just that this is my upbringing--my experience.  But I wanna be able to look back and say that here's a piece of legislation that I was--I influenced--I was involved in.  And it impacted these people.  I want my legacy to my--to people to believe in themselves.  And that they can do anything and get away from this business of--I think in the society of black people, especially we're moving to this entitlement mentality.  You're not entitled to anything . You know, you have to work for it.  And they're losing this.  We're losing this. (Unclear) work ethics,  and it's not good.  But I'd like to be remembered for having made a contribution along the national scene that result hopefully in getting something across to more people.
Story_ID: 17832
Speaker 1: So on the eve of the celebration of Brown Versus Board of Education, was it worth it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  When--that just changed this whole country.  And though you--if you look at--I don't where a lot of people were. But I was in a segregated community.  And as I grew up, that was my place. I never--I just accepted that.  This is my fate.  You know what I mean? Somebody had to--let me say, "Look, this is unfair.  I never--you know, go to this black school--pretty good school.  Got good teachers, I'm told.  This is just where I belong.  This is just my life.  I don't know anything about over there.  I know I can't go to that there.  Those people live over there.  I live here."  And then all of a sudden, this Brown thing goes out.  And I think the newspaper that was the Afro-Americans said, "Eat anywhere,"  I mean that's how they summarized the whole legisla-"Eat anywhere."  Okay?  So then, I said, "Man! I can eat anywhere.  I don't have to limit myself to those places anymore."  And it just opened up.  Most significant thing that's happened in the world, I think.  Because of the contributions that black folks have made.  But there's still so--you know, there's a long way to go.  But we gotta let the young people know what's happened before.  And we've gotta get the older people to--I mentor a lot of kids.  And when I say kids, I don't mean young kids.  'Cause I don't--I--my role I think is to--I mentor young professionals.  And that's what I wanna see.  I wanna see some of these kids that are young.  I had a young lady with me just last week in Nevada who suc--Dartmouth graduate.  Got a masters from the University of Pennsylvania.  That she's gotta bring new--I don't know what--doesn't know what to work--what she wants to do.  And I like that.  She's got so many options.  She doesn't know whether she wants to be a lawyer or educator.  She likes education.  She likes law.  She wants to be an educator.  Whether she wants to be a superintendent or college president.  Just bubbling with potentiality.  And I try to expose her to different kind of things.  At the same time, she works with me on a lot of projects.  Another young lady here, the same way.  But we don't have--we're not taking these people under our wings when we should.  We're not giving back. And you have to give back.
Story_ID: 17833
Speaker 1: So one last question.  Your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: My hopes--
Speaker 1: For--
Speaker 2: And concerns--.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well I hope that black people will--can get themselves in a position of being able to do anything that they aspire to do.  And at the same time maintain their identity.  And now that my point here is that often in order to be successful, we have to almost assimilate. Even if we don't assimilate our skin color.  We assimilate out culture, our values and so forth to be upwardly mobile.  And I'm suggesting that, I'd like to see us be separate if we want to be.  But to still to be able to aspire and do anything that we wanna do.  Because this is a big country.  We've got all kinds of cultures here.  And we have to accept that.  When I was at Dartmouth I use to think that when we talked about desegregation and desegregation and prejudice, all the guys at Dartmouth [College], white and blacks said, "Well the answer to this whole thing is assimilation of the races.  Just have one race."  Well that ain't  gon' happen.  We should not have to lose our culture.  Hispanics--We can live and maintain our cultures.  But this should not preclude us from doing what we wanna do, working where we want to work, living where we want to live.  So I wanna maintain our racial identity at the same time have the freedom and the encouragement and the flexibility and the skills and the opportunities to do whatever it is we want to do.
Speaker 1: And your concern?
Speaker 2: My concerns are that we are--haven't--the gap between those that have and those--and that the gaps between  the have and the have not is widening.  And the haves are not helping  the have-nots.  And the have-nots are developing feelings of entitlements rather than working harder to get what the haves have.  So I think there has to be a meshing of those two kinds of attitudes.  But we're not reaching out.  We're not mentoring.  We're not developing people that replace the leadership.  I mean the best indication of what I'm talking about is the Civil Rights Movement at all levels.  Where are our Civil Rights leaders?  They're certainly needed.  They're not there.  We're not bringing them up anymore.  And that we had, you know, Jesse Jackson, Walter Fauntroy. We had a bunch of 'em.  Now you can't name a--I can't name five people that I would say  are credible Civil Rights leaders that believe in --you know, civil rights and equal opportunity.  So we're losing it.  We need it.
