Story_ID: 671123
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, Brian Keith Fulton [HistoryMaker B. K. Fulton], B-R-I-A-N, K-E-I-T-H, F-U-L-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, that's what my mom [Flora Lee Fulton] and dad [Bennie Fulton] named me.  I don't know if it's related to the actor, Brian Keith.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was thinking that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but there is a story behind what I like to be called.  So for many years people called me Keith because I decided that there was no Brian on TV, and Keith Partridge ['The Partridge Family'] was doing pretty well, so I liked Keith.  And then the only time I would hear Brian is when I was in trouble.  So my mom would say my full name, and I would be like, "Uh, all right, call me Keith."  And then as I got into the corporate world, I would write B. K. as a short for B. Keith Fulton, and so B. K. caught on.  It was kind of corporate cool.  So probably for the last ten years or so people have called me B. K.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, and sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 10, 1966, Hampton, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now I'm pretending to be retired.  I was the leader for the Mid-Atlantic region at Verizon Communications [Verizon Communications, Inc.].  I retired from there in December.  Now I chair three startup companies, and I'm on several boards.  So I guess we call that quasi-retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you are, you are a lawyer by train--
Speaker 2: Lawyer by training, studied engineering and architecture [at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia], also got a master of science degree [at The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York], so a lot of education.  And, but I've worked all my life.  I, my dad and I had a little landscaping company, and I worked that from about ten years old until even when I go home now.  My dad's like, "Hey, you want to go help me out?"  (Laughter) I was like, "Whatever you need, Dad."
Speaker 1: And you've been on the cutting edge of technology for many, many years.  I just, I have to say that for anybody watching this.  This is what, this is a lot, a lot of this interview is about that.  So, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is December 5th, 2016.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Richmond, Virginia.
Story_ID: 671124
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask, they're kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like a lot of food, but yes, I like fish dishes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Anywhere with my wife [Fulton's second wife, HistoryMaker Jacquelyn E. Stone] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's good.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Often I start my speeches or presentations with, "God blesses us all to turn our dreams and ideas into their tangible equivalents.  We must have the faith, be willing to do the work, and expect the outcome."  I believe that.  I believe that we can invent our future.  We can create things through the gifts of raw talent, the infusion of technology, the infusion of wisdom and experience of others.  And that all comes down to this melting pot of synergy and love and belief that you can make the world a better place.
Story_ID: 671125
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side and then put them together, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Flora Ann Fulton [Flora Lee Fulton], F-L-O-R-A, A-N-N, F-U-L-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now, what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Lee.
Speaker 1: Lee, okay.
Speaker 2: L-E-E.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Wow, February 20th, 1945, Murfreesboro, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How, how far back can you trace that side?  Are there any ancestral stories?
Speaker 2: We're having some work done now.  And a friend, Dr. Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.], connected us with a genealogy group, and so we're having that worked on now.  But what I know thus far is that my family has always been a very hardworking family.  These are folk who are mostly educators, farmers.  One person on that side of the family was a Tuskegee Airman.  He was a pilot trainer, Leroy Ealey [ph.].  And, and so that was an interesting discovery.  In fact, my wife [Fulton's second wife, HistoryMaker Jacquelyn E. Stone] and I just went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and saw his name there in the books, and we're very proud of that.  But my mom was the oldest of ten.  And so being the oldest child, a lot of responsibility fell to her.  She ended up getting a teacher's scholarship to Fayetteville State University [Fayetteville State Teachers College; Fayetteville State University, Fayetteville, North Carolina] and probably was the first, or definitely among the first, to go to college, and that's where she met my dad [Bennie Fulton].  She was in the tops of her class, maybe number one or number two.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When she was growing up, what did her parents do for a living?
Speaker 2: I believe they were farmers, not--I don't know if they finished high school.  Her--when they moved to Newport News [Virginia], my grandfather worked at the shipyard until he got an, an injury that crushed his foot, and then he started working for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  And my grandmom worked at a factory, I think one of the crab factories in that area, and did that for some time, and then the duties of motherhood brought her home.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Yeah, post office job, that's pretty--it's, it's a coveted job in the black community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: --with benefits--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and security working for the government--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --instead of some--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --capricious private, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that's a fair point.  I mean, I, I, I, I don't remember everything about that period other than there seemed to always be food, and everybody seemed to always be happy.  Every weekend we'd go to grandma's house, and it was great.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so did your mother, like, so she pursued education, right--
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: --as a teacher?
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: And she was able to, to--
Speaker 2: And she taught for almost forty years and retired from teaching.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so, let me go to your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, did your mother have any stories about growing up that she shared, any--
Speaker 2: None in particular.  Just, you know, they always preached hard work, and, and there was a love for family.  We would do these reunions pretty regularly, at least once a year.  And we'd always go to the country.  And you know, I think it was a way of helping us not to forget.
Story_ID: 671126
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure, Bennie Lee Fulton [Bennie Fulton]: B-E-N-N-I-E, L-E-E, Fulton, F-U-L-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 13th, 1944, New Bern, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: New Bern?  That's--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --N-E-W--
Speaker 2: B-E-R-N, um-hm.
Speaker 1: B-E-R-N, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Equally hardworking like mom's side--
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: --preachers mostly on that side, hailing from South Carolina.  They migrated to New Bern for work.  My grandfather was an independent logger.  I remember he was always just this really muscular man, even well into his seventies and eighties.  And grandma did domestic work, and she was a wonderful cook.  I mean, she made these pineapple cakes that would just--my mouth is watering now just thinking about her pineapple cake.  But it was a, a lot of love there as well.  My dad was one of two children, Aunt Nyna [Nyna Fulton (ph.)], his sister, actually from Chica- lives in Chicago [Illinois].  But my dad was a strong guy, very athletic, and actually went to Fayetteville State [Fayetteville State Teachers College; Fayetteville State University, Fayetteville, North Carolina], where he met my mom [Flora Lee Fulton], on a football scholarship.  And he got injured fairly early on.  And they thought he was gonna lose his scholarship, but he had good grades.  And so as long as he maintained a B average he got to stay at school on scholarship.  And he studied math and became a teacher and also taught for forty years in the, between Newport News [Virginia] and Hampton [Virginia] in the school system.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did your father have any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: My father had stories about everything (laughter).  But most of them were just lessons he'd find about, you know, getting in, getting in fights or making the folk appreciate that it was okay for him to be an athlete.  There's one time there was this really big guy, he'd tell me, he said, "Son, you can't be scared of everybody now.  You can't be scared of people.  It was a bunch of little guys from the gang, and they wanted to jump me, but my aunt said, 'You can only fight them one at a time.'  I didn't want to fight any of them.  So the biggest one came forward, and he took off his shirt.  And he had this big old chest, and I just knew I was gonna get killed.  And then I remember, you know, the car was there in the front yard, and it was a black car.  And it was hot that day, and so the sun was shining on it.  So I said, if I can get this guy turned around with his shirt off and pinned up on that car, he might holler.  And those other guys are gonna think that I'm just a beast of a man."  And so that's what he did.  And the guy hollered and, "Ah," and then, "let me go, let me go, Bennie, let me go."  And then they're like, "Oh, we don't mess with Bennie.  He, he beat up that old big guy."  And so he used his mind and strategy, and I, I, I think that he kind of always tried to instill some of that in me.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a good story.  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a good story--it was pretty funny. And to hear him tell it, he almost can't get through it without laughing as a he remembers it.  But it's, it's fun.
Story_ID: 671127
Speaker 1: Now is, is there a story about how your parents [Flora Lee Fulton and Bennie Fulton] met?
Speaker 2: Let's see, to hear my dad tell it, that he--back in that day, at the historically black colleges [HBCUs], you had to go to chapel.  I think they called it vespers.  And you go in, and you're not supposed to talk, and so they're passing notes [at Fayetteville State Teachers College; Fayetteville State University, Fayetteville, North Carolina].  And my dad's like, "Meet me after vespers," or something like that.  Now, now he would say that she gave him the note first, she would say that he passed the note.  Who knows what really happened.  If I cornered them both at the same time--they're still alive; they live in Hampton [Virginia].  And I, I may ask them.  But I suspect my dad was the one being a little fresh.
Story_ID: 671128
Speaker 1: When you think about their personalities, their talents, their sense of humor, their, their points of view, how they walk, how they talk--who do you think that you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Wow, I think a little bit of both of them.  My dad's [Bennie Fulton] very gregarious, and I tend to be gregarious.  I like to tell jokes.  I like to not take myself so serious.  I love to have fun.  And so I think that comes from my dad.  My mom [Flora Lee Fulton] is very precocious.  She is, she's a person who can look at something and, and, and see it from many angles.  And so I think I get those aspects about my own style from her.  And so I'm a blend of both.  And I, and I, I'm grateful for them being educators and then being humble people but also people that have been willing to share their trials and tribulations and their triumphs with me and then with an expectation that I would, you know, kind of make my own path but use the best of what they had to offer.
Story_ID: 671129
Speaker 1: Now do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: I do.  I have a, two sisters, one half sister who's about three and a half years older, and Shauna [Shauna Fulton], a younger sister, about seven years younger.  And she is still at home with my parents [Flora Lee Fulton and Bennie Fulton].  She, she has a disorder called Rett syndrome, R-E-T-T, syndrome.  It'll only girls that survive it.  So evidence that women may be a superior species, I support that hypothesis, the way the sisters have kind of buttressed our existence for so long.  But be that as it may, one of the blessings of having a child in the house who doesn't walk or talk, especially when you have to provide care for her, is that you, you know, you learn how to pay attention.  You know, she couldn't talk as we talk, but she could motion or make a certain sound.  And once you learn to know what those sounds mean, then she was communicating.  And so that's helped me as an executive; it's helped my parents to be more active than their age cohorts.  And so, you know, Shauna has had a particular effect on my life.  In fact, my first book was in fact about her and a poem I wrote about her when I was sixteen, and then we turned that into a book ['Shauna,' B. Keith Fulton] in 2015.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, you know, this--and your other sister, Devora [Devora Fulton (ph.)], what, what does she do?
Speaker 2: She's retired.  She went into the [U.S.] military about eighteen, nineteen.  She was a logistics expert for the [U.S.] Air Force and served dutifully, (clears throat) and then retired maybe three or four years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, all right now, as we get to it I'll ask more about Shauna, and 'cause I know that's an important story--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --too.
Story_ID: 671130
Speaker 1: You grew up in Newport News [Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: Right, between Newport News and Hampton [Virginia]; born in Hampton and raised in Newport News.  But the, the, that area is very contiguous, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right, a lot of people don't understand the Tidewater area [Virginia] and how all these little communities make one--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --pretty big community, actually.
Speaker 2: That's right; that's right.
Speaker 1: It's a pretty big urban area, especially now.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So, how would you characterize the neighborhood that you grew up in?  Was, was it an all-black neighborhood?  And, and was it--I mean did it have a name or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we started out in Hampton.  Let's see, what I remember is Weaver Road or a little bit before that.  There was this house on, on Dewey Avenue that I don't remember as much.  All I remember was there was this German shepherd there that, that my dad had.  And they would want me to pat this dog.  And I would say, "Dad, I'll pat you on the head, and you pat the German shepherd on the head."  And so, you know, I, I didn't like that dog.  But--
Speaker 1: It's negotiating.
Speaker 2: Negotiating.  So then when we moved to, to Weaver Road we got another dog called Rusty [ph.].  I loved Rusty.  Rusty was my running mate.  He--I'd go to 7-Eleven.  I loved Slurpees.  And so he would run with me, and I'd ride my bicycle.  But the neighborhood was of, a black neighborhood I think is the right characterization.  I, I don't remember any white people in that neighborhood.  It was a working class neighborhood, so teachers; people worked at the shipyard; people that had their own businesses; a lot of kids.  And so when we first moved there though, the, my first day of school [at Francis Mallory Elementary School, Hampton, Virginia] I got chased home.
Speaker 1: This was Newport News--
Speaker 2: In Newport--it was in Hampton.
Speaker 1: In Hampton? Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I'm running, and then I get to my house and run straight to the, to the backyard where Rusty is.  So the guy that was chasing me, a guy named Zen Graft Grines [ph.]--I run to Rusty.  I said, "Come on now, come on, keep on coming."  And then he stops, and Rusty's there.  So again, Rusty was my buddy.  And now Zen Graft is one of my best friends, and so we've stayed in touch.  But that neighborhood was, was really wonderful.  It was a great growing up experience.  And then I had started budding as an athlete and so started getting some respect from the kids in the community because of my running and, and ability with football and basketball in particular.  And then we put a basketball court in the backyard, and it became the place that people came to play.  Then as my parents' [Flora Lee Fulton and Bennie Fulton] careers in education started to rise, we had an opportunity to move into Denbigh within Newport News, and that was a more integrated neighborhood.  So it was probably more white people in that neighborhood than blacks.  And, and my parents had a house built there.  And they would drive down to their jobs.  And interestingly, I was bused from Denbigh back downtown to downtown Newport News to, for sixth and seventh grade [at J.M. Dozier Middle School, Newport News, Virginia].  And so we moved out of Hampton, and we moved to the white neighborhood.  I got bused back to the black neighborhood for sixth and seventh grade.
Story_ID: 671131
Speaker 1: I mean the school in New- in Newport News [Virginia] was, had been a white school before?
Speaker 2: It was a white area, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. It's always confusing when I hear these stories, 'cause sometimes the, a white school is in a black neighborhood, but the black students had to walk past it to go to another school further away than--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--some, sometimes, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so you're bused back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was bused back downtown, yeah.
Speaker 1: --days of busing.
Speaker 2: In the days of busing, that's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And how, how did you adjust to that?  I mean, it was it, was it, was it--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --difficult (unclear)--
Speaker 2: As, as a child that's just what happened, so it, it didn't really matter too much.  Of--I knew people down there 'cause I played ball with them, 'cause the, the football teams and the basketballs teams, they'd play each other in the different schools.  So for me, just I didn't like the early morning bus ride, especially when it was cold and then having to get out, but, but otherwise it was no problem.  And the kids were friendly, and so we didn't have any issues where folk were protesting, per se, that I was aware of.
Speaker 1: Right, like--
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: --South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: It wasn't like South Boston, exactly.  And so it was, it was a good experience generally.  And then by the time I started middle school [J.M. Dozier Middle School, Newport News, Virginia] and high school [Denbigh High School, Newport News, Virginia], I was going to the local schools, which were integrated, and had good experiences there.  You know, one of the things that was really important for me, sports always made a difference to me.  Because my parents [Flora Lee Fulton and Bennie Fulton] were teachers and had high standards, I was required to do my work.  And but because I was pretty good, a pretty good athlete, the, the, the, the, the, the official cool people didn't put me down.  They just said, "B. K. [HistoryMaker B. K. Fulton]--," well, "Keith is different."  They called me Keith at that time, "He's different."  And so I didn't get picked upon like most of your folk who were doing the homework because I was an athlete.
Story_ID: 671132
Speaker 1: It didn't happen when I was growing up, but--but you're saying that people that did their schoolwork were picked on--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when you were coming along.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely, absolutely. Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, a square, accused of trying to be white, or stuff like that, just foolishness.  But--
Speaker 2: You know, it may be a result of integration on some level, because in an all-black environment that I grew up in, it was, it was not a stigma to do your homework (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: No, no, nobody said you were trying to be white, 'cause--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --we didn't even have that comparison.
Speaker 1: Sure, sure.
Speaker 2: But in the other, in this situation, where--now, now did you see the white children as being advanced in terms of what they were learning in their school and the equipment they had and all the other things, or--
Speaker 1: I didn't see it as a, as a set of tools that weren't available to me 'cause I was in the advanced placement classes.  I was in the calculus classes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) before did you notice a difference (unclear)--from the all-black school to the white school in terms of the, where, where the white students were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, I don't, I don't think so, because even when I was in Hampton [Virginia] and although my neighborhood was black, the school that I actually went to [Francis Mallory Elementary School, Hampton, Virginia] was integrated.  So I've always been in integrated environments.  The only time I wasn't in an integrated environment was probably kindergarten.  As I think about it, yeah, kindergarten, that was all-black.  But from first grade on, there were always white kids in the room, so I didn't see this, you know, these differences and wonder why their laboratory is better than ours or their bus is more shiny or what have you.  I was always on the bus.  I was in the room and, and I think benefited from a more resource rich environment at the time.  Now again, my parents [Flora Lee Fulton and Bennie Fulton] were teachers.  They knew the system.  They knew the other educators.  They knew the principals.  And I think they were determined that I was gonna have a good experience.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so I'm pretty sure that that contributed to why in fact did have a, a good experience.  Sometimes though it was a little bit of a problem, because if I wasn't doing my work, the folk would go talk to my parents instead of talking to me, and then I'd hear about it when I got home.  I almost got in trouble for this science project.  I had, I had planted some plants that didn't make it.  And the teacher said, "Your son--," told my dad, you know, that, "hey, we're--you know, your son didn't--almost bombed his, his science project.  He had to come up with something else at the last minute."  And so my dad's all upset, and he's taking me outside.  "Where are the plants?  Where were the plants?"  And I said, "They were right here (laughter)."  He was like, "Show me where."  And I'm digging in the dirt (laughter).  And he was like, "I don't see no plants."  I was like, "Well, yeah, they died" (laughter).  "What, what do you want me to do?" (Laughter)  And we laugh about that to this day.  He'll ask me, "Did you really plant those plants?"  I was like, "Yeah, I planted them."  He was like, "What happened to them?"  "They died" (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, so being an athlete, though, you're ticket to being a cool--
Speaker 1: It, it gave me a pass.  It gave me a pass.  I got my work done.  I played sports and you know, had girlfriends.  And you know, I was just, you know, I was different, is what they called me.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Now this was a black community calling you this--
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: --rather than the white community [in Denbigh, Richmond, Virginia]--
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right, right, 'cause there, 'cause there's still a strong identity.  I mean, I had, you know, friends, African American.  There was a Korean family beside us.  First girlfriend in, when we moved to Newport News [Virginia] was a mix of, could have been Indian [Native American] and Puerto Rican.  And so there was a lot of diversity.  And I think my parents sought that out in picking this particular community and neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And again, I was the beneficiary of it (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 671133
Speaker 1: Was this diversity basically caused by [U.S.] military presence in Newport News [Virginia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably, probably, 'cause there was a, a military base, Fort Eustis [Joint Base Langley-Eustis, Virginia], it was not too far away from where we lived, probably within a mile or two, so you had a lot of families from there and then people seeking (air quotes) better communities.  I mean, it was a nice neighborhood [Denbigh, Newport News, Virginia], very safe, and people wanting that for their children.  And you know, as you know, when you get down to it, you know, the things that separate black, white, other ethnicities is really, has less to do with es- in--ethnicity and more to do about whether or not they think their children can have opportunity, they can have opportunity, where work is, and those sorts of things.  And so my parents [Flora Lee Fulton and Bennie Fulton] had, had a view towards the correctness of that early on.  And so in their family they were probably the best educated, and so they wanted to make sure that I had a shot to be among the best educated in our family.  So I'm--I don't know of any other lawyers in our family.  I think I know what Ph.D. out of the, the whole family.  And, but because of the things I was exposed to, there was never a question about college, never a question about some kind of success.  We just had to figure out where and when.
Story_ID: 671134
Speaker 1: Now, can you name your schools?  Now, you started off at school in Hampton [Virginia], right, in, at--
Speaker 2: How far back do you want me to go?
Speaker 1: Well, first grade school.
Speaker 2: Okay, Mallory [Francis Mallory Elementary School, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Mallory, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, that was, that grade school.  And then there was one after that where I did fourth grade for a little bit, and that'll have to come back to me.  But the next one was Newsome Park [Newsome Park Elementary School, Newport News, Virginia] of--and then Dozier intermediate [J.M. Dozier Middle School, Newport News, Virginia] and then Denbigh High School [Newport News, Virginia] and Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia], then did a fellowship at the Harriman School of Pub- [W. Averell Harriman School for Management and Policy, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York]--of--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, I didn't want to go that far ahead--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --as a kid, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, as a kid, yeah.
Speaker 1: I (unclear) I'm sorry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no, that's all right that's all right; that's right.
Speaker 1: --you know, but, but so, in, I guess in, in middle school did you have a concept of what you wanted to do for a career?  Did you have--
Speaker 2: I, I had no idea.  I mean, back then I think I wanted to be a police officer of--interesting, I think I might have had law on my mind just 'cause of TV shows but still related to police officer.  And, and so, I--and then of an athlete.  (Unclear) what kid who was playing ball didn't have a dream to be in the NBA [National Basketball Association]?  I think, you know, Dr. J [Julius Erving] was big back then.  And so everybody wanted to be like Dr., and I was no different.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did your parents, like, try to push you towards something, or did they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My dad [Bennie Fulton] tried to push me towards football 'cause he played football and loved football.  And I think that's what pushed me to basketball.  'Cause one time he said this, and he, he regrets that he said it.  And I, I think he was right. I was a better football player than I was a basketball player.  I was a pretty, pretty good running back.  But I remember he said, "I don't care what you do as long as you play football."  And I was like, "That's all you want, is a football player?  I'm gonna play basketball." Plus I didn't like the football, especially during the cold and getting hit and all that stuff, and I could do without it.  I mean, I was a good runner, in part, 'cause I was running for my life.  I didn't want to be tackled.  I hated it, hated it.  And so I would do everything I could to get away.  I'd run back and forth, cut across the field, throw passes.  I hated getting hit.  I still hate getting hit.  And, and so basketball, it was less of that.  And basketball, I could go out and practice on my courts.  Everywhere, every house we moved in from the house in Weaver Road [Hampton, Virginia] forward, every one had a basketball goal, and so I would practice relentlessly.  And it served me well.  But, but yeah, it was, you know, dad wanted, wanted me to play football, and my mom [Flora Lee Fulton], she never really spoke much on that.  She just wanted me to do good in school.  And so, and then the thing was, before I could go play oftentimes, I was at home with my sister.  And so I had to make sure until, until some--until one of the adults came home that she was all right.  And then I figured out a way to take her with us sometimes, which was kind of fun, but we'll get to that when you talk about the, the--Shauna [Shauna Fulton] and the story ['Shauna,' B. Keith Fulton].
Story_ID: 671135
Speaker 1: There's a seven year difference between you and your sister, Shauna [Shauna Fulton], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And now, now did your other sister [Devora Fulton (ph.)] play a part in taking care of her too, or--
Speaker 2: She came to live with us when she was older, so she wasn't there until I was about ready to go to college [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia].  And she, shortly thereafter she went off into the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: --she was in--
Speaker 2: --she wasn't in the household for most of, of those formative years.  And, but when she was, when she was there she did help.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was the offspring of your father [Bennie Fulton]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --from a previous (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Then she joined the family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right, now I understand.   So, but seven years is, is a difference at--I mean it's a difference that makes you almost parental but not, not quite--
Speaker 2: Um-hm--
Speaker 1: --smart as a parent (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --but, but close.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, it, it helped tremendously.  I mean, I was, I was for all intents and purposes an alpha male.  And alpha males are out throwing rocks and playing ball and chasing girls.  Being in a place where I was needed as a caregiver, really taught me a mother way that most boy children don't get, and definitely not the alpha male.  But it was (clears throat)--it has been a tremendous asset to who I am today.  I can go in a board room, and I know who's serious, who's not, who's telling the truth, who's not.  I can read body language and know in a way that I have confidence in about how people will react or if I need to work a little harder with this person or that one, or if this person is on my side.  And I owe that to my little sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  You had to, you had to really be sensitive to what she wanted.
Speaker 2: To what she wanted, 'cause, I mean, she couldn't walk or talk, but she still had to eat and use the restroom, had to rest.  And so you, you, you, you spend enough time with someone, you take enough time to care for someone, and it's a, and it's a blessing that actually you end up getting, which was not anticipated.
Speaker 1: Now, now, what are some of the symptoms of Rett syndrome?
Speaker 2: So Rett syndrome affects--well, only little girl children survive it.  They get to about age two or three; then they start to regress instead of progress.  So their developmental things that would be normal at a certain age, you know, they, they, they stop hitting those marks, and they seem like they go backwards.  It's probably--it's, it's on the autism spectrum.
Speaker 1: So, so, so is that, is that, is that the stage where it's diagnosed, or, or, or--
Speaker 2: Shauna wasn't diagnosed--that's her name, Shauna--until she was about twelve years old.  And she was diagnosed by, by Dr. Retts [sic. Andreas Rett] from Austria, Hungary [sic.], yeah.  And, and so--
Speaker 1: He's the one who they named--
Speaker 2: Named the, the, the disorder after, yes.  So, now I think in, in the late--in the mid to late 2000s they came up with a, with an amnio test [amniocentesis test] so they can test for it in the--and what's going on with the chromosomes.  But back during Shauna's time, the diagnosis were late in life and sometimes not at all.  And then the life expectancy was not so long 'cause these children really become dependent on their caregivers for the rest of their lives.  But Shauna is forty-three, and so she's outlived her life expectancy by, you know, a decade or so.  And part of that is because of the level of care that she's received from her family.  So, and she's kept my parents [Flora Lee Fulton and Bennie Fulton] young and active.  She's helped her brother to be more intuitive.  And we're all around and kicking, and she's still around too.  So it's a blessing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 671136
Speaker 1: So you had like a daily routine that you (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Daily routine.  Every day after school, where all the other kids were doing stuff, I had to be home, get her [Fulton's sister, Shauna Fulton] off the bus, and feed her, and make sure she had used the restroom if she needed to, and that every day.  So what it does, though, that mother wit is, is, is very useful if you're, you know, put in charge of people.  I mean, here at Verizon Virginia [Verizon Virginia, Inc.], I had, you know, ten thousand colleagues that I had to think about; you know, before that, in West Virginia [Verizon West Virginia, Inc.], two thousand colleagues, and I cared for all of them.  But having that empathy and being able to relate to their circumstances was helpful when I would sit down to negotiate with labor or negotiate with the government or nego- really talk with others.  And once you figure out, again, it's back to what separates us as people, as human beings, as institutions that employ people, as people who need work.  It, it, it's, it's--what separates us is a lot, I guess, less than what binds us together.  And if you can find those common denominators, then you can begin to build on those things for progress.  And if there's anything about my career and my experience, especially using technology, it's been that.  Technology is one of the building blocks, also love, also faith, and those things kind of coming together to create a career that, as I think about it, was fun.  And I mean, I, I'm, I'm honored that I'm getting opportunity to, to, to spend some time with The HistoryMakers.  And in, in my head I'm saying, but I ain't even done yet.  I'm still going.  We're just, we're getting ready to do part two now.
Story_ID: 671137
Speaker 1: What role did church play in the family?
Speaker 2: Went to church every Sunday.  It was critical.  I think that, probably need more of that today.  You know, now there you got the TV ministries and ministry on the radio and Sirius, the XM [Sirius XM Radio, Inc.] and all that.  But we went every day.  It was a big part of our family.  Family members were either on the board of the church, the caretakers for the church, the ushers, or the head ushers, family sang in the choir.  So that was a big part of the fabric of the community.  And, and any of those from, from Newport News [Virginia] and Hampton [Virginia], any of those communities we were--there was always church.  And my parents actually--my--still goes, especially my mom [Flora Lee Fulton], to the church we went to when I was a child.
Speaker 1: This is, is this--what denomination?
Speaker 2: Baptist church--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --First Baptist East End [First Baptist Church East End, Newport News, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In--yeah.
Speaker 1: And what role did you play in church as a youth?
Speaker 2: I would go.  And I was more probably reluctant, but I was there every Sunday.  I don't remember singing in the choir.  I never sung in the choir, although I have a decent singing voice, so, so my wife [Fulton's second wife, HistoryMaker Jacquelyn E. Stone] tells me anyway.  But she's probably got a little bias.  And, and I probably was, you know, just there and supported and enjoyed it when they had meal functions (laughter) but didn't have any super active role.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know Baptist have a lot of different, the, the Baptist training, all these different components (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I didn't, I didn't, I didn't get into that.  I was, I was way more into sports.  And as long as I did my sports and my school, then I could get a pass, which is kind of going to the service with my mom or my dad [Bennie Fulton] or both.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --weren't the kind of family that stayed in church all Sunday?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: I know there's some tension about, you know, when the NFL [National Football League] starts on Sunday (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: --you know, it's in a lot of households, people look at--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the clock.
Speaker 2: Yeah, looking at the clock, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At church. Yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Story_ID: 671138
Speaker 1: You started high school in what, 1980, eighty--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --two [1982] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) when did I start, eighty--
Speaker 1: --eighty-three [1983]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in, in the early eighties [1980s], yeah.
Speaker 1: In the early eighties [1980s].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now this is a time--correct me if I'm wrong--when the PC [personal computer] emerges, but most people don't have that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --businesspeople have it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And their--the little Mac Pluses [Macintosh Plus] and SEs [Macintosh SE] are out by that time.  And, but did--can you recall when you first encountered your--
Speaker 2: I, I can.  I was a--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --senior in high school.  It, it was, what, '83 [1983], '84 [1984], in that range.  And I was in an elective class.  And it was an introduction to PCs, so at Denbigh High School [Newport News, Virginia].  And you had to do projects and write code.  And I built an ATM machine [automated teller machine] with my PC.  And, and then around the same time, you know, IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] had just kind of invented their portable machines and their--and a, and a PCjr [IBM PCjr]. And Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] was the first engineering school in the country to require incoming engineering students to have a computer as part of their standard school supply.  The machine was six thousand dollars, by the way, back, you know, in the early '80s [1980s].  And so the only way I could force my parents [Flora Lee Fulton and Bennie Fulton] to buy me said computer was to get into engineering school at Virginia Tech, and that's what I did.  So after--
Speaker 1: Well I don't want take you that far--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that fast.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I, I wanted to know what your first introduction to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so, so that class--
Speaker 1: That class, okay.
Speaker 2: --at Denbigh High School, where we were gonna--introduction to PC, was the first time I saw one of these things called a computer, and I was hooked.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I wanted--
Speaker 1: I knew I wanted one, and I wanted to be able to do so--to, to play games on it and to learn how to build more things.  Well, building an ATM machine [automated teller machine] was a, it was, it was a success 'cause it worked.  It would keep tallies of your money and all this.  And it was just right on the computer, a little pro- a little program.  I don't know if I still have it, but--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --that was the first program I actually did, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These are the days--
Speaker 1: --it was basic.
Speaker 2: --when, I remember hand calculators came out in the '60s [1960s], '65 [1965] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, hand calculators came out.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: People--
Speaker 2: --by '84 [1984] they were old.  You could get them cheap, yeah.
Speaker 1: You could get them cheap.  They had started off very expensive.  And (unclear)--my parents were educators.  My dad [Bennie Fulton] was a, is a mathematician, and my mom [Flora Lee Fulton] taught math and English.  They would have all the calculators and things like that, and so we'd have access to those at home.  The first kind of device I had for typing was a typewriter and had some memory capacity but nothing like a computer.  And, and then I'd learned to type in high school [Denbigh High School, Newport News, Virginia] as well.  And so then they had this elective class that I took.  And a number of the students who were in the advanced math classes also took this computer class.  And it turned out to be a wonderful harbinger for things to come, because I went from that to a, a university [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] that re- also required computers.  And so I knew how to work it, and I knew how to type.
Speaker 2: So was video games out when you were in high school at all?
Speaker 1: Not so much at home.  So videos--so we would go to the arcade, where they'd have, you know, Spy Hunter and Pac-Man and bat- and Galaga and, and Centipede and all that sort of stuff.  And so we would more go to the arcade to play video games and less at home.  But it was starting with, what was it, Atari, I think, the early days.
Speaker 2: I know movies were starting to use the CGI [computer generated imagery] in the early '80s [1980s] for the first time instead of having to create a monster out of--I mean a real one then--I mean, I don't know, like mechanical means they can actually--
Speaker 1: Sure, sure.
Speaker 2: --generate one.
Story_ID: 671139
Speaker 1: In high school, what, what did you--what was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Favorite subject--probably math, 'cause I was good at math.
Speaker 1: Hm. Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, we can gravitate toward things we, we like.  I, I mean, there's a professor, Professor Coles [ph.].  He's now deceased, but he taught sociology, and I enjoyed his style.  He was an African American professor--
Speaker 1: This was in high school?
Speaker 2: In high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and he was really good at telling us like it is.  And so that, that class with Professor Coles was one of my favorites.  But if I had to think of a consistent favorite, it was math.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And meanwhile, you, you, are you, are you playing basketball?
Speaker 2: I was playing basket- played basketball throughout high school and really from junior high, middle school [J.M. Dozier Middle School, Newport News, Virginia] all the way through, and played JV [junior varsity] for a minute in college [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia].  Actually, my team won the intramural championship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you play point guard?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: I, I thought so.  I thought so.  Now, did, did you have a role model for the, for that position in the NBA [National Basketball Association]--
Speaker 2: In the--
Speaker 1: --or in college ball?
Speaker 2: Not in college.  In the NBA my favorite player was Dr. J. [Julius Erving].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, The Iceman was in there, George Gervin.
Speaker 1: I would have guessed it would have been Isiah Thomas as a point guard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, he, he wasn't my favorite though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I liked the guys that, you know, did the finger rolls or were nice with the ball.  I, I, I kind of liked that sort of stuff, too.  And I had developed pretty strong hands, and I could palm the ball.  So I'd come to the basket flying and stuff like that.  I, I couldn't--
Speaker 1: You (unclear)--flip it (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --flip it, and I, I couldn't--
Speaker 1: --finger roll it.
Speaker 2: --dunk.  I, I think I managed to dunk one time.  But otherwise, I'd just nice finger rolls and behind my back and all that, 'cause I could do all of that.  It was fun.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So the--how did Denbigh [Denbigh High School, Newport News, Virginia] do in high school?
Speaker 2: Not so well (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did, did Denbigh have a reputation of being a smart school or a athletic school or what--
Speaker 2: Probably more a smart school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so I take it your grades were good.
Speaker 2: They were good.  They were--they could have been better; they could have been better.  I mean, you know, the, the, one of the biggest eye opening things for me in high school was I didn't make--I didn't graduate with honors, and I probably could have.  But again, that pressure--you do too well, and you get this stigma for, you know, you know, acting white or something like that, which is, again, it's crazy.  And so then I was, I was in the graduation, kind of in the ceremony, and the, and the, and the, and the, and the so called cool guys are the ones that were outside of the room who I would see later that day on the basketball court in the, at the rec [recreation center].  "Hey, man, how come you didn't walk--get one of them gold tassels?"  I was like, "Oh, those are for the nerds.  They're not for us, not for us."  And, "But yeah, but, but we wanted you to be up there as our representative."  And then it hit me that they wanted to be in the room too.  They wanted to do better.  And so I didn't realize they had been looking to me to say, "Hey, we're smart too."  So it's an interesting thing, one, this pressure of, you know, don't act this way because that's what they do.  What I really see it as now, as a defense mechanism.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I didn't do so well, so I'm gonna make doing well an undesirable or an uncool thing so that way I don't have to feel as bad about it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's rejection of the unattainable--
Speaker 2: Rejection of the unattainable
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And so that was an important lesson.  I'm glad I learned it at high school.  So then thereafter, I would make sure that I applied myself a little more, still a little learning to do, and as I'll talk about in a bit, when in college, 'cause in, initially college wasn't a crystal star.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, I have a note here that, that Denbigh had a telecommunications program.  Is that, that true?
Speaker 2: I suspect because of this computer class.  I mean, I didn't spend much time in that particular, you know, specialty.  But definitely for me the computer elective was, was a catalyst.  And if you--and as we think about it, as I think about it, you know, going way back to the early '80s [1980s], for anybody to be doing anything with computers, suggests being a little ahead of the curve.
Story_ID: 671140
Speaker 1: Now did you have any counseling about college when you were at Denbigh [Denbigh High School, Newport News, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: I probably talked to one or two guidance counselors, but mostly my parents [Flora Lee Fulton and Bennie Fulton] were the fallback resources and, and the teachers that I had, my, my, my calculus teacher, a few others.  I mean, we, again, we knew I was going to college.  It was just a matter of where.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Had you projected yourself as a scientist or, or, or--
Speaker 2: Let's see, by--
Speaker 1: --how, how did you--
Speaker 2: --by, by then, I mean, you know, the coaching I was getting was engineering, which is broad enough where you can do that and then pick a career later.  I didn't quite know what I wanted to do.  I mean, my parents were educators.  My grandparents were farmers, domestic workers, post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  So there was nobody to tell me what the law would mean or being a scientist would mean, and so this was uncharted territory.  No one in my family had gone to a predominantly white university before, and so I, I would end up being the first.  But you know, what to do with that, it, it was really uncharted territory.  So, they said engineering was a good training to have; you're good at math.  And I could force my parents to buy this computer that I wanted, so I was able to check a few boxes.  And over time I learned that sometimes the, the door widest open, unless you know better, is probably a good choice.
Story_ID: 671141
Speaker 1: It was the computer that lured you to Virginia Tech, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was; it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Virginia Tech is in the mountains, Blacksburg, right? Virginia (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Blacksburg, Virginia, that's right; that's right.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah, okay. So what, what was--oh, before we get out the high school [Denbigh High School, Newport News, Virginia], was there any significant thing about high school we haven't talked about?  Were you involved in clubs or anything in high school, or, or, or run for student--
Speaker 2: I didn't run for office, played basketball, ran track for a minute, and then had this computer class.  No, I think you got it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So were you hoping for any kind of basketball scholarship or anything?
Speaker 2: I was hoping (laughter).  I mean, I had a few offers.  I had hurt my ankle my senior year, and that pretty much shot things.  Probably the most significant opportunity was the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado] wanted me to consider.  But outside of that, it was nothing substantial, small schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and so, you know, weighing that versus the opportunity to get this computer and be at Virginia Tech, it was a no brainer.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so, well, tell us about Virginia Tech now, the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, Virginia Tech as it's called for short, wonderful kind of lead engineering school in our state, probably one of the best in the, in the world.  They were the, literally, the first school in the country to require incoming engineers to buy a computer as part of their standard school supply.  So I was excited about that, having just had this experience with computers and now to get to own one.  And they had a 50 percent discount.  So from six thousand dollars to three thousand dollars you could buy what they called a portable [personal computer].  And the portable was a forty-seven pound thing that looked like a suitcase.  It had 64K of, of RAM [random access memory], two floppy drives, a six inch monochrome monitor.  So by today's standards, it's not even as powerful as the worst cell phone out.  But that was six thousand dollars.  That was state of the art, 'cause the companies had big mainframes with what they called thin dumb terminals.  And people were logging into the mainframe to do their computing and then printing locally.  The computer was starting to shift that and putting more processing power on the user side.  And then if you needed to access the supercomputer you could, but you could get more productivity out of someone having the computer power right there at their own availability, without having to worry about is there uptime or available time on the mainframe computer.  And so Virginia Tech gave me and the other students in engineering an opportunity to play with those.  Games had started coming out by then, so the King's Quest was really popular.  And so we had fathers that worked in math, that worked in the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], worked in different places.  So one of the most fun things to do was to take the games and reverse engineer them so we could get the codes to figure out how to win the game.  And so myself and my first roommate, a guy named Steve Cason--you know, we're still friends to this day--we would take these computers, and we reverse engineers those bad--those games, and we would have a ball.  And then, by the way, we wouldn't have to go to computer lab at night 'cause we had the computer in our room.  We got us a printer, and so all of a sudden all these conveniences.  And our papers looked better.  And we had spell check.  And I was like, whoa, this is cool.  This is gonna be the future.  And that really changed the trajectory of my career.  I mean, it pushed things up several notches.  I mean, at that period in time in the '80s [1980s], there were more computers in Blacksburg, Virginia, per capital than anywhere in the world--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --than anywhere in the world, you know, because of this program, and I was a part of it and really reaped the benefits of it.  I mean, at some point I, I think it's partly why I was able to go to some of the companies I went to and end up on the board of Virginia Tech.  I just stepped off the board in June of this year.
Story_ID: 671142
Speaker 1: I'm thinking, there must have been some computer guru at Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] who made all this possible.  Somebody had that vision--and you know, and do, do you know who it was or who, who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know.  The, the--
Speaker 1: --pushed that culture of technology--
Speaker 2: --there, there were a lot of folk there.  I mean, Tech's known to be an engineering school and to take some big bets.  I would probably say the president and the board of the school decided that to give the students an advantage they needed to embrace a future technology and build some leadership around it so that the, the graduating engineers could use the tools of their time.  And the mainframe was playing out, and the, and the home PC [personal computer] was becoming more possi- well, more, more, more, more popular, so I think the, the, just the, a, a knowledge of the time, being present, and being courageous enough to make that bold step.  I mean, when I was on the board we hired a new president and then added a, another bold step and said that we're gonna have the students to have what we called the VT student, the VT shaped student.  So matter what you're majoring in, computers or child care, you were going to have the latest technology in your field as part of that experience.  So if you go to Tech, the signature will be that you will have the latest technology as part of your training.  And so that's the new paradigm, but it's going to be it's what people will know when, when the student has gone to school X versus Virginia Tech, and that signature will be there.  And I think it made all the difference for me.  I know my roommate [Steve Cason], he also did very well, does very well.  He's an executive, a high level executive, as I was before I retired.  And we can point back to our experience at Tech as the catalyst and the engine for helping us to be who we became.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  This is exciting.  Did, did you have an idea of, of how special that was at the time, at the time?
Speaker 2: I knew that they were unique in the requirement, that you had to have a computer to go to engineering school.  I didn't know how big an impact it was gonna have on my life and that everywhere I went, even in, and even when I was in graduate school [The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York] and, and, and accepting scholarships and things, that I was always the guy people came to on the group to do the technology.  So I always had a role and an indispensable one.  And so that taught me to always be relevant, to always be somebody that's needed no matter what.  And so that's been part of my secret sauce, is to always be needed, always be relevant, to bring value to the table.  And for me, it was easy more often than not to bring that technological edge.
Story_ID: 671143
Speaker 1: So your, your major was engineering, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started in engineering--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --then did two years of computer engineering, then I actually switched to computer--I'm, I'm sorry--to architecture, and finished in architecture, ur- urban affairs and planning in the school of architecture [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University School of Architecture and Design, Blacksburg, Virginia], became their first outstanding young anum--alumnus in architecture, first in the school's history, black or white.  And, but it was ins- interesting road getting there.  My, my first couple of years in engineering weren't the easiest 'cause, you know, high school [Denbigh High School, Newport News, Virginia] was a little easier for me than the first couple of years at Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] in engineering.  And I applied myself but not as much as I should.  I thought college was gonna be easy.  And so my first year, I'm ashamed to admit that I had, you know, twelve hours of required sleep, as much basketball as I could play, at least a couple of hours, as many girlfriends as would have me, and then class, probably in that order.  And I was flunking out fast.  I took as much pottery, advanced pottery, and extremely advanced pottery (laughter) as the school allowed to try to get my grade, try to boost my grade point average.  And then what woke me up was I got a D in human sexual development.  And I'm like, ah, man, I got to do better than this.  And so I wrote a decla- I, I, I got this note that, you know, "Hey, you know, you might not be able to come back to school."  So I told my parents [Flora Lee Fulton and Bennie Fulton], you know, I was gonna change majors from engineering, go into architecture.  I told--I wrote a declaration of independence, and I told them that but for much appreciated tuition (laughter) payments, that I was independent.  They couldn't claim me on my taxes--on their taxes, and I was a man.  And so my dad came up there.  He drove, which was a long drive to get to Blacksburg [Virginia] from Hampton, Virginia, and we had a little conversation.  So we became friends, and he became an advisor after that.  But he said, "I'm gonna pay your tuition, but I'm also gonna claim you on my taxes."  And I resolved to go to school to do my best.  And I started going to class and reading the books.  And I was like, oh, my goodness (laughter), amazing things happen when you go to class and read the books.  I started making A's.  I started going to talk to my professors.  I took an advanced placement class.  The guy--the teacher [Richard D. Shingles] said, "Well, here, I want you to take my advancement placement class."  I said, "But it says here in the book that I have to have a three average--3.0 average.  I don't have a 3.0 average."  He said, "It also says if I invite you, if you're invited by the professor, you can attend the class."  I said, "Okay, cool, I'll do it."  So I got three hours of credit for two hours of class, and you got to pick your own books.  I was like, I've been hoodwinked.  If I'd known you could do this, I'd been in these (air quotes) smart kids classes the whole time.  You know, I started taking independent studies.  I said independent studies, I said I get to write up my own study and what--really?  Had no idea.  And so all of a sudden I stopped griping about the difficulty of school and started engaging.  So then I joined the honor society.  I worked as a page.  I became the student supervisor and had a car.  And I was like, oh, college is fun.  You know, I narrowed my dating habits, and I was like, wow.  And so, you know, what became I think the executive evolved out of those experiences, as though trial where things weren't going quite so well, a discovery that I could actually do it and do well, and then a, a verification, a validation with grades and now a scholarship.  And now people are saying, "Remember me when you get where you're going, you know."  But, but just one thing it's important to note that was a part of my history at Tech: when I was failing and not doing so well, and I'd take, taken the so called easy classes, some of them which were so easy, I went to soci- to the sociology department.  And I was gonna go into sociology 'cause the football guy said, "Oh yeah, join sociology.  That's easy.  That engineering stuff is hard."  And I said, "Well, let me talk to the dean of sociology."  And I, I forget the guy's name now, and it's probably the best.  And he told me, "College isn't for everybody." I was in college (laughter).  "College isn't for everybody.  Maybe you should consider the [U.S.] Army."
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So that's why I joined the National Guard, because I--just in case I had to leave school.  And I learned later that unfortunately black men are told that a lot.  When I worked at the Urban League [National Urban League], the then president before I left, [HistoryMaker] Hugh Price, who had a law degree from Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], was told college isn't for everybody.  The then general counsel, who also had a law degree from Yale, was told college isn't for everybody.  And so what is important is that we not let people derail our aspirations or our dreams because they may not believe in us or our capabilities.  And so as a parent, as an advisor, as a mentor, I try to make sure that I am one of the voices that tell young people that you can achieve anything that you want to achieve, and I believe in you.  But as I said, God blesses us all to turn our dreams and ideas into their tangible equivalents.  You have to have the faith; you got to be willing to do the work; and expect the outcome.  And that became real for me at Virginia Tech.
Story_ID: 671144
Speaker 1: Are there any particular teachers or advisors [at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] that you would cite--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, so many, so, [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni; James Bolen [ph.]; Paul Knox [Paul L. Knox]; Sarah Rosenberry, my first night supervisor; Mr. Green [ph.], gave me a chance, 'cause he started me off as a janitor and quickly moved me into page and moved me up into night supervisor within about a year and a half, two years, so, so, so those kinds of people, the professor who invited me--Dr. Shingles [Richard D. Shingles], who invited me to take the advanced placement course, the first one I'd ever taken in college.  And so those people were really pivotal.  In fact, Dr. Shingles was so impressed by my career that he had me to come back and do the commencement address to the school of poli- of, of, of, of political science, you know, years ago.  But you know, and, and, but it was because they took an interest and taught me how to make school a place where I could learn and grow that I was able to do just that.  And so, you know, the point there to me is, you know, no man is an island.  You know, we often think these self made, whatever--but really, all along the way there are people that reach back when you reach out.  And so the, trai- part of the, part of what I try to do today is you know, make sure that I'm doing my part to reach out and let people know that they can do it.
Story_ID: 671145
Speaker 1: Did you have a minor in sociology at all?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: You did, okay.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: All right.  It was, it was basically an architectural degree with an urban--
Speaker 2: Urban focus, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so the urban affairs and planning degree in the school of architecture of Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University School of Architecture and Design, Blacksburg, Virginia] allowed for certain classes in technology, in English, in statistics.  So it was probably more a liberal arts that wasn't designed to send you in to do a whole bunch of drawings but instead to be more like an urban planner, where you understood gentrification, big macroeconomics, and how cities evolved.  And then you were the person to put it all together.  And I always liked that role, being the, the conductor.  And so give me all the pieces, and I'll put it together.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause there's a, there's a school of thought I know years ago they even taught--there was a discussion in terms of public safety about where buildings are placed--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and the entrances and the exits and the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --ramps and the other thing it--that, and the green spaces, they create a safe environment--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or, or whatever kind of environment you want to--
Speaker 2: Want--
Speaker 1: --stimulate--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --you, you can--
Speaker 2: Yeah (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --help it along--
Speaker 2: You can help it along with planning, good planning.  Thought goes into it.  I remember one of my first projects for my thesis in undergraduate school I wrote about the, what's called the gate's lot.  And it was, it was this empty lot.  And I was tasked to figure out what the highest and best use of it was, right in downtown Blacksburg [Virginia].  So to this day, it is a farmers' market, and that's pretty much what--I said keep it a parking lot and some other kind of maybe farmers' market, something like that.  And it's a farmers' market and a parking lot to this day.  That was thirty years ago, you know, but, you know, it was good work.  And I learned how to do it, and then you make it happen.  So when you're downtown Blacksburg there's very few places where you can park.  My place is one of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so the, the function, you know, dictates the form, on a level--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --right? And--
Speaker 2: All of that, yeah.
Story_ID: 671146
Speaker 1: You graduated in '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: Eighty-nine [1989], uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You got your--it, it was a B.A. or--
Speaker 2: Right, B.A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right.  And so, also in 1989, I mean, well--you attended the Harvard school of--Kennedy School--
Speaker 2: Kennedy School of Government [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  So I, I attended the Kennedy School as part of a Sloan fellowship [Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship].  So during that last year at Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia], when I figured out I needed to go get a job, one of my professors, Dr. Sarah Rosenberry, and Dr. Bolen [James Bolen (ph.)] knew of this scholarship they thought I could, I could get.  It was students who underperformed early in their career, academic career, and then blossomed later.  And so you wanted to get into the best policy schools in the country.  So the Sloan foundation, Alfred P. Sloan Foundation [New York, New York], had this, had this money aside for promising students who did well during two summers, one at the Harriman School [W. Averell Harriman School for Management and Policy] in Long Island [New York] at, at, at, at SUNY Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York] and then a summer at Harvard's Kennedy School.  And so I got the scholarship and paid for everything, full ride to graduate school and a stipend, and to all the top forty policy schools in the country and that you could get into.  But they were, they were all participating.  If you were a Sloan Fellow, you're likely to get in.  And then, some schools, like The New School in New York [New York], said, "Well, if you accept our offer of admission, we will match the Sloan Fellowship for your second year."  And so I was like, 'cause that's a full ride, and so that's where I went.  And they accepted my--they, they matched the Sloan Fellowship.  So I went to The New School, where I studied management, science, and policy analysis.  And that was the first time I made all A's in school.
Speaker 1: This is The New School for Social Research [The New School, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yep, graduate school of management and policy analysis [Robert J. Milano Graduate School of Management and Urban Policy; Milano School of International Affairs, Management, and Urban Policy, New York, New York].  And I, and I, and I finished with like, I don't know 3.89 [grade point average], something like that.
Story_ID: 671147
Speaker 1: What did you learn there, and what--and how did that affect you in your career (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think the thing, I wrote my master's thesis.  It's called 'Ghetto No More' [ph.].  And it was a redevelopment strategy for Central Harlem [Harlem, New York, New York], got to work with the guy, Professor Timothy Bates [Timothy M. Bates], who probably still is the foremost commentator on minority business development in the country.  And so it was great to be there with Dr. Bates.  A guy named Dr. Jeffries [John M. Jeffries], African American guy, was also dare--also there.  Susan Morris was the dean who admitted, and she still has become a lifelong friend.  We share books.  But what I think I learned there from those people is that there're several ways to solve a problem.  And as the leader, you've got to assess the different choices and evaluate them against important criteria, your criteria and maybe the criteria of other stakeholders.  And you have to make a decision, important to get to a decision and important to do the, the work of thinking through what the choices are.  And so that's the thing I took away from graduate school.  So, if you think, kind of, Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] was learning about, you know, that, that you--what are the things that make the world work?  Engineering, architecture.  Graduate school [Robert J. Milano Graduate School of Management and Urban Policy; Milano School of International Affairs, Management, and Urban Policy, New York, New York] became: what are the organizations that make the world operate?  And then by the time I went to law school [New York Law School, New York, New York] it was: what are the rules that allow folk to operate with some sense of normalcy and comfort and predictability.  And so graduate school became this place where I learned how organizations interact to make the world work and then how to make choices when you're a part of those big organizations that are setting the rules, whether you can smoke or you can't smoke, whether you can drive here or drive there. What are, what, what's good policy.  And that's what I learned there, and that's, that's proved to be immeasurable.  The New School [The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York], and the reason that it worked well for my personality type is that I've always been a hands on person.  The New School was, you know, held itself out as a place where theory and practice converge.  And so it just wasn't all this kind of book smart kind of stuff.  It was we went out and applied it.  And so when I wrote my master's thesis, I was living in Harlem, working with Abyssinian Development Corporation that's part of the Abyssinian Church [Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York, New York] with Calvin Butts [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Calvin O. Butts], and literally figuring out how to improve Harlem, not just as a, a, a, a, a academic exercise, but as a plan I could leave this organization in its development efforts.  And then they went, and then the Har--Harlem Urban Development Corporation took that plan and made it the plan for Harlem.  And so a store came in, renovation above the Central Park [New York, New York], reselling of brownstones, a little bit of work on Striver's Row [St. Nicholas Historic District, New York, New York], and so I can look back and say I, I had a part of that.  And it felt right and turned out that it's, it's still there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the title of your thesis, 'Ghetto No More,' it reminds me of a title of a book by George Schuyler [George S. Schuyler] called 'Black No More' ['Black No More: Being an Account of the Strange and Wonderful Workings of Science in the Land of the Free, 1933-1940'].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Did you--were you aware of that?
Speaker 2: I was not aware of that.  I was not aware of that.  I was not aware of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Black No More' was a story about a Japanese scientist [Dr. Crookman] who invented a process called electrical true--electrical nutrition--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --which would turn a black person white--
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: --at least outwardly--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, so people started signing up for this process.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This, this, this book was written in the '30s [1930s]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --so--
Speaker 2: No, I, I, I had not heard of it.  I heard of the book 'Black Like Me' [John Howard Griffin], where the, I guess was it the white journalist or the, or, or the journalist who made himself look--
Speaker 1: Look black.
Speaker 2: --look, look--yeah, and then went around, but had not heard of the other one.
Speaker 1: 'Black No More.'  By--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --George Schulyer--
Speaker 2: How about that.
Speaker 1: --who became, later on, the only black member of the John Birch Society.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, any rate, I thought it sounded so much like it.  But, so, you could gather--you put together a plan that act- actually was useful for the Harlem community--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --in those days.
Speaker 2: In fact, the first home I ever purchased was a result of my master's thesis, yeah, 'cause I, I bought it was part of the program that we created.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  And now the real estate is, is, is gone through the roof.
Speaker 2: So I paid eighty thousand dollars for that place on 116th Street.  At the peak of the bubble it was worth $1.6 million.  It's probably worth six hundred, seven hundred thousand today.  Two blocks off Central Park.
Story_ID: 671148
Speaker 1: The school that you graduated from is called the Milano School of International Affairs [Robert J. Milano Graduate School of Management and Urban Policy; Milano School of International Affairs, Management, and Urban Policy, New York, New York]--no, no, no--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, now it is.  I mean, when I left (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 2: --it was probably like the Milano School of Management, and it's gone through some name iterations since.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but a really great place.  And then the people there are good, and they still focus on (unclear) practice to converge, a really wonderful new dean, an African American woman [Michelle J. DePass] who's bringing folk like myself and others to talk to the students, because that, that practical piece is really significant.  I mean, most of the, the students will go out and go to work, and they will impact people's lives.  And so you want folk who take it serious and who have a, a, a good process for getting to good policy, good conclusions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your specialization is basically urban planning, then--
Speaker 2: Urban planning and then really policy analysis.  And, and still I would always bring the computer angle too, so we'd still--the technology stuff stayed.  And I'd be the guy doing the spreadsheets or developing the databases.  And I tutored in statistics while I was there.  I tutored economics.  I almost took a job with, I think it was Moody's [Moody's Corporation] to do bond ratings, 'cause I was really good at statistics.  And so that math from before just carried through in the technology.  What was funny, they asked me the oddest question in the interview: "If, if, if David Duke," 'cause I think he was doing something in Louisiana or somewhere in government, "if, if, if the firm was hired by them, could you be objective in your analysis?"  And I think I gave the right answer.  But I just thought it odd that that would be a question in the interview.  And then, but more importantly, I think I had set my sights on the Urban League [National Urban League] as a place I wanted to work because I, I loved biographies.  And I read about Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], Ron Brown [Ronald H. Brown], another guy named Stanley Grayson [Stanley E. Grayson], who worked at another organization, and Marianne Spraggins [HistoryMaker Marianne Camille Spraggins], who went to the law school  I ended up going to [New York Law School, New York, New York] and was a, I think the first female, African American female managing director on Wall Street [New York, New York].  And I kind of patterned my life after their experiences.  And a number of them had touched the Urban League.  So I said okay, well, I'll go to work at the Urban League.  And, so right after graduate school that's where I went.
Story_ID: 671149
Speaker 1: Now, I have a note here that you received the President's Distinguished Internship (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--
Speaker 1: --is this in, at graduate school?
Speaker 2: Well, that, that was still in graduate school [Robert J. Milano Graduate School of Management and Urban Policy; Milano School of International Affairs, Management, and Urban Policy, New York, New York], so wrote the master's thesis, and just before that a group of us petitioned the president of The New School [New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York] to do our own study and to write a book to help kids in New York [New York] to find scholarships to school.  So we wanted to help kids.  And so we wrote this book called 'Doing It Right' [ph.].  And it was basically a collection of scholarships that probably were lesser known and that kids could apply for.  And we had these seminars where we'd go around campus, go around campuses, high schools in particular, and talk to them about having the--thinking big, having a positive historical perspective, and planning.  And then we'd leave them with this book on scholarships.  And the president liked it so much that he found money for us.  'Cause at The New School you had to do work.  You had to be pragmatic.  And so he found money for us to do this work as his first president's interns.
Speaker 1: Hm. Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And so, so you--so, so the jobs we had in the first year--the first summer, were jobs that we created with the help of the administration.
Story_ID: 671150
Speaker 1: Something you said intrigued me, that you learned the organizations that, that, that create policy in grad school [Robert J. Milano Graduate School of Management and Urban Policy; Milano School of International Affairs, Management, and Urban Policy, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What, what are those organizations, briefly, if, if they can be made brief?
Speaker 2: Well, sure: government creates policy; the courts create policy; corporations create policy; even nonprofits create some pa- or influence policy, but it's, it's, it's learning these kind of big structures, these sectors.  I mean, most people would say there are three sectors in society: government, nonprofit, corporate, this three legged stool of society, but really learning how those things mix and mash.  You know, you, you, you, you join nonprofit boards often because you're aligned with the mission.  But also you, you want to be--have a--build a relationship with some of the people on the board.  Many of the corporate leaders that I met--I mean, the first time I met the CEO of what would then become Verizon [Verizon Wireless], was because my work at Urban League [National Urban League], and he was on the Urban League board.  And so people may miss that connection, but it's there.  And otherwise, some black guy from Hampton [Virginia], why would I know the CEO of a guy from a company in New York [New York], you know?  But if we're in the same place, helping the same organization, then the likelihood of our paths crossing is increased tremendously.  And so when they were looking for someone to help them with the TV service that's actually out now, they needed somebody with engineering background, civil rights background, legal background, sounds like a job for me.  But they knew I was there because they knew who I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in '91 [1991], now--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I finished The New School [The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York] in '91 [1991], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 671151
Speaker 1: You joined the Urban League in '91 [1991]--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: --right, as?
Speaker 2: I did.  So I went right to work for the Urban League.  I was one of their early associate directors.  And I actually founded the technology programs and policy department for the League, and it was great work.  I had pretty much decided that I was going to spend a good part of my career bringing the kinds of things that helped me, the technology in particular, to other young people--
Speaker 1: Now this is--
Speaker 2: --to other communities.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the state of ur- now you're--I, I think '90 [1990], '91 [1991] is a time period when a lot of organizations tried to re--had to reassess--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --because of what was going all around--
Speaker 2: All around.
Speaker 1: --what their position was in terms of technology.
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: They were gonna--or be left behind.
Speaker 2: Or left, or be left.  So, so you're absolutely right.  I mean, it was a question of relevancy.  Was the organization going to remain relevant as a group that help people to get jobs, where the jobs were increasingly becoming technological?  What a lot of people don't know about the league, though, was that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I mean, Whitney Young gave a speech at the university of Israel in the '60s [1960s] on cross border data flow.  I have a copy of that.  The League in the '80s [1980s] wrote journals that included articles on technology and the importance of it.  The first technology centers were built by the Urban League and IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], in partnership.  IBM in the, in the '60s [1960s], mid-'60s [1960s], late '60s [1960s], their, their annual reports are full of stories about the, the kids are being trained in the Urban League.  In fact, there was a Wall Street Journal article with a picture of a kid at a terminal doing these programs.  So I saw this, and I said okay.  These were mainframed.  It was way early.  Let me build on that tradition and help to get this organization into the 21st century.  So my role was, as the founder of technology program and policy department, was to get technology into the affiliates, to make sure people were trained, to get the national up on technology, the national organization, to spearhead innovative pra- projects in technology.  So the National Urban League was the first nonprofit of any kind, black, white, indifferent, to broadcast over the Internet, the very first one.  We had a partnership with Columbia University [New York, New York] to get high speed data, online training, emails for all the employees.  The fascinating thing was, you know, in hindsight, everybody said oh, what a great idea that was.  But back in those times, where I was doing those negotiations, I had to write a memo to say why we should accept free high speed Internet (laughter) and a C block, which is a lot of email addresses, a C block of email addresses of free classes from Columbia University.  I had to write a memo explaining why we should accept it.  This was probably worth--I don't know--a million dollars, but people didn't get it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  And so--and that was the thing.  So fortunately, the guy who came in from AT&T [AT&T Inc.], guy named Milton Little [Milton J. Little, Jr.], he became like the COO, and he, he was comfortable with technology.  He said, "What do you need from me?"  And I said, "If you can just block, I can get us a touchdown.  But I need your help, because people don't really understand what's at stake here or what's going on, and so they're trying to micromanage it. And they're gonna blow this opportunity."  People were saying, "Well, if we give everybody Internet, aren't they gonna just play games and, and, and do email and not work?"  I'm like, "Well, somebody may do that, but we hire professionals.  And these people are good at what they do.  And our--the companies that we're soliciting are going this way."  And so we created a job bank, one of the first job--online job banks we created with the company--I forget the name of the company.  I, I forget the name of the company, but created a job bank, had, had the first websites, doing this broadcasting.  I mean, Mark Cuban went on to be the Mark Cuban we know from TV.  But before that, he was partnered with the Urban League broadcasting conferences.  And so, but we had that history.  A lot of people don't know about that.  But we were way at the cutting edge, the first Urban Technology Summit the Urban League did with Mark Dean, an African American guy from IBM who helped to invent the PC [personal computer] and a, another guy from Silicon Graphics [Silicon Graphics Inc.].  We had these people on this panel talking about the future that was coming, you know, high-tech over high-tops, and helping them to appreciate that a, a, a new world was evolving, and, and there was an opportunity to be a part of it.  And fortunately, I was in, right in the middle of a lot of that.
Story_ID: 671152
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit more about Mark Dean.  Now, you mentioned him before we came in. Now he's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so Mark Dean was a IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] fellow.  He was on the team that invented the PC [personal computer], African American scholar.  I think one of his latest project was trying to influence storage so you can have more storage on smaller devices, but just really a, a, a mountain of a man but very humble and a person who gave back and mentored a lot of young people, including myself.  I mean, he would accept emails.  He would respond back, never had any problem accessing him.  And I, I was grateful for that opportunity.  And, and that computer that I had was something that he had his fingerprints on 'cause he was on the team that helped to create it.
Speaker 1: Now we interviewed a man, a, a black man, in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] who was one of the founders of Silicon Graphics [Silicon Graphics Inc.].  I can't think of his name right now, but I just want to throw it out there so anybody watching this knows it.
Speaker 2: And he was on the Urban Leader's [National Urban League] panel that panel that we had.  It was Marc [HistoryMaker Marc Hannah], the gentleman, the guy you're talking about.  The name will come back to us--
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but yeah, one of the founders, yeah, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: This is Silicon Graphics (unclear)--with coming up with the CGI [computer generated imagery] for--
Speaker 2: All, all of that. That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So this is an exciting time, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the Urban League is on the cutting edge of all of this, so they're not being--the national is not being drug into the future, but I mean, they're being prodded.  But the branches probably are not so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, and so what we did was we were bringing this technology to the branches as well.  And so the largest grant that Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation] gave, they gave to the Urban League.  And we had all this software.  I mean, it was a funny story, so.  I wrote the grant, with some help, and knew that we had won.  It was a very order, amount of $3 million, something like that.  It was a lot of software.  But you know, if I ask you now, what is $3 million in software look like in terms of how much physical space you need to store it?  We got software in the cloud.  Well, well, they didn't have clouds back then.  So, I get a call, and the trucks are outside.  We're at one--we're Wall, on Wall Street by then.  The Urban League moved from Sutton Place [New York, New York] up to I think it was 120 Wall Street.  It was a cake building.  And I look out the window, and there are three, like, eighteen wheel trucks parked all alongside the street.  And, "We got plats to roll into your building."  I'm like, oh, my god.  So I go to the chief financial officer.  I say, "Paul [Paul Wycisk], we don't have enough space (laughter) to put the software.  And it's out here, and we gotta unload to--they're gonna unload it today."  So we load every file cabinet, a few offices, ceiling to floor software, and the licenses.  So then the next biggest problem was how to distribute it to the hundred and some local affiliates.  And so what we decided to do was tell them, "Okay, we have the software; send us what your need is or verify your need; and then whoever sends us FedEx [Federal Express; FedEx] or UPS [United Parcel Service] or paid shipping will take priority on delivery, anyone else, you'll get it at the various conferences and things or when we can get it to you."  'Cause it was--it would have been expensive for us to get it out.  And just, you know, it was a good problem to have, but that was just a funny story about, you know, dealing with your success and what happens.  And it was I mean tons of software, truckloads, literally.  And but we got to distribute it.  And so very, so very quickly the Urban League, you know, pushed even higher in terms of its technological relevance.  When it was started as an organization, it was helping people to move from an agrarian, you know, world into a more industrial world.
Speaker 1: Like settlement houses.
Speaker 2: So what we were then doing was helping them to move from this kind of industrial and an urban focused jobs to now a more technologically driven society.  And so having the technology and being at the epicenter of that activity was a big important part of what the Urban League's work needed to be.  And so I had the good fortune of having great leadership and colleagues who supported us doing this work.  And because I understood it and was at the right place at the right time, I got an opportunity to be a part of it.
Story_ID: 671153
Speaker 1: John Jacob [HistoryMaker John E. Jacob] was the head (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I came in John was the president.  He had just taken over from Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.].  And then shortly thereafter, [HistoryMaker] Hugh Price came in, became the president, and Milton Little became his executive vice president.  And we worked very closely together.  In fact, by the time Ivan Seidenberg joined the board of the National Urban League, Hugh also joined the board of what was NYNEX [NYNEX Corporation] at the time.  And I think he just stepped off of in the later company Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.] board maybe a few years ago.  But you know, having all that stuff in play, made a difference.  It sure made it a lot easier to bring in new technology.  And that's how, that's how AOL [America Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.] discovered what we were up to, because they're saying who are these people building all these technology centers and doing all this important work.  And of course, we all, we got invited to speak quite a bit about technology and bringing technology to poor neighborhoods.  There was--I don't know if it's a cover story, but when, when The New York Times went color, it was a color article with a picture and the Urban League and technology.  And so we were, became really sought after for panels and things like that to talk about what was called bridging the digital divide.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, and by the digital divide, you mean those who were involved in this technology.
Speaker 2: Those who had technology and those who didn't.  And so more often than not, social economic status defined whether or not you were a part of this, you know, technology tsunami of opportunity or whether you weren't.
Speaker 1: It's an interesting time period, 'cause I know people that are older than myself, but not that much older, who decided they didn't want to do it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They drew the line.  And said, well, I already know what I know, and I'm not gonna--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --try to know this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --this.  You know, it's too much for me right now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I--or, or I just, I just don't see the value of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And there was--
Story_ID: 671154
Speaker 1: Interesting story on that.  So there's always gonna be folk who don't embrace a new thing, and for their reason, many of them sometimes good reason.  But for a leadership organization, for an organization that we're trying to get people to get work in the emerging economy, it would have been irresponsible not to embrace technology at least as a training tool.  And so what I realized though, was the way to do it, was to get the executives in a room by themselves, 'cause these were mavericks.  And really, some of them didn't, they didn't want to risk embarrassing themselves and not looking like they knew what was going on.  So when I got them in a group of their peers, it was easier to do training, so that's what we did.  And then they started--then they could ask these questions like: so what's this thing for?  A basic question but in front of their secretary or their trainees, it would have made them look like they were lost.  In front of their buddies, it was a big joke, but they were really serious.  We had one lesson where, you know, the executive said well, "I put the, I put the, this, the--," what do you call it when you sew, and you step on--oh, the foot pedal on the floor, the foot pedal?
Speaker 2: Oh, so the mouse (laughter)?
Speaker 1: The mouse (laughter), exactly.  But you, you learn things in your context.  I said, "Wow, this looks--that's a different kind of foot pedal, okay, put that down here.  What does thing do?"  You know, and so, but it was that.  But once you put them in an environment where they are comfortable, so then I started doing the executive trainings one on one even.  So then you even got more point--(unclear) "I'm so glad you did this."  "What the heck is this thing?  I've been looking at this thing blinking on.  And what is that telling me?"  You know, and then all of a sudden you get a breakthrough.  And so once we started getting those breakthroughs, we were building websites; we were collecting donations; people wanted to broadcast their own stuff; they wanted--is this a way to get feedback?  We were the, the non--the Urban League [National Urban League] was the first nonprofit of any kind to have a site on the Internet and a site on a popular online service where they could literally pull down winning proposals.  So instead of recreating the wheel, I had it set up so that if Boston [Massachusetts] won a contract for housing or a contract for job training, then we could take that proposal and put it in this library, digital library.  And then if you wanted to read it, as you wrote your own response to a proposal, you could.  And so we were taking the league way ahead of everybody else, way ahead.  And, and so I'm, I'm really proud of that.  I mean, you know, the, the--and unfortunate thing is that some of them didn't move beyond that after I left.  But you know, that's for that generation to decide what they need and how they get there.
Story_ID: 671155
Speaker 1: The Urban League [National Urban League], you were involved also in like youth programs around technology, right?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So the, the technology centers focused on adults and youth.  And what we realized, were the youth were often just so ready to embrace it, that we had a number of young professionals and, and youth oriented programs.  They started having a, a, a, a youth conference, and then the technology work would always be an element of that.  But to this day, the, the Urban Leagues that, that embraced the technology centers would tend to, to, to be a place after school where young people could go to access these technologies.  I mean, again, we're talking many years ago, in the '90s [1990s], where folk didn't have the stuff at home yet.  And very few offices even had it for everybody.  And so we wanted to make sure that the young people at least had it at the Urban League.  Over time, there were pushes to put, put them in libraries and make sure schools had them.  But way before that, the Urban League was at least one place you could go and typically find computer resources in most low income and urban areas.
Story_ID: 671156
Speaker 1: So you were at the Urban League [National Urban League] until--
Speaker 2: 'Til 2000, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) two thousand [2000], okay. And so what, what are you the most proud of at the Urban, Urban League?
Speaker 2: Wow.  I think definitely bringing those technology centers in and kind of leaving that mark, the broadcasting of the conference [Urban Technology Summit], 'cause that's the first time it was ever done in the world by a nonprofit.  I won a, a medal for the work that I did at the Urban League collectively for community technology.  It was called a Computerworld Smithsonian Laureates Medal.  And so all of that work, the writings that I did, 'Losing Ground Bit by Bit' ['Losing Ground Bit by Bit: Low Income Communities in the Information Age'], things like that, are permanently archived in the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.].  And so I'm, I'm, I'm pretty pleased by that.  My parents [Flora Lee Fulton and Bennie Fulton] got to see that and were there when I got the medal, and the children [Joshua Fulton and Terrell Fulton] were there.  And so it was a validation of, of, of a body of work that was meaningful to me and looks like it's helped a lot of people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  One of, one of the thing that--things that you developed was a CD-ROM called Cruise Control [ph.] that the--was that, was that you?
Speaker 2: There was a, a few CDs [compact discs] that we did with other partners.  And some of them were designed to help to--help people to learn technology.  I, I forget which organization took the lead on cruise control.
Speaker 1: I think it was Ameritech [Ameritech Corporation; AT&T Teleholdings, Inc.] was that it?
Speaker 2: Could, could have been.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 671157
Speaker 1: You also testified before [U.S.] Congress, right?  On the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did.
Speaker 1: --digital divide--
Speaker 2: I did, I did.  There became a time where I probably had built more technology centers than anybody.  And so Congress was interested in knowing how we got it done, what were some of the pros and cons, and so, yeah, so I did that.  I think C-SPAN has it in some archives somewhere, the actual testimony.  But one of the things I told them was, it's easy to build them.  When you have the right resources you can put them together.  The next biggest problem is sustaining them, and how do you keep them going now that you've created a, an expectation that this resource will be here?  And these things get obsolete, and they get old.  And you gotta replace them and upgrade them, and then you gotta--fast.  And then you gotta maintain them.  And so we were able to get this work done and, and, and get Congress to see that providing technology centers was a way to fill a gap that needed to be filled.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I've seen the old computer labs in community centers where the--they, they got them in the early '90s [1990s], and they haven't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, hadn't done the upgrades and that sort of thing, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They, and they're still proud that they have these (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: You know, I mean, I guess they should be, but that it's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at some point you start, doing, being a bit of a disservice because people are getting a false impression of what today's computing looks like.  And so you always have to refresh it and stay on top of it.  And so I was trying to be helpful, as the United States was now thinking about what policies it could do to promote technology infusion.  So, Congress ended up giving me an award for that work and, and then started promoting what they call public/private ventures.  So they were matching dollars available if communities wanted to embrace technology.  Then there was monies that you could get from the government and from private companies and work with nonprofits.  And so the Urban League [National Urban League] was a catalyst for that sort of thing.  You know, we realized that we could only build but so many technology centers.  So then, I remember one of my first jobs at the Urban League at AOL [America Online, Inc; AOL, Inc.], we created a thing called the Digital Divide Network, where it was a database where you could type into it and put in your zip code.  And it would tell you all the computer resources within X radius of that zip code, so libraries, Urban Leagues, schools that were open after school.  And so basically we realized that awareness and access was became almost as an important as creating the thing.  'Cause if you create something nobody knows where it is or that it exists, then it has limited value.  If you create something and put some rocket boosters on it and say hey, it's here, flashing neon light, come, free technology, free training, then people use it, and, and you know, then the, the, the, the value of it spikes.  And that's what we wanted to have, hundreds and thousands of these spikes around, especially on Native [Native American] reservations, urban areas, poor areas in Appalachia, 'cause this wasn't, you know--a black thing.  This was we wanted technology to be available for everyone, at all the schools, and, and we worked to make it so.
Story_ID: 671158
Speaker 1: At some point you decided to go to law school.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Was that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did.
Speaker 1: --was that a result of the conversations with [HistoryMaker] Hugh Price, or?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, well, Hugh Price (unclear).  But early on I'd, I'd, I'd read these biographies of these people: Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], Ron Brown [Ronald H. Brown], Stanley Grayson [Stanley E. Grayson], and Marianne Spraggins [HistoryMaker Marianne Camille Spraggins].  All of them were lawyers, so I knew I had to go to law school at some--(unclear).  I used their live stories to kind of write my own plan.  And then the Urban League [National Urban League] was a part of their experiences, working in big companies, and so I basically patterned--'cause nobody in my family had done this stuff.  So I needed some kind of frame to pour my energy into what I thought would work.  And, and so I figured, okay, if they did it, I'll do it the way they did it or something close, and I'll be okay doing it, and I'll come out all right.  And so law school was on the horizon.  And so I did some research.  I knew I wanted to do communications law, telecommunications, intellectual property, electronic commerce, which is what I ended up focusing on.  And the top school in the country with the most courses in those areas was New York Law School [New York, New York].  And the leading professor was a Jewish guy, Mike Botein [Michael Botein].  He, he passed recently.  And he wrote the leading casebook on media law.  And the leading African American professor was Al Hammond [Allen S. Hammond], who happened also to be at that school.  And then the kicker was, by this time I had a family and, and was in the process of adopting children [Joshua Fulton and Terrell Fulton], and so I needed a program that, that was at night so that I could work at the Urban League during the day.  So I went to law school at night.  And New York Law School had the most cla- had eighteen electives in media and communications law, had the top two professors, one Jewish, one black, and they had a night program.  And so I don't advise this to young people, but I was always kind--I'm all--I'm, I'm a very focused person.  I can see things at fifty thousand feet but also get very granular.  And so for me, I tended to apply to one or two schools that I really wanted to get into.  And I figured if I didn't get in, then it just wasn't for me.  And so for undergrad I applied to Virginia Tech's [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] engineering school, thinking that's the only one I wanted to get into, and I did got in; for, for graduate school, The New School [The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York], and I got in.  I think I applied to other; I think I got in as well.  And then for law school, I only applied to New York Law.  And if they hadn't accepted me, then I probably would have gone and maybe continued to work or done an M.B.A. or something like that, because I never practiced law, but I wanted the train--had a professor at The New School, Professor Goldstein [Henry Goldstein], who said, he said, "Young man, you're a smart young man, and you should get a terminal degree."  And I was like, "Terminal as in--?" He was, "Like a Ph.D., a J.D., something like that."  And so I thought about Ph.D., but Ph.D., everything I was reading was tracking towards academia.  With a law degree, I could practice law; I could do business; or I could teach.  All the bi- biographies I was reading, they all had law degrees, and they were doing stuff I would like to do.  And the law degree was a defining experience.  I could have that experience in three years full time, four years part time.  Ph.D. was, you know, five, ten, some accordion, who knows, gotta defend this thing, highly opinionated.  And so I was like, and it led to an academic path, so too undefined, too narrow in landing place; law degree, narrowly defined, wide open in terms of landing spaces.  I'm a pragmatist.  I chose that one, and it worked out well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So the New York Law School had a media focus--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I graduated as the commun- outstanding communications law student.  So that was, that was cool to, to kind of finish.  So, so after I figured out how to do school, then everywhere I went after that I always finished with some kind of high honor.
Story_ID: 671159
Speaker 1: Now you're doing a lot of--you're, you're really busy when you're going to law school [New York Law School, New York, New York], already (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --you have a family--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and did--now, when did you get married?  When, when, when did that happen, now?
Speaker 2: The first time I got married in 1990, young lady I met at Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia], when I narrowed my dating habits down to one woman, and I married her and right, right before I finished graduate school [The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so we adopted two little boys [Joshua Fulton and Terrell Fulton], stayed married for a little while.  And then things drifted, and we went our separate ways.  And the boys are all in college, and so, and things are going all right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got remarried in 2014 to a wonderful woman who's from Williamsburg [Virginia], lives in Richmond [Virginia], Jackie Stone [HistoryMaker Jacquelyn E. Stone], you'll talk to a little later on.
Speaker 1: That's right, we'll interview her later on today.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 671160
Speaker 1: I would just guess that the Urban League [National Urban League] was supportive, you know, when you were in law school [New York Law School, New York, New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, extremely support- extremely supportive.  They were pleased that of the--for the things that I was doing.  They gave me pretty much a free rein in technology, as I become kind of a national leader and one of the spokespeople for bridging the digital divide.  I later write--wrote an article about creating digital opportunity.  And people starting digital opportunity as administrations changed.  But yes, the League was ver--very supportive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, it says here that you concentrated on electronic commerce, intellectual property, and telecommunications law. Why those three--
Speaker 2: I'd always been a technologist.  Those are the things I was most interested in.  I figured if I were going to practice law, that I'd practice in some kind of technology related field.  What pulled me away from the practice of law, though, was this idea of being a businessman.  And then one thing--so, the, the, the big giveback that I got from [HistoryMaker] Hugh Price and the leaders of the local Urban Leagues was this: they said, "Look, young man, you've got a shot."  'Cause I, I was committed to helping the League for the rest of my career.  And they was like, "No."  Vernon [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] stayed about ten years.  Whitney [Whitney Young] died after about ten.  So that created a tradition of ten years for the leaders.  You know, "We don't want you to stay much longer than that, not because you're not good; you're great at what you do.  But you've got a shot to go and enter the highest levels of corporations.  You can bring resources back to our organizations that we can't get without having someone on the boards or someone in the C-Suite." Said, "You can do it," and so, and, "Don't be like us who've committed our lives to this.  These problems are gonna be here when we die, when you die, when your children die."  And you know, the organizations that we're heads of may not have even my retirement together.  And so I've gotta drive--one CEO said, "I gotta go drive a cab after I'm done being CEO of the Urban League because everything isn't together.  Some of that's my--I own it, but I don't want that for you.  We don't want that for you.  You have helped us to take a leap forward with this technology.  Now help yourself and help us by taking a leap forward in your career, and then just don't forget us, and make sure you send back."  So while I was at--any of the companies that I was at, the Urban League tended to be a part of the groups that we would go back to 'cause I knew the quality of the work but also knew that they needed partners.  So again, back to that three legged stool: for profit, government, nonprofit.  And I knew that if I were helping the League through some of these corporations, the corporations would benefit, and the league would benefit, but also the, the people that I cared about would benefit, these communities.  And until this day I still mentor, still helped to build technology programs.  I've been helping, volunteering for the City of Richmond [Virginia] most recently to bring technology to the schools here.  We got a new mayor, and so they reached out to me, and of course I said yes.
Story_ID: 671161
Speaker 1: When you were at the New York Law School [New York, New York] you received Outstanding Communications Law Student of the Year Award [ph.].  And you were also the technical editor of the Media Law and Policy--
Speaker 2: Yeah, journal, yeah.
Speaker 1: --journal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no I, I, I became a, I became a really good writer in law school.  And I had this one professor, Professor Ryan [ph.], and he said, "You know what the key to good writing is?"  I said, "What's that?"  And [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni had echoed this earlier, but you know, proofreading.  But also, what he taught me about proofreading was this: read it out loud.  He's like, your--, "Our ears are less forgiving than our eyes and brains.  If you read something to yourself, your eyes or your brain will likely correct it.  If you read it out loud, good writing is tonal, and you can hear the mistakes.  Read it out loud, mark it, and then fix it."  And that has made a tremendous difference in my first drafts or, or, or the first drafts that I share being really pretty much almost there.  And so law school was a big part of that and also confidence.  I mean, what you get when you read all those cases and things like that is an understanding about what makes these big organizations keep their promise, keep their word.  It's a set of rules that govern.  And, and so that training was really good for me.  And, and so, so New York Law School and the focus on IP [Internet protocol] communications telecom really was just a big addition to creating this telecom executive [telecommunications executive].
Story_ID: 671162
Speaker 1: As you finished law school [New York Law School, New York, New York], did you have a lot of--I mean, what--where--what direction were you going in?  And did you have offers from corporations (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had a lot of offers.  And I was heading to Corporate America.  The, the, the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] wanted me to go there.  Bill Kennard [William E. Kennard], the first African American chairman of the FCC, was recruiting me, a company called Covad [Covad Communications Group].  NYNEX [NYNEX Corporation; Verizon Communications, Inc.] was recruiting me and this little company called AOL, America Online [America Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.].  And, and so I ended up going with AOL.
Speaker 1: Now you graduated in '98 [1998], is that right?
Speaker 2: From law school.
Speaker 1: From law school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you started with AOL in?
Speaker 2: In 2000.
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, I mean, I had a job.  I wasn't in any rush to leave the League [National Urban League], but I had those conversations with those folk who were telling me that they didn't want me to stay too long and that they saw that I had some opportunities that they just didn't have.  And so, so the, so getting the law degree was part of kind of polishing off my skillset as an executive so that I could make the leap from nonprofit to for profit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, And AOL, and I guess from 1994 through 2000, was the, was, that was the Internet (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If you were on--you were online, you probably were online with AOL.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They charged you a little fee, right?  It--
Speaker 2: Yep.  It was dial up access.  We had those--
Speaker 1: For email--
Speaker 2: --we had to those modems--and things like that (makes sound), all the little sounds and stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you'd hear the sounds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh (laughter)--
Speaker 1: It seem so long ago now, but that was the--
Speaker 2: It does.  That was state of the art back then.
Speaker 1: --that was the, yeah.
Speaker 2: I remember I had a 2,000, a, a 2,000 kilobit modem.  And then when my 9,600 kilobit modem came, I thought I had died and gone to heaven.  That, that, that was like, that was three times--four times the speed.  I was like, oh, my goodness, almost five times.  And then the--it was out for two days one time, and I felt so disconnected.  That's when I knew that it was a revolutionary shift in what was gonna happen with connectivity in the world.  When I missed being able to connect to the folk and send my email and all that stuff, I was like, oh, my goodness, this is going to be big; this is going to be huge.  And how do I make sure that this doesn't bypass my community?  And so that's why I took it so seriously, 'cause I knew how big it was going to be.  I'd wrote in my--when I was the--on the, on the Media Law and Policy journal, I wrote about commerce and how important it was going to be as a new revenue stream for industry and whole new companies.  And so the article that I wrote was quite prescient in talking about the billions of dollars they were gonna generate from online commerce.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 671163
Speaker 1: I remember the little cartoon of the AOL [American Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.] figure, bigger, faster, stronger.  He's like, (unclear) faster this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --there's--people that had a, a PC [personal computer] in those days were the cool people.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause everybody else had a--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --had a desktop.
Speaker 2: Desktop, yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --also, the, one of the key features of the time period, 2000, was--and it seems like nothing now, but then it was a big deal, the Y2K [Year 2000] scare.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: And cities spent millions of dollars--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --trying to protect themselves from what they thought was gonna happen during Y2K.  Can you explain what Y2K was and what--
Speaker 2: Well, well, sure.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, when you put the, a date down and you do month, day, year, and, and typically we were doing two digits for the year.  And so that was fine as long as you've run the 19 whatevers.  But then all of a sudden, if you're in 2000, if you were still using the two digits, well, it wouldn't stand for 1901.  It needed to stand for 2000 or 2001.  And so we--so the computer world realized, oh, my goodness, we've done all this programming on, on a, on a two digit year date.  And now is stuff gonna reset to 1900 when it hits 2000?  So are all my banking stuff is gonna be off?  Are the calculations gonna be wrong?  So now your account, your accounts' been open for a hundred years (laughter) instead of one (laughter).  And so it was a potential problem.  So they had to rewrite a lot of code, do a lot of scenario testing to make the, the year a four digit year to account for correct chronological timing.  And so that's the Year 2000 problem in a nutshell.
Speaker 1: Oh, it--I mean, people predicted that every computer system in the world would crash, and--
Speaker 2: Would crash, right.
Speaker 1: --all the planes would fall out of the sky.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so that didn't happen.
Speaker 1: And the grid was shut down.
Speaker 2: That didn't happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But, but still it was an important bit of work that needed to go on to make sure that there weren't problems that were hard to fix.  And so the work of the coding was real, but the--it probably was more overhyped than I think it should have been.  But we had become so reliant on these devices and these systems that there was little room to make a mistake.  And so you had some of your best minds thinking about how to mitigate any negative impacts from the Y2K problem.
Story_ID: 671164
Speaker 1: Tell us about AOL [America Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.].  And n- you were executive director of corporate outreach, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, basically corporate responsibility, corporate outreach, essentially the, one of the heads of the foundation [AOL Foundation; AOL Time Warner Foundation], and so, and also worked closely with AOL Investments and would talk to them about new ideas, would create things like something about the, the benefits checkup that gets the federal benefits to seniors done over 5.4 million dol- helped over 5.4 million people and done over seventeen and a half billion dollars in federal monies to folk who didn't know they qualified for these benefits, creating the Digital Divide Network, creating the Peace Packs [AOL Peace Packs; AOL Time Warner Peace Packs], which created little technology bundles for Peace Corps volunteers in over seventy countries, really just did a really a tremendous amount of work, helping dot.org, which got hundreds of millions of dollars to nonprofits, DonorsChoose [DonorsChoose.org], really created a lot of the, the infrastructure and, and, and, and, and strategic philanthropy for how you leverage corporate dollars to advance a cause and how you use technology.  We had this project, the, the, the, the teachers learning institute.  It was called ed- the Education Teachers' Learning Institute [sic. Education Technology Leadership Institute].  EDLI [sic. ETLI] was the short name.  And we worked with Trinity College [Trinity Washington University, Washington, D.C.] to train teachers on bringing technology into the classroom.  Then they'd go through our training.  Then we'd give them a bundle of technology.  But it really helped them to be stewards and good stewards for young people.  So you think about when I was at the Urban League [National Urban League], I had to go out and write grants to get money for our technology centers and various technology programs.  When I shifted to corporate within the foundation side, I was able to use a, a bigger pocketbook, the resources of a big corporation, major corporation in the space, to bring more resources to more communities.  So the biggest project ever to do technology centers was $100 million project called PowerUp.  So I was brought in to kind of help to head that up.  It was with Gateway computers [Gateway, Inc.], the White House.  I mean, President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], Steve Case, and the head of Gateway did the announcement, and I was part of it.  And so, came in and helped to do that and built--I don't know--maybe four hundred or so technology centers all around the, the nation and a really good body of work.  But a company like AOL and then when the, the AOL Time Warner merger happened, AOL Time Warner [AOL Time Warner Inc.] was embracing a lot of this.  And, and then even after, you know, Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.] took back over the, the, the, the, the assets, they still kept their social responsibility angle that included technology.  So I was really proud of the, the work that was done and the commitment from the leadership.  Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] became a bit of a mentor.  And he--you know, his example, one of, one of the most important things I think I learned from Dick was under promise and over deliver, you know, the idea that, you know, we can come up with a whole lot of things we want to get done.  But we're gonna have to be particular and focused about what we actually can do.  And there, you want to be smart about what you promise that you can do and then work hard to do a little more, under promise and over deliver.
Speaker 1: Which is the opposite of what a lot of people do (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so many people promise more on the front end and deliver less (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) And way--right, right.  And--
Speaker 1: And that's to get their foot in the door, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or to get to attract--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --people--
Speaker 2: And then you let folk down if you don't accomplish what you say (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Story_ID: 671165
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I used to put up with my teammates, I would always say, "Okay, how much time do you need to get this project done?"  They tell me, "I need two days."  I said, "Okay, take three or take four or, or report back next week and tell me where we are."  But I'd always try to give them a little bit more and trying to teach them that principle.  If you get it to me early, fine.  But I'm gonna set my expectation based on what I understand, that wisdom coming in.  What I understand, you know, there's a thing called life that intervenes.  We've got the best laid plans.  You've given me a strategy for if you're working forty hours a week nonstop, and you're able to focus on this, but something else may pop up.  I want to leave room for that, 'cause in life something else always pops up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  As--so, you're on a--you're doing the same kind of work as you were doing in the Urban League [National Urban League], except you're on the, on the corporate side.
Speaker 1: Definitely by the time I got to AOL [American Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.]--
Speaker 2: More latitude I guess (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, lot more latitude--
Speaker 2: --and power behind (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --and a lot more resources.
Speaker 2: --what you're--
Speaker 1: And so that was, that's, that, that's one of the things that made the AOL time really fun.  The other thing was I got to meet a lot of people and build some relationships with, know, Senator Warner, with Mark Warner--it wasn't senator at the time--Steve Case, just some really wonderful people.  And, and those relationships remain.  You know, subsequent to AOL, when Steve resigned, I went into government for a little while.  And that was part of kind of polishing myself to become just a bonafide trade business guy and to leave kind of the nonprofit and foundation world and then to shift into kind of high level business dealings.  And that happened after AOL Time Warner [AOL Time Warner Inc.] in, in a, in about a year and a half, almost two years in government.
Story_ID: 671166
Speaker 1: AOL [America Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.] merged with Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.] in 2001.  And, but there were some problems.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I know some people say it was a cultural problem. Two organizations had different cultures I mean.  And there's, and there was a change in technology too.  AOL was huge at the time, and all of a sudden it started losing.  What happened?
Speaker 2: In, in my view, definitely a, a whole lot of things, some things beyond our control.  There was a lot of regulatory requirements that were put on the deal because people thought it was going to be so successful that, you know, AOL, for example, couldn't use all of the assets, Time Warner Cable and things like that, without first wholesaling them to someone else.  And that probably was a mistake.  There was a difference in culture.  Time Warner had its various companies with their own reporting systems and boards and profit and loss centers.  And AOL was more kind of a matrix system.  You pulled together the team you needed to get whatever project done.  And so that didn't join as seamlessly.  And so when AOL wanted to get content from one source or another, there was an, an expectation that there would be some pay, just like it would from an outside company.  And so that, it's, it's hard to leverage a new asset if you're paying for it just like someone else.  And so those things, you know, just took too long to iron out.  And then, and then, I mean, 9/11 [September 11, 2001] happened, with the World Trade Center [New York, New York], you know, losses.  And the, the, the, the mood I think changed on a lot of--and it was in New York [New York].  But the mood changed on a lot of, for a lot of people and what was going on in society at the time.  And it just, you know, this, this big behemoth called AOL Time Warner [AOL Time Warner Inc.] just wasn't to be.  And, and then I think, you know, people like, you know, leaders like Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] were able to kind of come in and, and shift and, and stem the problems and, and right the, the, the ship so that the, the companies were going back to a level of esteem and luster that they had before the transaction.  AOL then kind of became a, a, a subsidiary, if you will, and, and it's still operating.  I mean, it actually was purchased by Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.] I guess for about four and half billion dollars not too long ago, last--this, this year as a matter of fact.  And Time Warner seems to be doing well with its brand.  It spun off its cable company and its various brands.  Time Warner I think are doing well.  So, there's been a recovery, but the expectation that all this great stuff was gonna happen because you had the powerhouse in the online world and the powerhouse in the media world coming together.  All those synergies didn't materialize--
Story_ID: 671167
Speaker 1: What happened that changed the nature of the Internet?  'Cause I know AOL [America Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.] was charging for email when, and then all of a sudden you had--and again I, I remember the, the Super Bowl commercial, I think they were NetZero where a guy runs in a room with a hammer and throws it at the screen, shatters the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right (laughter).  So what was happening was a shift from dial up to broadband.  So, you remember the early years of AOL was largely dial up access.  And you had a modem, a phone line, and you could get to the Internet and get these discs in the mail.  And, and AOL was great at shipping you--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --that, those discs.  Over time, you know, phone companies and other companies were getting better at packaging Internet over their existing wires but without dial up, per se, so that you were kind of always on, and you were always getting information, and the speeds were remarkably higher.  So we're not talking about, you know, kilobits per second.  We're talking about megabits per second and then gigabits per second in the fastest of scenarios.  And, and that speed created advantages.  It created the ability to download stuff faster, larger files, upload faster, upload larger files.  So then video becomes a possibility, and not audio and video but video in particular, 'cause now things like Netscape, which I think AOL invested in back in the day, are, you know, probably, Netscape's probably about half of the traffic on the Internet, video, you know, YouTube, all these kinds of things, because the bandwidth is, is, is wide enough where you can have reasonable quality coming through.  And so those things were happening.  And I think it was a little bit a challenge because AOL wasn't an, an infrastructure company in the sense that it didn't have its own kind of networks like a Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.] or a cable company.  And so it needed to ride over someone else's large pipes, as it were, to offer a service.  And it still had dial up, and there are some people that still us dial up.  But it's very few, and you know, if you have other options you would probably tend to take the broadband option.  But that was probably the biggest shift, is that more people desiring a much faster connection.
Story_ID: 671168
Speaker 1: And at age thirty-five, in 2001, you become the, a vice president of corporate relations for Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how, how was that job different from the other job?  And, and who did you report to (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, I reported up to a woman by the name of Kathy Bushkin [Kathy Bushkin Calvin].  And because she had been on the AOL [America Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.] side and she was the one that brought me into AOL, it didn't feel a lot different.  Again, instead of just having the resources of an online company, we had the additional resources of a media company, so it was fun.  You were working with HBO [Home Box Office].  And, and I remember, I remember one time 'Scooby-Doo'--it was take your kids to work day [Take Our Daughters And Sons To Work Day], and I show up with 'Scooby-Doo' and my kids [Joshua Fulton and Terrell Fulton], and my kids are like, "Oh, my god, dad is cool.  He works with Scooby-Doo (laughter)."  So it, it was fun.  You, you can imagine how much fun it was.  But that, that work was an extension of the work I had been doing and just having more resources.  I mean, Time Warner was a great company.  I made some really wonderful lifelong friends.  And so for me it was good.  I mean, I, I wasn't tainted with the, the old veneer of early AOL 'cause I came there from the outside and came from New York [New York], so I knew many of the Time Warner people.  So I was perceived as kind of a favorite son, which was to my good fortune.  That said, there were a lot good people in, in, in that, in the mix of businesses.  It just wasn't the time for that particular merger to, to be maximized.
Story_ID: 671169
Speaker 1: In 2003, you joined the U.S. Department of Commerce, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In the Office of Policy Analysis and Development.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did that position take place, and what, what did you actually do?
Speaker 2: Sure.  So, that's the job I had after I left America Online [American Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.].  Steve had resigned, and I was--you know, the team that I was with worked for Steve Case.  And so at that point it was a time to think about career.  And so I knew I wanted technology.  I knew I wanted to, to, to become more of a businessman directly and kind of leave this nonprofit foundation stuff and really try my hand at P and L [profit and loss] and selling the product or improving a product.  I was always a kind of creative technology kind of person.  So, I went to the Department of Commerce at the suggestion of my professor from law school [New York Law School, New York, New York], at Mike Botein [Michael Botein].  And he said in government you can focus on your family.  I know that's important to you.  You can make a fair amount of money and do some meaningful work.  So I wrote briefs.  I worked on spectrum, worked on Next Generation Internet [Next Generation Internet Protocol] called IPv6, Internet Protocol Version 6, contributed to a, a book ['Technical and Economic Assessment of Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6)'] on that, and, and kind of was preparing myself to go back into industry but this time really focused on some of the big kind of business challenges in industry.  And that's when Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.] called, and they said they needed somebody that had a civil rights background, understood technology, and preferably some legal training.  Well, I had been at the Urban League [National Urban League].  I had a law degree in telecommunications, intellectual properties, and electronic commerce, and understood technology, having founded technology departments.  And so I was like a shoo in, and I got the job.  And so my first job was to fight back a push that, that the, the, the FiOS TV [Verizon FiOS TV] was gonna redline and leave out black communities, oddly enough.  And it wasn't true.  But in, in our country, race is a raw ner- nerve, and when you start playing the race card, people pay attention.  And so--
Speaker 1: And they're inclined to believe the worst.
Speaker 2: Inclined to believe the worse, right--
Speaker 1: Often because the worst has happened.
Speaker 2: --because of his--historical context.  And so my job was to come in and, and say the cla--"The, the sky is not falling.  In fact, we are not redlining.  This is a volume business, and we need as many customers as we can get."  And so that view prevailed.  And I got to work with wonderful people like Donna Brazile and, and Julia Johnson [Julia L. Johnson] and Robert Townsend.  We had a great team.  Tom Tauke [Thomas J. Tauke] was the executive vice president at the time.  Ivan Seidenberg was the CEO.  By then [HistoryMaker] Hugh Price was on the board.  And it, it really--I mean, today FiOS TV is a reality with I don't know how many (unclear)--probably thirty some million customers.  But it's, it, it was a success, and then that's how I got to become president of Verizon West Virginia [Verizon West Virginia, Inc.] and then be the lead exec in Virginia [Verizon Virginia, Inc.], from which I retired.
Story_ID: 671170
Speaker 1: I guess, like a lot of people, I see like a national job with Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.] as being big, bigger than the West Virginia job.  But it's not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: -- necessarily so.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, you--no, your, your instincts--
Speaker 1: Am I right?
Speaker 2: --are right.  So, so the--so to--I'm from Virginia.  So they asked me what I wanted to do after successfully defending and promoting FiOS [Verizon FiOS TV].  And I said, "Well, I'd love to be in the C-Suite."  So they said, "Okay, well, where you wanna be?"  And I said, "There's no place like home.  I love Virginia."  Well, the Virginia business was a multibillion dollar business, and I hadn't run a billion dollar business before.  So I had to go somewhere for essentially CEO school.  And I went to be the president of Verizon West Virginia [Verizon West Virginia, Inc.], which is a $400 million business.  I had two thousand employees, so it was no small potatoes.  But going there was an opportunity to learn and how to be a CEO.  And then--
Speaker 1: This is in 2007--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And then, then I did that until late 2010, when that business was sold as part of a larger transaction, about thirteen and a half billion dollars, where West Virginia was the crown jewel of that transaction, and we got it done.  And so my reward then was to come to Virginia [Verizon Virginia, Inc.], and I work with the then retiring president [H. Stan Cavendish].  And when he retired I took that role and did that until the time I retired December of 2015.
Speaker 1: Back to West Virginia for a second.  You were the first African American president of Verizon West Virginia, which is probably not, you know, not worth even saying.  But, but what were some of the issues in West Virginia?  It's, I know it's a mountainous state and probably more difficult to develop the, the infrastructure in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, mountainous state, more rural in nature generally, and so there were some infrastructure challenges.  But they wanted the best technology just like anyone else.  And so we had to make some tough choices there.  And one of them was that rather than kind of lay out a lot of new infrastructure in the ground, which is quite expensive, the better strategy would be to do a wireless infrastructure and high speed wireless.  So that's what we did.  So we actually opened the first wireless store in West Virginia and then built an organization around a wireless business there.  And we sold the older assets of the terrestrial hardline business to a company called Frontier [Frontier Communications Corporation].  And they're still operating today.
Speaker 1: What are doing, like cable or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're, they're a more traditional kind of regional telephone provider, and they do high-speed Internet.  But they do it over what's called digital sub- subscriber lines or DSL.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Rather than fiber optics.  And in some places they may have it.  But you know, for a business connection, that's one thing, but this stuff gets prohibitively expensive.  And so you've got to figure out what's the way to deploy so you can have some reasonable return on the investment, otherwise, you know, you, you, you'll leave the market if you're forced to deliver in a way where you can't make a return on the dollar.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to imagine the technology (unclear)--the tech guy.  But I'm thinking that I guess even in a mountainous region like that, you've got--you're, you're like, bouncing the signal on satellite anyway, so (unclear)--
Speaker 2: In some places, but there were, literally, you have a lot of telephone poles, and you connect the wires.  And so they're--you know, this one connects to that one, connects to that one, connects to that one.  And some point it gets back to the network, and you provide service.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so the wireless precludes that.  And as the speeds have gotten better, you can all of a sudden deliver better capacity without having to deploy all the infrastructure.  And you know, but though even, even the wi- even the cell towers have to connect by wire to some central office.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 671171
Speaker 1: But this takes West Virginia ahead of the--I mean, technologically a, ahead of most other states, I guess, right--
Speaker 2: West Virginia got the largest technology grant in the country at the time, over a $120 million.  It doesn't hurt that Senator Rockefeller [Jay Rockefeller] was a friend and the head of appropriations.  But still, we won the grant on the merits.  Having the wireless canopy also was a leapfrog for, for West Virginia, having Frontier [Frontier Communications Corporation] to come in and make commitments to the state.  And they had some good policy leadership and the chairman of the Public Service Commission [Public Service Commission of West Virginia] and the consumer advocate, a guy who I got to know pretty well and was fond of.  And the companies worked together.  I mean, you know, sometimes people point to big companies, and they said, "Oh, you're just trying to get profits, or you're trying to take advantage of these communities."  And one of the things I have loved about the companies I've had the privilege of working for, from AOL [America Online, Inc.; AOL, Inc.] to Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.] to Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.], is that they tended to take the high road, and they had a respect for our customers.  And we didn't always get it perfect, but there was an attempt to do the right thing.  And my boss who retired from the company, Tom Tauke [Thomas J. Tauke]--and we're still in touch to this day; I loved this man--Tom said, "B. K. [HistoryMaker B. K. Fulton], the way I run my shop: If you do the right thing, I will support you 100 percent; you do the wrong thing, you may be on your own.  But do the right thing, and bring it back to me, and I can, I can support doing the right thing."  And that's the way I've approached my own career, decision making.  I've never had to say something to a client and gulp really hard because I'm misrepresenting.  And I try to teach my boys [Joshua Fulton and Terrell Fulton] that if you tell the truth in life, if you take the high road, then your regrets become very few, because--and you don't have to remember what you said.  You tell the truth.
Speaker 1: I got the image in mind of the car salesman discussing, holding, you know, the thing, that, that uncomfortable discussion (unclear)--, "Oh, yeah, do you want (unclear)--you want to buy that?"
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, right.
Speaker 1: The customer said, "Well, what's that?"  You know, or they, they have to explain something that--well, yeah.  So you did, so you always tell the--
Story_ID: 671172
Speaker 1: You were vice president of the Mid-Atlantic region of Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.] in Richmond [Virginia] in 2010, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: That's when you moved over.
Speaker 2: So, so basically when I left being president of West Virginia [Verizon West Virginia, Inc.], I came here to be the president of Verizon Virginia [Verizon Virginia, Inc.].  But by that time, the state presidents were giving way to these regional vice presidents.  So, instead of being the president of Virginia, which technically I was, I was called the lead executive.  So you look up in the newspaper, it'll say lead executive.  That usually means the head guy.  Every, every other company had president, unless they had adopted this regional structure, where you had more states and more people, not that much more pay, more responsibility.  But it was happening all over Corporate America, where you were kind of flattening the organization.  So, instead of having so many different Indian [Native American] chiefs--when I joined Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.] there were twenty-five state presidents; when I left there were none, and there were these kind of four regional kind of folk.  And so I was one of the regional guys.  And so it was a lead, leadership position.  And end up having--so I was the king of Virginia, and then we also had in our region Maryland, D.C. [Washington, D.C.], Delaware, and, and Virginia.  And then each, each one of those states, areas, had a VP [vice president], and then we all reported under one additional regional guy.  And he was a wonderful leader, happened to be an African American guy, Tony Lewis [Anthony A. Lewis].  I have tremendous respect for him.  If you haven't already interviewed, one day you will.  And he had been with the company for many years and was a really great leader.  He was a--he, he, he's a, a, a drummer, loves music, and so he led with a musician's touch.  And he helped us to kind of operate a team.  "Okay, you play your piece; you play your piece; you play your piece, and we'll all sound great together.  And nobody fails; we help each other."  And it's that sort of thing, those kind of lessons in leadership.  To a person, Verizon tended to try to find the best and brightest.  Verizon has always been in the cutting edge, at the highest rankings on diversity, usually in the top three.  And that has paid dividends, because if you go wherever the best and brightest are, you don't say give me the best black guy, the best white guy, the best black female, or the best white female or whatever.  You say give me the best person.  Who--and everybody compete on the merits.  And let me take the best and brightest wherever they may be, 'cause we want them in here.  And the other thing you have to do, you see, let the data win.  You don't get to be right because you're such and such.  Can you prove your case?  If you can prove your case, I don't care if you're the dishwasher.  If you've got the data to show it, then we can make a decision off that that is rational, that we can rely on, that we can take back to our shareowners and say this is why we did this.  And, and more often than not you win.  And so people would always say those guys at Verizon, like, do these master strokes, or they're like three or four years ahead of everybody.  Where we were ahead is that we valued diversity, so we took in the best talent.  And we valued the data, so we made better decisions.  We weren't guessing.  If we made a big bet, there was a reason behind it, or we didn't make the bet.
Story_ID: 671173
Speaker 1: You participated in Lead Virginia, which is something that people do all over the country when they come to a new region.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, but what--I hardly ever ask anybody about it 'cause I never see it on their outlines.  But, but this is, it's important really to understand where you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --are living in.
Speaker 2: Sure.  So for me, one of the things that I like to do is be hands on.  I'm a pragmatist.  And coming to Virginia to be the head executive for a major corporation, you know, three and a half, $4 billion, ten thousand employees in Virginia, forty-four thousand in the region, I needed to get to know the region.  And so Lead Virginia was an opportunity to speed date Virginia, if you will.  And so I got to go to all the key areas, see the key institutions in those areas, and really learn more than I ever knew about Virginia in a short amount of time.  So that's part--that's was really the driving reason for that.  I had no idea that my classmates would element essentially the valedictorian.  So I did the speech at graduation, which was an honor.  But I'd now--by then become accustomed to being in that role.  I'm often pushed forward.  And so I just figure, okay, well, that's what God's blessing me to do, so I'll try to say something helpful and useful.  What you'll find when I talk to people is I'm often giving observations about things I've learned along the way, again, telling the truth and trying to be helpful and insightful.  But more often than not, my per- preferred position is to sit back and to learn, to look at the data, to hear what's going on, not to draw too much attention.  I don't really like to be the one out front, but I will be the one out front if called upon.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you, you took an active part in the community.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (Unclear). What percentage of your time did you really spend in, in the community doing things that were not directly related to (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.] encouraged volunteerism and getting out there, so I say probably 20 percent of my time was community facing.  I always served on a bunch of boards, so I'm not even and counting the board time.  If you had the board time, more like 25 percent of my time.  And then since I've retired or since I started failing at retirement, 'cause now I'm, I'm chair of three companies and sit on three or four, four others boards, but I still spend a lot of time trying to help.  I think that's part of our obligation.  I continue to enjoy a great life.  And I think part of what I owe to my ancestors to my communities, to the people who sacrificed so I could get here is to be engaged and to teach other people to do some of the things I've learned how to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And, and, and you helped to track the Washington Redskins training camp to the region.
Speaker 2: I did.  So the mayor [Dwight Clinton Jones] asked me to be a part of a committee that would develop a package and find a site to bring the Redskins here.  The Redskins had a belief that for them to go to the next level as a team, most of the teams that done it had a off campus or out of area training site.  And so they identified for that Richmond [Virginia] might be such a site.  And so I happened to be on the board of Bon Secours Health System [Bon Secours Health System, Inc.]--which is the partner at the site.  And so, and the Redskins did, in fact, work with Bon Secours and the city and others to build a, a training facility not too far, not too far from here actually.
Story_ID: 671174
Speaker 1: You got married in 2014, and you were just explaining a little bit about it.  But, you want to (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I married the wonderful Jackie Stone [HistoryMaker Jacquelyn E. Stone].  She's Williamsburg [Virginia] royalty.  Her dad [William T. Stone, Sr.] was the first substitute judge, African American substitute judge in Virginia, went on to, you know, have a successful law practice, real estate company, has Whiting's Funeral Home [Williamsburg, Virginia], so that's a family business.  But Jackie went on, went to Harvard Law [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and UVA [The University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] and was the first black female law partner of a major law firm in Virginia and was a worldwide hiring partner for this company, for McGuireWoods [McGuireWoods LLP], her current employer, for almost twenty-five years.  And so I'm quite proud of her, but she's very humble.  What I love about her is her energy, her spirit, and we complement each other.  And the Bible says that in a mate you should be equally yoked [2 Corinthians 6:14].  And so, in Jackie, I found--I find that we're the same people with different plumbing.  That's our shorthand for each other (unclear)--B. K. [HistoryMaker B. K. Fulton] and J.  And so we rarely travel without each other.  You know, we figure that the la--the next half of our lives will be spent enjoying each other's company, giving back, and enjoying the time with our family, our children.  Our parents are still alive, and so they're a big part of our relationship.  But I'm fortunate to have her as a life partner.
Story_ID: 671175
Speaker 1: Now you retired from Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.]--when was it in?
Speaker 2: December 2015, so just the, the, the--
Speaker 1: Just last--
Speaker 2: --just, just, just last year.
Speaker 1: --a year ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and you, and you're, you're what, fifty now?
Speaker 2: I had a goal.  I wrote, thirty years ago I wrote a sixty year plan, and one of the things was retire by my fiftieth birthday.  I retired at forty-nine years, 348 days.  My wife [Fulton's second wife, HistoryMaker Jacquelyn E. Stone] had a wonderful little party for me.  I believe in planning.  I believe in writing it down.  And again, I read these biographies, and I saw how these people lived their lives and knew that if I followed this regimen I could do well and then modified as opportunities permitted.  And so I was able to retire and be comfortable, but I'm not finished.  And so that's why I say sometimes I'm failing at retirement.  So now I chair three companies, including the only minority run augmented reality company [Ario LLC, Newport News, Virginia] in the world.  And I'm on the--
Speaker 1: Augmented reality, now what is that?
Speaker 2: So augmented reality is a few steps up from virtual reality.  So you've seen the virtual reality stuff.  You wear the goggles, and it's all closed in.  You create a new digital world, and you see whatever it's captured.  In augmented reality, you take the real world, and you infuse digital elements so that you can kind of see clearer, if you will, so I can add.  Instead of just seeing this wall we're looking at, I can see where the electrical conduit is or where the HVAC [heating, ventilation and air conditioning] is or where the studs are or the support beams.  So then if you're doing construction or some kind of maintenance or some kind of architectural work, you just have a more informed designed because you know what's on the other side of a wall or what's inside a wall.  And we can augment anything, buildings, vehicles, human anatomies.  So it's, it's, it's going to be a, a tremendous tool in our future, and we're at the cutting edge of it.  And, and if you've taken nothing from this interview, I like to be at the cutting edge.  I like to be at a place where the cutting edge meets current need.  And so I find myself in the three companies I chair, an app company [DITY Apps LLC], an augmented reality company, a logistics company, [U.S.] military, you know, all doing these things are working together.  And then I serve on Norfolk State's [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] board.  So I left Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia] board, serve on Norfolk State board 'cause I care about HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], the National Council of the Black Aged, for helping black seniors, and really seniors across the spectrum, but mostly African American seniors, Bon Secours [Bon Secours Health System, Inc.], one of the largest hospitals in this, in the state hospital systems, and then TowneBank, the largest community bank in Virginia.  I'm on the, the Richmond [Virginia] board here, and we're growing that, that business.  And it's, it's, it's fun.  And so, what I like about this period in my life is that I get to call the shots.  I get to come and go as I choose.  I'm probably more busy than I've ever been, but I'm doing what I want to do on my terms.  It's fun.  I have this wonderful bride to go with me.  And, and she's fulfilled in her work [at McGuireWoods LLP].  And so we are kind of performing as stewards now.  And she's--you know, we're, we're working with the, with the kids.  She's mentoring young lawyers.  I'm mentoring young businesspeople, and we're enjoying every day we get together.
Story_ID: 671176
Speaker 1: In 2015, you wrote 'Shauna' [B. Keith Fulton], the book, a book about your sister [Shauna Fulton] and illustrated by Jerry Craft, who's a person that you worked with, you know, a--
Speaker 2: At Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.], yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the book.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the book is about the gift of caregiving.  It's, it's, it's based on a poem that I wrote when I was sixteen.  My wife [Fulton's second wife, HistoryMaker Jacquelyn E. Stone] actually encouraged me to turn it into a book.  And I had thought that what I would do in retirement is teach, write books, and travel.  I'm also working on a screenplay with Dr. Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] called 'Love's Insurrection' [ph.].  It's about love in the Antebellum South.  But the first project was this book about my sister.  And I--it's a labor of love.  And it talks about, you know, the, that, that being able to take care of somebody else is a gift.  And you get out of that kind of these, these things that are hard to measure but are valuable.  And, 'cause a lot of people provide gift to a senior, an elderly family member, or handicapped child.  And if they treat it as a burden they're going into it in a mis- in a mistaken way.  And I find that so mostly the, most--the best feedback I could get about the book is from people who, who care for others.  And so you know what: thank you for helping me to rethink how I look at this, this gift, you know, that I get to provide for someone.  And if the shoes were on the other foot, I would want them to come to this endeavor with the, the right kind of spirit.  I mean, the, the poem--I can give you the book in ten seconds--thirty seconds.
Speaker 1: Yeah, get--yeah, I was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --gonna ask you to read the poem, yeah.
Speaker 2: So it goes like this: "A gazing little boy stopped and asked, 'Can you run?'  'Yes,' adjusting her leg brace.  'Can you dance?' 'Yes,' adjusting her position in her wheelchair.  'Are you happy?'  'Yes,' adjusting her gaze towards heaven.  Big brother, now that you are a man, in your newfound wisdom, don't count me out.  I run in my mind; I'm an Olympian.  I dance in my dreams; I'm a debutant.  And I am happy because I am alive."
Speaker 1: Okay. Now that--you shared this poem with [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni.
Speaker 2: I did.  So she did--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --she did the cover quote on the book.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she had a, I mean, it was a slight edit (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  So, so because we wrote a children's book, she said that children may not fully appreciate the last word, "I'm happy because I am alive."  And she said, "But they do understand love."  And so she said, "If I were coaching you at all, not to correct, 'cause it's beautiful the way it's written, but I would, for a children's book, I'd change that word, 'Happy because I am loved.'"  So in the book, that's the only thing that was changed.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I owe that to Nikki Giovanni.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what--well, what a privilege to be edited by Nikki Giovanni.
Speaker 2: By Nikki Giovanni.  And, and, and who am I to question what Nikki--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Nikki's advice.  I mean, I love her.  She is a friend, and she was a mentor when she came to Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia], and was one of my poetry teachers.  I felt just blessed.
Speaker 1: Well this is something that you, you would write this poem at age sixteen and bring it into fruition in another form at age fifty.
Story_ID: 671177
Speaker 1: Was your retirement--you, you said there was a retirement party and all that, but, but it just seems, you seem so young to have retired--so but you had, you already had, you had planned to retire--
Speaker 2: I'd, I'd already planned it.  I mean, I want to do things with my life that a traditional day to day just really kind of got in the way, you know.  Now I've got these companies.  I can do more with my nonprofit work, be more present for my wife [Fulton's second wife, HistoryMaker Jacquelyn E. Stone], and, and really enjoy the next half.  And so for me--and it was probably a mistake to even say retired, because I actually, I, I do probably spend more time now than ever trying to make the world a better place, trying to live my best life.  But the way I'm able to do it is on my own terms.  There's a, there's a comfort I think that comes with being traditionally employed in somebody else's thing.  There's a lot more courage that's required to do your own thing and to help others to do their own thing.  And so building a business is different than starting out in some preexisting enterprise.  And so I'm getting the experience of that in a major way.  We got big clients.  But building it, there's a certain amount of, of pride actually that comes with doing that.  But then that's another set of stories that I have to tell young people when I do these panels with them or, or, or my mentees.  You know, if we come back to the three-legged stool we talked about, government, private sector, nonprofit sector, I've worked in them all.  And, and now I'm adding growing a business in the private sector, which you know, I've, I, I, I hope to be able to point to in the near future and say and we made this a success too, and here's how we did it, and 'cause I, I like to demystify life.  And I think that life isn't hard.  I think people make it hard.  We have our presuppositions or attitudes about each other or race or ethnicity, and we let all this junk get in the way of what we can actually become if we work smarter, if we use the data, if we work together.
Story_ID: 671178
Speaker 1: Tell us about some of the projects.  One is called DITY Apps [DITY Apps LLC], and another one is called Ario LLC [Newport News, Virginia].  And they're both--you work with, with JarMarcus King and Falana King [Falana Dula-King] and Jai Manselle on those projects, right?  Now who, who, who, who, who are those people?
Speaker 2: So those people are some of the co-founders of the companies.  There's also a guy named Joe Weaver with Ario.  DITY Apps is a mobile apps company.  We invented the world's first doctor approved digital reading glasses.  So instead of you need--you know, we get our age and need reading glasses, so we put them on the phone.  And so you can literally scran- scan--move your phone up and down, point it something, has all the diopter settings, a little flashlight, and you can just pull it up.  It's a free app.  And if you don't want the advertising, then you pay $1.99 and the ad, the ads go away.  Ario is the augmented reality company I was telling you about.  It's a line with the [U.S.] military logistics firm that JarMarcus and Falana founded called J and F Alliance Group [J and F Alliance Group Inc.].  Together we can approach a client and say, "Hey, you want a military thing, we have a military minority female business, or if you want straight commercial, we've got this Ario business."  And we're set up in a lab.  We have top secret and secret clearances.  And we do full scale augmented reality for construction, military, medical, entertainment, and advertising.  And it's just really fun.  We're certified by Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation] and DAQRI and Google [Google Inc.], and so all the right certifications to do these kind of next generation things with camera and broadband communications and enhancing your field of view using, you know, world-class vision science.  And so it's, it's cutting-edge.  It's like a playground for me.  I've been a tinkerer all my life.  I have loved technology.  I embrace it.  I understand it.  And so I'm getting a chance to, to, to benefit from making it available to the masses.  Right now, augmented reality, for example, is in the, the nascent part of its, of the industry.  This year it'll be 500 million to $5 billion.  By 2020, it'll be a $162 billion, by 2027, $7 trillion.  The head of Apple [Apple Inc.] has already said all their new phones will have an augmented reality capability.  Facebook's starting to buy virtual reality companies as a ramp up to augmented reality.  Microsoft has a product out.  Other companies have products out.  And so what we do is we don't fuss about the hardware.  We program it all.  And so, it's exciting, and it's one of the things that keeps me up at night because--but not because I'm worried about it, because I'm having fun.
Story_ID: 671179
Speaker 1: Your path has been pretty clear, as you outlined it.  But we always ask the question, now: if there was--you could go back and change something or, or, or, you know, what would it be, or, or, or is there anything like that that you'd go back and change if, if you could?
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably not.  I mean, there are a couple of places where I might have fallen here or there.  I wish I hadn't of got that D in human sexual development [at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia], for example (laughter).  But you know what, it helped to make me who I am.  And so, God has the pen of life.  And I--what went on got me to where I am.  And so, to go back and try to change anything, it might have changed where I am, and I'm, I'm in a great place.  I'm married to a great woman [Fulton's second wife, HistoryMaker Jacquelyn E. Stone].  My children [Joshua Fulton and Terrell Fulton] are alive and in college.  My parents [Flora Lee Fulton and Bennie Fulton] are here.  My sisters [Devora Fulton (ph.) and Shauna Fulton] are still with us.  I'm retired at fifty.  No, I don't think I'd change anything.
Story_ID: 671180
Speaker 1: We always ask this question too: what are your some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Wow, that's a big one.  I hope that the African American community recognizes its power, recognizes its talent, and relevance and significance.  I would argue that our ancestors created more with less.  And you've got more highly-trained African Americans, more wealthy African Americans, more well positioned African Americans, and yet we're, we're still seem to struggle a little more than I think we should in terms of the trajectory of our children, of the health of some of our institutions.  In fact, we still join the same organizations that were created a hundred years ago, and what have we done to build on them or build the next generation of institutions, to build the, the economic engines that employ us?  And so, I, I, I want that for the African American community.  I want what I see in some other communities where they've become more self-sufficient as they integrate and, and, and, and are a part of a global economy.  The world is a really big place, and we have to continue to push forward to assume our rightful place in it.  Historically, we've been kings and queens.  We've created empires.  A lot of people don't know that the richest man to ever have lived in the world is a king from Africa.  What's his name?
Speaker 1: Mansa Musa.
Speaker 2: Mansa Musa, exactly, the richest man by far to ever have lived in the history of the planet is an African.  And there are some of us who, when they saw me as a humble executive from a phone company [Verizon Communications, Inc.] who was titled the president, "Wow, I've never seen anybody like you in a leadership position."  And it, it's, it's humbling because they don't know our story.  That's why I applaud what you all are doing here, 'cause you're telling these stories.  I hope it touches, and not just one.  'Cause when I go, and if it's just one to replace, that's not a growth strategy.  Each one should touch as many as they can.  And my story is not only important for African Americans.  It's important for Native Americans, for white kids in Appalachia, and other kids, 'cause I didn't grow up with a silver spoon in my mouth.  My parents [Flora Lee Fulton and Bennie Fulton] were teachers.  Excellence is a human thing.  And the more of us that can relate to the stories of others, the better for all of us.  And I believe in humanity.  I believe in all of us.  I want to get post racial.  I know that race still matters.  That said, my community has some work to do to recognize where it is, its place, its relevance, its importance, how smart we are, how wonderful we are, how much of a contribution we can make--we, we have made, and how much more we will do as we come into our own light.
Story_ID: 671181
Speaker 1: I know you--you spoke to this already, but can you encap- encapsulate, I guess, your business philosophy?  So--
Speaker 2: My business philosophy: win the right way.  That's what I tell the guys on a regular basis.  We will do well in this company, in the various companies I touch, but let's win the right way.  And when you do that, it lasts, it's sustainable, and you can be proud of it, and you can leave something behind.  We don't cheat our customers.  We're straight up about what we can and can't do.  We under promise and over deliver.  And, but we do win, and we're in it to win.  I'm not in it to lose a penny, and don't encourage them to do it.  But you do it the right way, and that doesn't fail us.  When we built our institutions, and part of the reason we're still connected to many of these institutions, whether you join the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] or the Urban League [National Urban League] or the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], or you pick your organization, whatever fraternity, whatever, it's because they were built with the right structures and value systems, et cetera.  So they've been able to sustain us for over a hundred years.  But now we've gotta retool; we've gotta fortify; we have to do what I did at the Urban League.  When the Urban League moved folk from, from an agrarian society to an industrial society, we had to move to a postindustrial with the technology.  Our communities have to do the same.  We've gotta shift up.  We need more people that are better trained.  We need the folk to come back as mentors.  We need executives to head up the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities].  We need to figure out how to get our children into more technology fields, more medical fields, more of the health care industry, more of the kind of jobs that are, that, that, that pay a lot, that are, that are skilled, that they can carry for a lifetime and then pass on those traditions to their children.  We just need a lot more of that.  We've gotta focus on excellence.  There was a time in our community where essentially you went to the [U.S.] military, you went to college, or you did some kind of vocational training program.  And you were as if in a bowling alley, and you had the bumper rails up.  And so everybody's bowling.  You're gonna one of them three things, no gutter balls.  Today our community is bowling across all the lanes with no bumpers, and it's a whole lot of gutter balls, too many, too many.
Story_ID: 671182
Speaker 1: You mentioned the fact that you have like two sons?
Speaker 2: Two sons, Joshua [Joshua Fulton] and Terrell [Terrell Fulton] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.  And they're in college today?
Speaker 2: They're in college, one at Virginia State [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] and one at VCU [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are they par- pursuing a, a technological--
Speaker 2: One's doing mass communication; the other's in fashion design in the per- prestigious school of art at VCU [Virginia Commonwealth University School of the Arts].  He may change majors though, so, but it's okay.  You know, it's cool; you pick majors; you change majors.  It's their first year and literally their first semester, so they get to kind of pick and choose.  But it's, it's, it's great to be able to say they're in college versus somewhere else.  You know, there could be a negative narrative, but I love that it's a positive one.  And then also there's a nephew that we're caretakers for, my wife [Fulton's second wife, HistoryMaker Jacquelyn E. Stone] and I.  He's her nephew, my nephew by marriage.  And Sam [Sam Stone] has all A's.  He's also at Virginia State.  He's gonna be a math major.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So we're very fortunate.
Story_ID: 671183
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we have not discussed we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I think you've been pretty thorough over the last few hours, but why don't you go ahead and ask the last question.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is kind of a coun- compound question--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --two things.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They're a little different.  Sir, what do you see today as your legacy, and how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Legacy at fifty is he's a guy who did what he said he was going to do.  I want to be known as a doer, a person, especially in the technology space, that really advanced the ball for the African American community and low income communities--large on technology.  I think I made a serious impact on the importance of getting technology into the hands of people who didn't have it.  And then and related to that, you know, remember me as a person who, who does, who, who, who, who's willing to act on his beliefs, who approaches things with love, with faith, and who chooses to be kind.  I still think I'm kind of cool.  But don't take my kindness for weakness.  You do it at your own peril.  I'm one of the good guys, but I look out for my people.  I look out for my family.  And I believe in us, all of us, and what we can do collectively.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you for spending the time with us.
Speaker 2: Oh, thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll come back in thirty years (laughter).
Speaker 2: Appreciate it, all right.
Story_ID: 671184
Speaker 1: All right, this is my--me and my wife, Jackie [HistoryMaker Jacquelyn E. Stone], Russell Wilson, quarterback of the, the Seattle Seahawks, and Dr. Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] at The Richmond Forum.  Let's see, that's probably last year when Dr. Gates was interviewing Russell for his first live 'American Lives' [sic. 'African American Lives'] session.  And that's in Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's myself and Jackie Stone.  We were being photographed at the Black Filmmaker Foundation Summit in Dana Point, California.
Speaker 2: That's my wife, Jackie Stone, myself, and Loretta Lynch, the attorney general of the United States at the celebration of black alumni, Harvard Law School's multiyear gathering for alums.  Jackie graduated from Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] in '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: That's a, a group of supporters for Just the Beginning Foundation with Justice Ginsburg [Ruth Bader Ginsburg] at the [U.S.] Supreme Court.
Speaker 2: That's a cartoon of me.
Speaker 1: That's a corporate headshot of me.
Speaker 2: That's my wife, myself at our wedding with our nephew, Sam Stone, January 1, 2014.
Speaker 1: That's Governor Terry McAuliffe and Steve Case.  We were at the American Civil War Museum [Richmond, Virginia].  Steve was giving a talk when his new book came out on--I forget the name of the latest book.  It's about--'The Second Wave' I think is, or 'The Third Wave' ['The Third Wave: An Entrepreneur's Vision of the Future,' Steve Case] about these new companies that are popping up.
Speaker 2: This is a scholarship [B. Keith Fulton and Jacquelyn E. Stone STEAM Endowed Scholarship] that my wife and I announced last year at Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia].  I was on the board at that time.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, that's Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], my wife, and myself at a fundraiser for Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] here in Richmond.
Speaker 1: That's my wife and I at a chamber meeting for the D.C. chamber [District of Columbia Chamber of Commerce] in Washington, D.C., in 2014.
Speaker 2: That's my wife and I at my fiftieth birthday celebration and retirement party.  On her birthday, January 7, 2016, we did this party.
Speaker 1: That's our wedding day, January 1, 2014, [HistoryMaker] B. K. Fulton, Jackie Stone.
Speaker 2: That's Jackie and I on our honeymoon in Barcelona, Spain.  We did a Mediterranean cruise with a stop in Barcelona.  And we went with two others, Dawn [Dawn Siegel] and Stuart Siegel, and Bob [Bob Scudder] and Dougie Scudder [Dougie Bowman Scudder].
Speaker 1: That's me at birth.  I cried when people showed me this picture 'cause I thought it was a white baby.
Speaker 2: That's me at seven years old in this psychedelic outfit that my mom [Flora Lee Fulton] picked out.  But that's who I was.
Speaker 1: That's Jackie and I in 'Great Gatsby' attire in Shanghai [China] for Eduardo Ramos-Gomez birthday party.  And he celebrates them around the world.  And we travel with them each year to a different destination.  Here, we were in Shanghai.
Speaker 2: That's the president of the University of Richmond [Richmond, Virginia], Dr. Ronald Crutcher [HistoryMaker Ronald A. Crutcher], his wife Betty Crutcher [Betty Neal Crutcher], Congressman Bobby Scott, Jackie and myself at a fundraiser at Jack--at, at Bobby's family home in Newport News, Virginia.
Speaker 1: That's a sign from the Tuskegee Airmen in Tuskegee, Alabama, where my cousin, Leroy Ealey [ph.] is noted as one of the Tuskegee Airmen.
Speaker 2: That's Jackie and I with Justice Sotomayor [Sonia Sotomayor] at the Just the Beginning event in New York [New York], and it's just this year.
Speaker 1: That's me at a book signing for my book, 'Shauna' [B. K. Fulton], talking about the blessing of caregiving.
Speaker 2: That's my, myself and Jackie with the, at the time, the chief justice of the Supreme Court of Virginia.  I'm blanking on his name, but--Spencer, Justice Spencer [James R. Spencer].  He's also the justice that had did the ruling in the Bob McDonnell case.
Speaker 1: That is a little flyer for the book on my sister, Shauna [Shauna Fulton].
Speaker 2: That's Dr. Betty Crutcher, Jackie, myself, and Prince Edward from London [England].  We were in London with the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] and the Executive Leadership Council.
