Story_ID: 217890
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers today.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Monte Ford, M-O-N-T-E, my middle name is Eric, E-R-I-C--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --last name Ford, F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: All right; any significance to the name Monte?  I mean is that a family name or--
Speaker 2: My mother [Charity Hunt] just liked the name Monte; she thought that it had some relevance to upward mobility, which it does in other languages, and so she adopted it for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Washington, D.C. on October 3, 1959.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am currently the senior vice president and chief information officer at American Airlines.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is October the 29, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in my office at American Airlines headquarters [Fort Worth, Texas], near the airport of Dallas/Fort Worth [Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, Grapevine, Texas] in Texas.
Story_ID: 217891
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you and they only require a brief answer, basically.  And the first one is--they're kind of a warm-up.  The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is my mother's [Charity Hunt] fried corn--no one else's.  Charity's fried corn.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I have a favorite color and it's crimson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is the month of October.
Speaker 1: Okay; a vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite, very favorite vacation destination is Cabo San Lucas, Mexico.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And lastly, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have two favorite phrases and sayings.  The first one is, it is what it is, so now what?  And the second one is, well done is always better than well said.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's a plaque to that, that memorializes that, right here in the office (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right there (pointing), that's right.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Story_ID: 217892
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history, and we had kind of a warm-up about it before, but what can you tell us about--well, first give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Charity Hunt, C-H-A-R-I-T-Y, last name H-U-N-T.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Charity Hunt was born in 1929 in Sparta, Georgia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now, I'm gonna ask you about--
Speaker 2: --on, on August 16th.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm gonna ask you about her side of the family and I'm gonna ask about your father's [Nathaniel Ford] too, but what do you know about your mother's side of the family right now?  You had--the ancestors on that side.
Speaker 2: Did I say 1929?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I meant to say 1928.
Story_ID: 217893
Speaker 1: So what can you tell us about your mother's [Charity Hunt] side of the family?
Speaker 2: My mother's side of the family is an exciting story--from Sparta, Georgia, it dates back many, many years.  There's a book written about a number of people in my mother's family; it's called 'Ambiguous Lives[:Free Women of Color in Rural Georgia, 1789-1879,' Adele Logan Alexander], and it's a fascinating book about the history of black people in Hancock County, Georgia and Sparta in particular, including people that became what is now my mother's family.
Speaker 1: That's something.  Well what--are there any stories you can tell us about your mother's side?
Speaker 2: You know, there are a lot of stories I could tell you about my mother's side of the family; I could tell you about my cousin, [HistoryMaker] Edith Ingram or Jack [ph.], as we called her, who was the first black judge in Hancock County and one of the first black judges in the State of Georgia who's retiring this year--actually 2004, and I could tell you about my going down there as a child and spending summers there and being a part of Freedom Rides and marches, and going to different counties and marching with them and getting in trouble in those marches for throwin' rocks when I wasn't supposed to be throwin' rocks.  And I can tell you 'bout the evolution of the Civil Rights Movement from my perspective--from a child's perspective in Georgia, in rural towns in Georgia, and my participation in it; then my cousins and my uncles and aunts and my mother draggin' me along, making sure that I participated in all these sessions and meetings.  There are a lotta stories to be told.  My, my grandmother, Katie Hunt--Katie B. Hunt [ph.], was the matriarch of our family and really is; even though she's left us, she still is the matriarch of our family; the values, the ethics, the work ethic, the capability that we have as a family really is drawn from her strength.  She lost her husband before I was born, and moved to Washington, D.C. and lived in a house with us, so I grew up with Ma Kate [ph.], as we called her, and a big part of who I am is what she imparted on me, and the impact that she had on other people and the influence of that impact on me.  So peer, peer pressure relative to how we needed to be and perform and act and behave around Ma Kate extended beyond her sib- her, her, her children, and her--and their siblings--my mother and her siblings to the grandchildren and great-grandchildren--fifty-four cousins I have, and fifty-seven second cousins that I know about.  So we had a huge family; eleven children she had, all of whom were close, and all of whom had some sort of a nickname, many of whom came through Washington, D.C. to live, or were passing through on their way to New York.  So my family on my mother's side ended up settling in New York and Washington, D.C., and Sparta, Georgia where they originated.  You know, there are stories about my grandmother, Katie B., that I could tell you that my mother and my grandmother told me about [Klu Klux] Klansmen coming to their home in Georgia, when my grandfather was away, looking for black men that they were accusing of--that, that were accused of crimes, whether they had done 'em or not, and tryin' to force people--force 'em to allow people to come into the house.  My uncles lined up with shotguns at the windows while my aunts all readied the ammunition to re-fill those guns, and my grandfather, who was actually there, in a house to the side, and another cousin who was off to--in another house on the other side, ready to shoot from the sides if it, if it, if it came to that or, or my uncles getting into a fight with--and actually severely hurting a white man in Hancock County for, for mistreating my niece, or mistreating my, my, my cousin, actually--his niece--and having to leave town and having to go to New York as fast as he could.  And then another one with a similar situation that had to run off and join the [U.S.] Army, or join the [U.S.] Navy because he had to get outta town soon.  My mother's side of the family is a, is, is a story that's--that somehow should be told because it is a story of strength and honor and patriotism and hard work, but most of all, my mother's side of the family is a story of love, and there's nobody more loving than my mother Charity; she's done as much or more for anybody and everybody in our family, and outside of our family, than any one person has given to any group of people that I know.  So, we probably don't have enough time to go into all of the stories about my mother's side of the family, but a) it's large, b) it's very loving, and c) it's in a story of honor, patriotism and--nowadays, some people would consider it glory; I do, but I'm biased.
Story_ID: 217894
Speaker 1: Now, is Sparta [Georgia] the land your family was on after the Civil War?  Did they stay basically around the same land?
Speaker 2: My family, after the Civil War, was born and raised and bred in Hancock County [Georgia] from Hunts and Ingrams, primarily; they were slave owners in the area.  And my family was--were slaves in Hancock County, of which Sparta is the center, and they were proliferated from there out to other areas besides Hancock County in Georgia in that area, Milledgeville [Georgia] area, and then grew to the north, or left and went to the North and Washington, D.C. and New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.   Now, did your mother [Charity Hunt] talk about growin' up?  How did she--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Did my mother talk about growing up?  That's all my aunts and uncles talk about, is growing up; the little sayings, and things they used to eat and the things they used to do, and the dinner table and holidays and--it's funny, you know.  If you listen to my aunt tell a story and listen to my uncle tell the same story, somehow it doesn't sound the same, but the ending always ends up being, being correct--being right.  We used to sit around for hours and hours and listen to them tell stories; we always found excuses to have family gatherings and family get-togethers, and we would sit for hours and just listen to them talk, and listen to my grandmother [Katie B. Hunt (ph.)] talk and tell stories and remember names, and talk about people.  My Aunt Katherine [Hunt Ingram], or Aunt Cook [ph.] as we used to call her, was the best story-teller of all; she was the funniest.  She would tell stories about people and, and she was really a closet comedian; she could contort her face and imitate people's voice and inflection in ways that most comedians couldn't do today, and we would sit around and listen to them talk under their porch in Sparta, which was a gathering place, and, and listen to her and my Aunt Gladys [ph.] get together and talk and, and every--everybody else would just be sittin' there laughin'.  And, and so there was a lotta story-tellin' that went on, and their story-telling really was a part--culturally, was a part of how we identified ourselves and how we kinda stayed on top of things and how we, how we kept up not only with what was happening, but kept up with each other, and when we gathered together, there was always an expectation that stories would be told and people would laugh--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, which was pretty good.
Story_ID: 217895
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Charity Hunt] go to school in [Washington] D.C.?  Did she have a chance to finish high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, my mother went to school in Sparta [Georgia]; she went to high school only, and she went to Sparta, and then she left Sparta and went to Pennsylvania and stayed with family on my fath- my grandfather's side in--Hunt [Irving] Funeral Home [Chester, Pennsylvania] in, in, in Pennsylvania outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and in West Chester [Pennsylvania], in Westchester County [sic. Chester County, Pennsylvania] and those areas and worked there, and she ended up moving to Washington, D.C. and working in Washington, D.C. at a number of jobs--at the [Omni] Shoreham Hotel [Washington, D.C.] and waiting on tables, and doing a number of things until she settled down at working at a beauty parlor, and got enough money to get a down payment to buy her own house, which is what she always wanted to do, and she did that, and I grew up in that house; she lives in that house today.  And that was over fifty years ago.
Story_ID: 217896
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Charity Hunt and Nathaniel Ford] met?
Speaker 2: There is a story about how my parents met.  My father grew up in Waycross, Georgia and came to Washington [D.C.] and started odd jobs and different businesses.
Speaker 1: Now what's his name--his full name?
Speaker 2: His name is Nathaniel Ford.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Nathaniel Ford was born in Waycross, Georgia in 1911.
Story_ID: 217897
Speaker 1: And so the story about my father's [Nathaniel Ford] side of the family is an interesting one, too, which I'll take a second to share with you.  My grandfather, Elzie, was from Waycross, Georgia and met my grandmother there and they were married; my father was an only child.  But the story of Elzie Ford is an interesting one, too.  Elzie post-slavery found a way to make money; he was an enterprising young man and he worked and worked hard, and found a way to buy some land, he found a way to legitimately own a car which, in the late 1800s, was not an--early 1900s--was not an easy thing to do, and Elzie made up his mind to help other people, and so what Elzie would do is he would sneak people from sharecropper land in the South, would caravan them north to start a new life, and figure out a way to give them some money to get started, and he made many trips like this--sort of a Harriet Tubman post-slavery days, and he made many trips taking--sneaking people off the sharecropper land in which they had no way to get off of, always in debt to the owner.  And he'd take them one-by-one up north, and then when that person was ready to send for other family members, he would take them, sometimes the rest of the family, all at once, in his car at night, drive away, sneaking them off the land; when there was a day or two that they would have on their own, especially Sundays, and get as far away in a different direction as he could, and then find a way to get them on a train or get them to someone else or get them the way--get them to the North to meet with their loved ones.  And he did this for a number of years, and they suspected him of doing it; people suspected him of doing it.  And when they suspected him of doing it, they started to rob him of things; they started to rob him of some of his freedoms.  They locked him up several times for no reason, they took his land, they took his car.  And when I say took it, I mean swindled it out of him.  And he was one of the very few black people to own land, especially in Waycross, Georgia then.  And Elzie found a way to reconstruct himself every time they did that, and that's his legacy.  My father learned from him an entrepreneurialism, an entrepreneurial spirit, an adventurism that most people didn't know or have.
Speaker 2: Now, how did he spell his name?
Speaker 1: You spell Elzie E-L-Z-I-E.
Story_ID: 217898
Speaker 1: And so I learned a lot from the stories of my grandfather [Elzie Ford], whom I never met, on my father's [Nathaniel Ford] side and, and I combine that kind of adventure, that kind of spirit with the kind of honor and patriotism, and loyalty and love that I got from my mother's [Charity Hunt] side of the family, and that's what constructed me as a child, to think and behave the way that I did then, and hopefully that I do now.  I got grounded--especially on my mother's side--I got grounded in religion very early.  I spent a lotta time at church, spent a lotta time working, I spent a lotta time tryin' to sneak around and figure out what I was--what I could do that I wanted to do; a lotta times didn't include work and church (laughter).  But culturally, that's how I grew up; that's the family I grew up in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was church a big part of life?
Speaker 1: Church was a huge part of life, and still is today.
Speaker 2: And what church did you attend in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 1: I--in church, I attended Florida Avenue Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.], of which I am still a member, actually; I still pay dues, so I consider myself a member.  And I attended that church until I went away to college [Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts], or went away to, to school, and then when I went away to college.  My mother was always insistent on us understanding who God is and what God expected, and our role and relation--having a relationship with God.  And to this day, she still reminds me of that.
Story_ID: 217899
Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up now.  What neighborhood did you grow up in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: I grew up in Washington, D.C. on--almost on the corner of North Capitol [Street] and Bryant Street, which is a few blocks from Catholic University [of America, Washington, D.C.] and 'bout two blocks--two and a-half blocks from Howard University [Washington, D.C.]; North Capitol and Bryant, right across from the Stronghold [Washington, D.C.] in--which is the neighborhood on the northeast side of North Capitol Street.
Speaker 1: The Stronghold, huh?
Speaker 2: The Stronghold.  And the side of the street that I lived on, the northwest side of the street, I grew up with my closest friends there, people that lived around the corner from me--Dwight Benjamin [ph.], Thomas Marable [ph.], Andre Benjamin [ph.], my cousin Curt Collins [ph.]; we grew up and, and lived our lives there.
Story_ID: 217900
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growin' up [in Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  You know, I grew up on North Capitol Street, which is a busy street, so at night it was not--it, it, it was not uncommon for me to hear sirens and buses and cars goin' by and police cars and ambulances and all kinds of sights and sounds in the city.  One of the things that I remember most was at Christmastime; I would go to sleep and I would listen for chains in the street because they sounded so much like bells on reindeer for Santa Claus.  When cars would go by with chains on the tires, they would make a chinking--kinda--almost like a bell ringing sound in a rhythmic way, and I likened those to reindeer, and I remember every time thinking that I heard--every time I heard those thinking that, they're reindeer going by, or here comes Santa Claus, or Christmas is coming.  And those were sounds that, that I really enjoyed.  Other sounds and sights and things that I grew up with was also listening for noise in the back of my house because noise represented a good thing; noise meant that there was a football going--football game going on, or about to go on, in the alley, and I could hear people hollerin', "[HistoryMaker Monte] Ford!  Ford!"  And I would run outside and we'd play basketball in the alley, play football in the alley, and we'd have to go across the street, across Bryant Street in Washington [D.C.], in-between Bryant and Channing [Street], to play baseball because that was a much better alley for baseball, and we had much bigger yards to hit into the back of, much less opportunity to break somebody's window, but we didn't have a lot of recreational capability in terms of facilities near us.  If we had a big football game, the sound would be again noise of a number of kids with their best football gear on, their best sneakers, and socks rolled down, sleeves rolled up, on our way to the [Washington] Hospital Center [MedStar Washington Hospital Center, Washington, D.C.] because the Hospital Center, which is a hospital complex where Children's Hospital [of the District of Columbia; Children's National Medical Center, Washington, D.C.] and veterans hospital [Washington D.C. V.A. Medical Center, Washington, D.C.] are in Washington, D.C.  They had grass there, and if we behaved properly, and talked to the people the right way, they would let us go onto the grass and we would play football on the grass, and we could actually play tackle football on the grass, so it was--grass under our feet was a special thing; it was much better than playing in the street, and much better than playing in the alley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, the sounds that, that I grew up with were mostly noises, and those noises equated to something--something good, or something bad, or something hopeful.
Story_ID: 217901
Speaker 1: Now, do you have brothers and sisters, sir?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have two brothers, Neil [ph.]--my brother Neil and my brother Keith [ph.].  My brother Neil was always the smartest of, of all the people I grew up with in my opinion.  To me, he always had the most character, the most understanding.  I learned a phrase from Neil that will never leave me and it's a part of who I am.  My brother Neil told me once that he is a survivor, and he taught me that I have to be a survivor, so no matter the circumstance, no matter the situation, you have to figure out a way to survive--excuses aside, which is why one of my favorite sayings is, it is what it is, so now what?  I got that mentality and that survivor mentality, that survivorship, from my brother Neil, and I've always wanted his intelligence; I've never come close but I've always admired him for it, and he was my hero as a kid.  My other brother Keith had a, a, a, a different influence on my life; he was always practical.  He's the other side of the reason I got in my head, it is what it is, so now what?  He always took a difficult situation and made the most of it; he was the first I knew of to go to college.  My cousin Buddy [ph.] went to college but that was a long time ago, and he had lived at my house, too, but a long time prior to that.  But he went to college when almost nobody else around him was goin' to college; he worked when almost nobody else around him got a--had a job, he was so young.  And he worked two jobs in the summer; he always had a beautiful girlfriend and he always had a life of hope and opportunity, and he always wanted to do progressive things; he had a fantastic music collection.  He was in a group with Wendy [ph.], Audie [ph.] and Butch [ph.] called the Incredibles.  He could sing; they could all sing, and I remember going to see them at the Howard Theater or The Howard Theater [Washington, D.C.], as we used to call it, down right by Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus, and at the auditorium in the main campus at Howard, they played there also, and they would open up for other groups, and they were good, and I was excited about them being on stage with the same outfits on, and watching them.  He took my fishing tackle box that my father [Nathaniel Ford] gave me one time and threw all my hooks and lures out, and turned it into the management--road management kit for the Incredibles, and wrote "The Incredibles" on the top of it in black magic marker.  I was upset with him for that for a little while, but really I was impressed by it because I thought I could be an Incredible one day.  And so he went to college and went to Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio].  And at a time in my life when I lost focus, my mother [Charity Hunt] sent me to Wilberforce where he was, and I stayed with him and I met all his friends, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you were able to stay--was he staying in a, I guess, off-campus apartment, or was he in a dorm, or--
Speaker 2: Well, here's, here's what happened.  My brother was pledging a fraternity, Kappa Alpha Psi [Fraternity], at the time, and he talked to his big brothers while he was pledging; he told them the situation about me losin' focus and losin' my way in Washington, D.C., and they sent me there.  My mother and my cousins got together and, and my cousin Mike [ph.], I think, pitched in some money, and they sent me there.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?  How old are you when they send you?
Speaker 2: Let's see, how old was I?  I had to be in junior high school [Augustus Paul Junior High School, Washington, D.C.]; I had to be in early, early junior high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so eleven or twelve?  Eleven or twelve?
Speaker 2: Twelve, thirteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--twelve, I think, and they sent me there and--eleven or twelve, I guess.  And he was pledging, and I stayed in the frat house with the big brothers while he was pledging.  I saw probably more than I shoulda seen, but I, I was mesmerized by it all.  He told me, "There's another world, there's an entirely different world out there other than Bryant Street, North Capitol Street; there's a world that you haven't seen, there's a world that you're not a part of that you need to be a part of, and you need to come see it."  And I did, and I met his big brothers and they were all from places from all around the country; they were from Michigan and Ohio, and California.  Sonny [ph.] was from California and, and Tommy [ph.] was from [Washington] D.C. and--Tommy Mossby [ph.] and, and I was really influenced by those guys, and I met them and I wanted to be a part of them, and later on I ended up--because of that experience, ended up pledging Kappa Alpha Psi myself, but I got turned on to a world, a life that I didn't know existed--a college life where people actually were achieving things, and were doing positive things, and that had tremendous influence on me.
Story_ID: 217902
Speaker 1: Back up a little bit to grade school.  Now, what grade school did you attend in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: Well, grade school was an interesting story for me.  My mother [Charity Hunt] was always tryin' to get me into a really good school so I could learn and get an education and get ahead.  And so when, when (laughter) it was time for me to go to school, I went to school at Katie C. Lewis [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] for a brief period of time, which is the elementary school down the street, and before I knew it--in kindergarten, my mother was driving me to kindergarten across town in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] to Fillmore Kindergarten School [sic. Fillmore School, Washington, D.C.] and--kindergarten at Fillmore, and it was very interesting because I had very little experience with people other than black people in my neighborhood; there was one white family--White Doc [ph.], that's what we called the guy that was my brother's age, and then there were a couple-a kids my age there too, but I, I went to school out there, and then in the first grade I was catchin' the bus to school on my own--across town, as well as getting rides when I could, but then by the time I got to second grade, I was always catching the bus, and I went to Jackson Elementary School [sic. Jackson School, Washington, D.C.].  And I had an experience there with people that were not only black people, but white people, and I had an experience there with other black people from other parts of town that were bussed there.  My mother cheated a little bit, I think, and used my aunt's address and got me into a busing program; but instead of actually catching the bus at southeast, which is where my Aunt Marian [ph.] lived at the time, I would catch the bus on my own, with bus tickets, from North Capitol Street over to Jackson Elementary School in Georgetown.  And I went there for my elementary school years, and that was an interesting experience.  I had a great time, I met--you know, John West [ph.] and, you know (laughter), Sam Mitchell [ph.] and, you know, Connard Amin [ph.] and myself, we constituted something called, you know, the fantastic four; we were from all different places all around the city, and we became friends and we bonded, and I learned friendship and I learned that there was life outside of my own world on North Capitol Street from those guys as well.  I went from there to Augustus Paul Junior High School [Washington, D.C.] in the seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, during all this time you were a real good student; you say you made all A's?
Speaker 2: I was an ex--I was an A student; I was an excellent student in elementary school.  I fancied myself quite the athlete and quite a dodge ball player, and I went from elementary school to junior high school with an outstanding academic record.  When I got to junior high school things changed a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 217903
Speaker 1: And you were a good student, and what was your--what were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was a good student; I was a great student in fact.
Speaker 1: Well, what were some of your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: I loved to read, I, I, I loved all the subjects, but I particularly liked (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you made straight A's?
Speaker 2: I, I did; I was a great student and, and then I went to junior high school [Augustus Paul Junior High School, Washington, D.C.]--that was a different story.  Junior high school, I took shop class; all I learned in shop class was how to play pinochle and how to play cards, and to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did this happen?  How did this happen that you just ended up in shop classes or--in your academic--
Speaker 2: I went to--I went--my mother [Charity Hunt] talked me, my mother talked me into goin' to Augustus Paul because it was uptown, and it was gonna be a better school, she thought.  And she thought I have too much influence goin' to school with my friends 'cause I didn't know how to control myself bein' around my friends, and I didn't have a lotta self-control.  In some ways, she was right.
Speaker 1: So this is junior high school, Augustus Paul Junior High (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But this was junior high school, Augustus Paul Junior High School and--but, but what, what she didn't count on was me--what I now refer to as losing focus, getting involved in a buncha things I shouldn't involve--been involved in, doin' a buncha things that I shouldn't a done, and my grades suffered tremendously for that--I mean a lot, and I was hangin' out, I was doin' all kinds of things, and I was used to travelin' across town by myself, so goin' to school on my own, catchin' the bus all over that town wasn't a big deal.  I would walk to Georgia Avenue, four for five blocks, and then--four or five city blocks, and then pass Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and catch the bus all the way uptown every day--rain, snow, shine, whatever, and--but I lost focus.  So my mother said to me, "You're not goin' back to Paul."  I said, "Oh, sure, I wanna go back to Paul; I got friends there, I love it."  She said, "Well, I don't think you can go back to Paul."  I said, "Why not?"  She said, "Well, I don't think that you can handle it; I think that you've lost your academic edge.  The prowess that I thought you had academically, it seems like you've lost it."  I said, "No, I haven't."  She said, "Well, I'll tell you what, why don't you prove somethin' to me?  You take a test, and if you do well in this test, then we'll talk about it; we'll talk about you goin' back to Paul," which I assumed meant I did well on the test--if I do well on the test, I'm on my way back to Paul.  So I studied, studied the material--the types of things that the test was going to be about, and did well with that--
Speaker 1: Now who administered this test?
Speaker 2: The test was actually an entrance exam, into--there were a set of programs, one was called ABC, A Better Chance, and Moving Forward; there were a number of programs like this, and there was a program to take inner city kids with a high academic achievement and send them to boarding schools and private schools, and I didn't know that.  I aced the test; I studied, I aced the exam, and so my mother and my father [Nathaniel Ford] one day start talkin' to me about different schools and all, and I just wanna go back to Paul.  And one day, we got into the car and my father said, "Help me load this, this trunk into the car," which I did, and 'bout--I don't know, half-hour, forty-five minutes later, I said, "where are we goin'?"  He said, "Well, we takin' you to military school."  I said, "No, you're not; I'm not goin' to military school."  He said, "Yes you are."  And I said, "I'm not gonna like it, I wanna leave, I'm gonna run away," or whatever.  They said, "You're not gonna do anything; you're gonna stay here and you're gonna do well."  And--I don't know how she did it, but my mother got me into scholarship programs in the eighth grade--scholarship money to send me to school, and--through these various programs and whatever little bit they could kick in, and so I went to military school--to Linton Hall Military School [Linton Hall School] in Bristow, Virginia, which is right off of Quantico Marine Base [Marine Corps Base Quantico, Prince William County, Virginia], down that way.  And Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] ran it; Marines ran the school, and I got there the first day and I thought, I'm, I'm, I'm hatin' this; I'm not gonna like it at all.  And by the second week, I loved it; I loved the discipline, I loved actually bein' back at an academic environment that I could achieve in; I did very well.  I like roll--to this day, I roll my socks and fold my underwear, which I learned in military school.  I still know how to march, I still know how to do all of the things that I learned there.  I was in the drill team and I worked hard; I became an officer my first year--the first person to ever do that--become an officer in their first year.  And then besides becoming an officer, I, I became a part of the battalion staff.  Ron Rutley was the Battalion Commander, and Ron and I became friends; we played on the basketball team together, we did a number of things, and I became a part of the battalion staff.  So all the companies of students would stand up and--with the sergeants and the lieutenants and the captains, and I stood in front of them all with Ron and the battalion adjutant and, and I was an officer and--so instead of carryin' a rifle, I carried a saber and I got into it, and I said, I like this life, and we had all decided--this is during the Vietnam War, and so we all decided we're gonna go someplace together, and we hooked on a New York Military Academy [Cornwall, New York].  And we said, "We're gonna go to New York Military Academy, and from New York Military Academy, we're going to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], and from West Point, we're going straight to Vietnam"--straight to Vietnam; that's what we said we were gonna do.
Story_ID: 217904
Speaker 1: My parents [Charity Hunt and Nathaniel Ford] got nervous with this, and my mother in particular (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You sound really gung ho there, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, I, I, I was; I enjoyed it.  I liked it, and I particularly liked the discipline.  My parents got wind of this and, and we talked about it and they weren't particularly liking it, especially my mother, and they transferred me in the program, talked me into--really, I didn't have a whole lotta say in it, but they transferred me into going to another school in, in Pennsylvania within the same--with the same kind of program, same inner city kids, and a lotta rich kids that went to school there, and a military school.
Speaker 2: Now, they didn't take you out [of Linton Hall Military School; Linton Hall School, Bristow, Virginia] in the middle; they let you finish that year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, I finished the year.  The school only went up to the eighth grade, and then you had to go to the next level of school, which is where New York Military Academy [Cornwall, New York] came in, ninth grade, which was high school effectively (unclear).  And I went to school in Pennsylvania and (laughter) I went to an all-boys school, and in the program I did well and--in, in that school as well, and played sports, but I thought, you know, if I'm gonna do this, and stay in this program, which I liked now--being on my own, being away, living on my own, traveling, being an adult, getting on a train by myself and, and catching cabs and buses and goin' places and, and living that lifestyle--very independent lifestyle at the ninth and ninth grade, I thought, I wanna do this with women around.  So I transferred in the same kind of a, same kind of a situation within the same program and the same--my mother got Pell Grants for me by this time, which I thought were reserved for college.  I'm probably sayin' somethin' I shouldn't say (laughter)--I don't wanna take my mother to jail, but she was gettin' Pell Grants for me, and I transferred there to [The] Perkiomen School [Pennsburg, Pennsylvania], which was a co-ed school, and I liked it there as well.  It was in a country town so I learned about the country and I learned a new Sparta, Georgia in that part of the country.  But this is a country town in Pennsylvania, and I learned the difference, and I learned how to interact with and work with people that weren't black people during this whole time.  In military school, I went with people from--that, that lived overseas and grew up in Mexico and were from Europe, and diplomat's children, and so I had a diverse group of friends that I was developing.  I contrast this with what my home life was which was effectively Washington, D.C. in the city, all-black neighborhood, and there were contrasts that I learned, and I learned to live and work and reside, and feel comfortable in both worlds and, and that was productive for me; that was a godsend actually.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm kinda confused in some way in terms of the chronology.  Now, you went to like two different military schools--
Speaker 1: I went to one military school, and then I went to an all-boys school--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then I went to a co-ed school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, during which period of time did you end up going to Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] with your--to spend time with your brother?
Speaker 1: I went to Wilberforce to spend time with my brother prior to goin' to military school, when I was in the process of losing my way--when I was goin' nuts (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, so, the military school is when you're, you're pickin' it back up.
Speaker 1: Yes, I--from military school.  My parents had already decided that, you know, this--enough is enough; that way my mother got me into that program.  And--so I went to Perkiomen School in Pennsburg, Pennsylvania; played three sports, did very well (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: Pennsburg, P-E--
Speaker 2: No, the name of the school.
Speaker 1: Oh, Perkiomen, P-E-R-K-I-O-M-E-N; it's an Indian [Native American] name.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Perkio--
Speaker 1: Perkiomen.
Speaker 2: --men.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  And it's in Pennsylvania?
Speaker 1: It's in Pennsburg, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: Pennsburg, okay.
Story_ID: 217905
Speaker 1: And at [The] Perkiomen [School, Pennsburg, Pennsylvania], I made friends for life--Kathy Cesario [ph.], Rodney Garrett [ph.]--I made friends for life there, and there wasn't a large African American population, but there was one, and they were from all over.  Much like the other school, they were from New York [New York] and they were from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and they were from Washington, D.C., primarily.  And they were city kids mostly, or people that grew up around the city--Newark--Newark, New Jersey area, northern New Jersey, so I met a lotta people and made a lotta friends from all over.  And so I would travel with them on holidays and school breaks, and I would take the train to New York many, many, many weekends; I almost lived in New York really, you could say, at one point in time.  When we had breaks from school, and when we had short weeks, which was often, we'd immediately go to New York and I would stay with Victor--Victor Sims [ph.], Caesar Rivera [ph.], Poppo [ph.]; I, I lived with them in, in the, in the South Bronx [New York, New York], and lived with their people and their connections and the Savage Skulls and the Seven Immortals, and which they were both gang members.  And we had many, many stories that we developed growing up together, which was another, another piece of my life.  So I've got the experience of a family that's well-honed together and close-knit in Sparta, Georgia, and North Capitol Street and Bryant Street [Washington, D.C.], and Pennsburg, Pennsylvania, and then going to New York and being in New York and living in New York and stayin' in New York, and I had a, a, a plethora of opportunity and experiences that came together to, to kinda make me a patchwork of--a patchwork of experiences that made me who I am, and they were all very different, and I learned a lot.  And I learned how to be flexible, I learned how to understand people and deal with people and work with people, and so I, I was very fortunate in that regard.  And so I, I went to school in Pennsylvania, Perkiomen, and played sports; I did very well in sports, especially football.
Speaker 2: What did you play?
Speaker 1: I played cornerback and receiver, but I made the paper as, as a cornerback, and I, I did, I did very, very well.  And I went--well, I won't say I did very, very well; I did very well academically, and I did very well from a sports standpoint.  It took a period of adjustment getting back into dealing with girls every day, and not only dealing with girls in terms of interacting with them all the time, but actually living on a campus with them where they're in the next building, when they're sleep in the next building.  And so that changed my perspective on how to deal with people in life.  And I became a student body president there, and I lettered in sports and I, I just did well.  And many of my friends there decided they were gonna take a year off and travel 'cross the country and backpack through the back--Grand Canyon or backpack across Europe, and so that's what I decided I was gonna do.  And of course they had money and I didn't, so I came home and announced to my family that I planned to take some time off and backpack across the Grand Canyon.  And the last thing I remember after that statement was my mother [Charity Hunt] swinging at me but, but I recovered (laughter), and she asked me if I was crazy and did I remember that I didn't have money like these other people, and that the only place that I would be backpacking to is across the living room to pick up my shoes that I had left there when I came in, and take 'em upstairs where they belong.
Story_ID: 217906
Speaker 1: Let me go backtrack to [The] Perkiomen [School, Pennsburg, Pennsylvania] for a minute like, like--and your other schools (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: Like who are the teachers?  Are there any teachers that stand out as a mentor to you, or--
Speaker 2: Oh, teachers that stand out as a mentor?  There is a teacher that not only stands out as a mentor to me, but a man that changed my life; I'm reluctant to talk about him really, because I get emotional when I think of this man.  But Edwin J. [sic. Richard] Strelecky changed my life.
Speaker 1: Strelecky--how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: S-T-R, Stre, E-L-E-C-K-Y.  Edwin Strelecky changed my life (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, what did he do?
Speaker 2: He was my psychology teacher and my history teacher at Perkiomen, and he was really my life teacher.  He would allow me to sneak down and talk to him and spend time with him talking about everything, from life in the city and life in the country, life in general--government--he was my government instructor as well.  Talk about government and how the government works, and why it's important to vote and why it's important to have the attitude that one needs to have to get things done that they need to get done.  Why you can't be a victim of circumstance, and he--I--to this day, I don't know if he was Republican or a Democrat.  And to this day, I learned more about the Republican Party and the Democratic Party from him than I would ever learn, in that short period of time, than I would ever learn in the rest of my life.  He had integrity; he taught me why this is the best form of government in the world with all its warts and, and problems and issues, and why I needed to be a better person and why I needed to be all of the things that we wrote down on a piece of paper one day that I could be in life.  And I would take this information and I would take these learnings and take this, this excitement and this, this enthusiasm, and take it back to my hometown and take it back to Washington, D.C. and talk to the guys on the corner, and talk to the guys around the corner of Bryant Street, talk to the guys in the alley, talk the guys wherever we hung out about why it's important to vote and all these kinds of things and I, and I became disappointed with apathy, with all the reasons why people thought it didn't make a difference to vote; people are gonna do what they wanna do anyway.  People don't care about us, and this is the wrong neighborhood, and all of those things that I learned did matter and were important in life, and Edwin Strelecky is the reason why when I recently went to college; I went wanting to be a government major because I was going to change the world single-handedly.  If I could get somebody else to help me, that was fine, but if I didn't get somebody else to help me, I could change it single-handedly.  We went through a series, he and I, of discussions once where he outlined to me the life of several people--the lives of several people, and these people sounded like they all had problems and they all were failures and, and I was studying government and history at the time, and it occurred to me one day--he was talking about very famous people; he was talking about [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], he was talkin' about Benjamin Franklin, he was talking about all of these people that had done incredible things with their lives, but he didn't let on to me that that's who they were.  And it was then that I realized (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Found out who they were after they--you heard the story, right?
Speaker 2: Who they were--that's right--after the story.  So--and then I realized it's not how you start off, but how you end up that matters, and most importantly, what you've done along the way.  He taught me that if there's a hole in the world where you used to be when you're gone, then you've made a difference.  The world will go on without you, but for some period of time, there needs to be a hole in the hearts and minds and places of the world, where you used to be and you used to touch, that oughta make a difference.  So he single-handedly made a difference in my life as an instructor, and he's since passed on, and I think about him all the time; I miss him.
Story_ID: 217907
Speaker 1: How did you choose a college?  Now you were a pretty good student and president of the student body [at The Perkiomen School, Pennsburg, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I was a pretty good student--president of the student body, all kinds of achievements.  Well, how did I choose a college?  I had some scholarships to go different places, and I got hurt, so sports was an issue for me 'cause I was plannin' to play football somewhere; I hurt my knee--actually, I hurt both my knees, but I hurt one really bad, and so I decided I was gonna figure out a way to go to school differently since the backpackin' thing was out (laughter), and--but I still wanted to work and experience life; I didn't just wanna go straight to school.  I had been going to school for a long time and I had done school, and I had done almost like a college campus, three times, going away to school, and so college wasn't foreign to me; I knew that you had to change classes, and I could up on my own and get myself ready and live my own life and be independent and take care of myself and keep myself clean and study on my own.  But a friend of mine, guy named Brent Berlender [ph.], B.B. from New York, came back from a trip, college trip, one time with a tee-shirt--sweatshirt that said--had Northeastern on it, and I liked that shirt, and I remember talking to Rodney Garrett [ph.] about it and he told me I should check it out.  I liked Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts] just from talking to, to Brent about it because you could work and you could go to school; it was a co-op school, so you work a few months and then you go to school a few months, you work a few months, you go to school a few months.  And I liked that 'cause I could earn money; I had never had any money, I wanted to have money in my pocket for a change, and I wanted to still be able to advance myself in my career and my life, so this was a great compromise and this Tem--this and Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] were two of the best co-op schools you could go to, and Temple had a technical focus and I didn't wanna be an engineer.  So I went to school in Boston [Massachusetts], and there were sixty colleges in the City of Boston, I think, at the time, and so I wanted to go to school there with all those people and all those other kids, and I did that; I went to Northeastern and the co-op program; I did well in the co-op program, ended up working at technical companies.  I worked at Digital Equipment Corporation [Maynard, Massachusetts], I worked at Prime Computer [Natick, Massachusetts], I worked at IBM for a long time, and then I was a buyer at Gillette, working--buying technical gear and equipment at the Gillette Corporation in South Boston.
Speaker 1: Is it while you're in school?
Speaker 2: While I was in school.  And at South Boston--I learned a lot in Boston; going to school with all those other kids.  I pledged Kappa [Alpha Psi Fraternity] there, I developed lifelong friendships and relationships with men and women that I still call my friends.  Working in South Boston at Gillette was also interesting; had my tires slashed there, and writing on my car, and racial slurs and epithets.  But that, too, was an interesting experience, but Boston was a great place to go to school.  I met my wife [Ingrid Ford] there--on a bet.
Story_ID: 217908
Speaker 1: Now, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, being the good citizen that I was, I came back early to help the freshmen girls move into their dorm [at Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts], to be helpful, and I learned this trick the year before.
Speaker 1: Trick, you say?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I learned how to be helpful the year before by helping the freshmen girls move in.  And so we were--during that week, the freshmen were comin' in, Rudy [ph.] and I had snuck into the freshmen dorm and were playing pool, playing pool in the basement, and these two girls came down and Rudy said, "Okay, you take the one on the right, I'll take the one on the left."  So I looked over, I say, "No, you take the one on the right, I'll take the one on the left."  So we discussed it for a moment, argued a little bit, and decided we better solve this before somebody else advances, and we flipped a coin and I got the one on the left.  It took me nine months to get a kiss, and three ultimatums later, "I'm leavin' that's it. If all we're gonna be is friends, I'm outta here," and I did that three times, and I finally--she called me.  You know, I used to, I used to call her all the time.  Every Saturday I would go by her dorm, and by the second year, I had an old piece-a-car that I would take her out and drive her around Boston [Massachusetts], and we'd explore Boston and the suburbs together and go to other schools, and I'd take her to--I was showin' her the world, I was showin' her life, and every Saturday at eight [o'clock], I would go by her dorm, ready to go and take her out.  And she would reluctantly roll downstairs with curlers in her hair and bath robe, sign me in, and I would wait for sometimes an hour-and-a-half for her to get ready, come downstairs and go with me to go see the world, as just friends.  And I wanted to be more than that.  I used to watch her go out on dates with other people while I stood around in her dorm room waiting.  Now, I never told the fellows all this; they, they never knew this, but--especially my frat [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] brothers--but I waited for her; I courted her--
Story_ID: 217909
Speaker 1: And it wasn't 'til I had finally given up that she came around.  We went--the last ultimatum I gave her was, I said, "Come on, get dressed up, we gotta go out and I gotta wear a jacket and tie, and you gotta get real dressed up."  So we went to Top of the Hub, which is--Prudential Center in Boston [Massachusetts] had a restaurant that went around in a circle very slowly, and a bar there; we had drinks and we sat, and we were gonna go from there to dinner.  So I said, "Come on, let's go to dinner."  And so she got up and we walked--as she was working her way into the restaurant and I said, "Well, where you goin'?"  She said, "Well, we're goin' to dinner."  I said, "We can't afford to eat here; we're just goin' to get pizza; we just came here for drinks."  And so I couldn't afford much.  So we went from there to pizza, and I gave her the last ultimatum.  I said, "Look, if we can't be more than friends then, you know, we just need to break this off; I'm gonna stop comin' around, stop doin' all the things I do, stop takin' you out all the time and all that."  And for the third time, she said, "Okay, well, do what you have to do."  And that was it.  I left it alone; I stopped callin'.  I called her every day for, for nine months; she never called me once.  At one point, I took a bag of dimes, a baggie, and filled it with dimes and took it over to her and I said, "You obviously don't have any money because I call you all the time and you never call me.  Here's a bag of dimes; you need to call me."  She didn't call me once.  So finally, when I gave up, and said, "That's it," and I was startin' to go on with my life; my phone rang, and I had a bachelor apartment and I was sharing it with Baron [ph.], who is one of my best friends in the world--my sands, it's Baron and Greg [ph.] I are real close, and then Craig King [ph.] was also on my line with Dwayne [ph.].  And Baron and Greg and I and Craig are still very, very close, and I, I was roommates with Baron and, you know, we'd chase girls together, we pledged together, we played sports together, we went on trips together, we went to other colleges together--we did everything together, especially with Greg.  And I was tellin' him, "That's it, man, I can't take it anymore."  And everybody thought I shoulda given up a long time before that anyway.  Of course, I let on that I was a lot closer to gettin' next to her than I really was anyhow, and I remember havin' a conversation with Baron and sayin', "That's it."  And then a couple days later, you know, the phone rang (laughter).  As I picked up the phone and it's "Hey."  It was Ingrid [Ford]--the first time she had called me.  Said, you know, "What's goin' on?"  "Well, I hadn't heard from you, and it's been a couple, a few days, you know."  And I was so tempted to say--you know--to hang up the phone.  But I didn't, and the, the relationship started from there, and blossomed from there.  And then we went out for seven years before we got married.
Speaker 2: Seven years?
Speaker 1: Seven years.  Yeah, I lost my mind for a little while, I didn't know; I was scared to get married, I think, and, and as soon as I lost my mind and said, "I'm not sure if I wanna get married and all that," and maybe, you know, I wanna talk to other people, see other people."  And she said, "No, no."  I said, "Yeah, I think that might be better."  And then when she said, "Well, yeah, maybe that's not a bad idea," then I said, "wait a minute; I don't like this so much" (laughter), and so we got back on track.  But after seven years, we got married and I've spent the rest of my life tryin' to gain her affection.  So the nine months, little did I know, that nine months was just the beginning.  And so I spent a lifetime tryin' to gain her favor.
Speaker 2: Well, you certainly know each other pretty well by now, I would guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, we know each other very, very well, and we love each other very much, and in most ways we're inseparable.
Story_ID: 217910
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now back at Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts], now how were your studies going at Northeastern?  How was school?
Speaker 2: My studies, my studies were great my first year, my freshman year, and I pledged a fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] as a freshman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you major in?
Speaker 2: --and they were best during my pledge period because they made us study every night, and I ended up switching from government to marketing, and 'course I had the co-op experience in, in working for computer companies, and so I liked the technology aspect of it and I gained so much experience, and I made so much money--the money was so much more in the technology world; I mean I was makin' $630.00 a week by the time I graduated, workin' at IBM on co-op, which was a lotta money, and so I had a lot of offers as a result of that.  Graduated from school; a lot of offers for jobs--offers in New York, offers in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], offers in Boston [Massachusetts], and I decided to work for IBM and, and just as I decided to work for them, the branch that I had been working at as a co-op student, that was making me the offer, broke up and changed; they had a re-org; GSD and all these things changed, and [Charles] Charlie McCord, one of my mentors in life, suggested I do what was best for me and not necessarily IBM, and I went and changed up at that point in time, and went to Digital Equipment [Corporation, Maynard, Massachusetts], which was a great move for me.  I opened up the financial community at Digital, and by this time, my real mentor was Charlie.  I sang in the choir at St. Paul A.M.E Church in, in, in Cambridge [Massachusetts], and listed to [Dr.] LeRoy Attles preach every Sunday.  I joined the men's group and the men's chorus and, and I was in the regular choir, and the choir cut a couple-a albums and I got to sing on the albums; it was good, and I, I had a kinda musical background, musical history with singing anyway, and I spent six years working as a DJ at a couple radio stations in Boston while I was in school, and so I was inclined to music and musical things anyway.  And Charlie had become my mentor, he and Donna--Donna McCord [ph.].
Story_ID: 217911
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So leaving college [Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts] and starting a career was an interesting proposition to me because I had offers everywhere.  My girlfriend at the time, now my wife [Ingrid Ford], was still in school though; she still had another year of school left, so I decided to stay in the Boston [Massachusetts] area and went to work for DEC [Digital Equipment Corporation, Maynard, Massachusetts], but at graduation, I didn't actually get my degree until months after graduation because when I went to graduation, I went across the stage to get my diploma; what I got was-- what looked like a container for a diploma, and when I opened it up, it said, "See the Bursar's Office," because I still owed money (laughter).
Story_ID: 217912
Speaker 1: I paid my money and got my degree [from Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts], and went on and I worked at Digital Equipment [Corporation, Maynard, Massachusetts], opened up the financial services community in Boston [Massachusetts], helped do that and helped get that started, and had a great job and a great career.  I worked for some really good people--Jack McNulty; Fred Cunningham [ph.] is who I started working for, along with a guy name Bernie--African American guy that was a great guy to get started with.  And then I started working for another guy, whose name is Tom [ph.].  There's two Toms; there's one Tom [ph.] that was in financial services and I worked directly for him and he was a, a financial services guy, and I worked on his team--not him; there was a manager--there was a group manager that I worked for, a guy name Tom [ph.], who told me that I couldn't do a lotta things.  He told me that I couldn't manage a number of things.  I had worked for a guy name Mario Mumalo [ph.], who was a great guy also, but then I worked for this guy Tom, and Tom told me all the things that I couldn't do, that I couldn't be, and that I shouldn't be on the Bank of Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] account because they weren't gonna--they weren't going to connect well with somebody like me, they weren't gonna relate to somebody like me, I didn't have an Ivy League background and they weren't going to accept me and they weren't gonna buy anything from me, and I went on to set records there of what they bought, and I told him at that point in time, I said, "We will have a lawsuit and a lot of very public orientation to this problem if you try to take me out of this environment that I've worked so hard to cultivate and manage."  And we went through a bunch of discussions about it and I stayed and I did very, very well at Digital; I had an outstanding sales record, and I achieved my goals a lot and--almost all the time, and I went on to be in the top 10 percent of the sales force several times, selling a lot more than anyone would have expected.  Then, I worked for a guy, [Thomas W.] Tom Nicholson, who was--had a much different attitude; we worked together and did fine together.  And then I worked for a, a guy by the name of [Stephen] Steve McGowan who's now, as of today, 2004, he's the CFO [chief financial officer] at Sun--Sun Microsystems [Oracle Corporation, Redwood City, California].  And he encouraged me to do more, and I did.  And I worked for Tom Sheehan who was a great guy, but a guy that had tremendous influence on my life at that point in time was a guy name Jack McNulty; he taught me fairness and honesty and straight-forwardness; didn't cut me a lotta breaks but once in a while he did, and I appreciated him for that, and I appreciated--I still appreciate who he is today.
Story_ID: 217913
Speaker 1: And so I did well there [Digital Equipment Corporation, Maynard, Massachusetts], and then I went on to work on the Bank of Boston [Boston, Massachuestts] account, and workin' on a--workin' on a Bank of Boston account was interesting because I worked with a guy by the name of Michael Simmons at Bank of Boston, who was in charge of a lotta things; he reported to the chairman, and I was going to take another job inside Digital and Michael asked me to come work for him instead, and it was right across the street from where I was working anyway and I did, and I was an executive there; I was the senior vice president in charge of a number of things in technology world.  And it was a challenging experience, but I was working with people that I knew and people that I was friends with--Michael Lezenski.  I, I worked with--and Kevin Rowland [ph.]; I worked with people that I trusted, that I understood, and who understood me, and I did well there. And Michael Simmons was leaving and retiring, and Michael Lezenski was going to take his job, then my peer, and I was very content to work for Michael.  And they got together with me and talked me into taking a job that headhunters were after me at--for taking a company called the Associates [First Capital Corporation], which is now Citigroup [Inc.] in Dallas [Texas], and so I moved to Dallas.  I mean I came home from work one day and I told my wife [Ingrid Ford], who happened to be doin' somethin' in the sink--I think she was washing a dish or somethin', and we were both working at the time and, and I said, "People are after me to take this job in Dallas, and now Simmons and Lezenski are tellin' me I should take the job."  And she didn't even look up; she said, "Well, you told 'em 'No,' right?  We're not goin' to Dallas."  And I said, "Yeah, you're right, we're not goin'."  Talked about it some more, I decided to come down because I knew people here and I could visit--go to this interview, but I really come down to visit, and the interview struck me, the people struck me, and what they were tryin' to do.  And I came back and talked to her about it; long story short, we ended up movin' to Dallas, and we love it here.  I mean I thought, there's no way I could live in Dallas.  Dallas is not the East Coast, and it doesn't have the kinda seasonal change and doesn't have the cultural influences and all the things that tie me so much to having lived up and down the East Coast--from Washington [D.C], to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], to New York, to Boston [Massachusetts]. And Dallas doesn't have the ocean and it's not close to the mountains, and it's not the East Coast--and it isn't, but I found Dallas--and my wife especially found Dallas to be easy living.  There's a, a, a friendliness and an ease to the--with the people, and an ease of life here that we find very attractive, and we love it in Dallas.
Story_ID: 217914
Speaker 1: I mean we may live somewhere else, and there a number of other places that we could live, but we really like it in Dallas [Texas], and our kids weren't born here, but they grew up here; they were born in Boston [Massachusetts] and--three of them; I have twins that are now fifteen, as of 2004-Anthony [ph.] and Arias [ph.], and they're really good students, really good students.  We live in a little town called Southlake [Texas], and right now they're noted for their football teams; it's the number one team in the country.  They just played on ESPN (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Caroll--
Speaker 1: Caroll [High School, Southlake, Texas], yeah--Caroll--Southlake Caroll; they just played on ESPN a couple weeks ago, which was a big deal in our household.  And I have a twelve year-old son Derrick [ph.], and Derrick is a great kid; Derrick is into fencing now, and Derrick is into shooting, which is surprising because he won't let you kill an ant, but he loves to shoot, and he is a great shot, so skeet shooting and trap shooting he really likes, and he wants to get into pistol shooting as well.  He does like paintball but he's docile in a sense that he won't let you kill a bug, but he'll shoot a target as long as you let him, and so Derrick's a great kid, and so we all live there in Southlake.
Story_ID: 217915
Speaker 1: I worked at this company, the Associates [First Capital Corporation; Citigroup, Inc.], and I ended up managing all of the technology there, became chief information officer [CIO] there, and I managed close to a couple thousand people in fifteen countries with eight or nine hundred million dollar budget, and it's a pretty big organization--two thousand branches and fifty-two call centers, and it was an enormous job and a lotta fun.  I worked with some of the best people than I could imagine working with there, and I started off working for a guy, Walter B. Copeland--Larry Sweeten [ph.], and very quickly Walter Copeland, and I ended up--Walter moved on and I took the head job managing all of the technology there, and that, that was an interesting job, but it was a tough job.  Well, Citigroup [Inc.] acquired the Associates, and I had a conversation with Keith W. Hughes, the CEO and the guy that kinda directed me at the time, and ended up working for American Airlines [Fort Worth, Texas]; they offered me a job to become chief information officer here, and that's where I am now, and American Airlines has the single largest--no offense to anybody else, but it has the single largest collection of really smart people of any place that I've worked.
Speaker 2: Now, when did you come to Dallas [Texas] in the first place--to the Associates?  What year was that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I came to Dallas in 1994.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  And came to American Airlines--
Speaker 1: I came to American Airlines almost four years ago, beginning of 2001.  So a few months before September 11 [2001, 9/11], right before the acquisition of TWA [Trans World Airlines; American Airlines] and its assets, but a few months before September 11 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's really kinda a turbulent period, I mean in terms of activity around American Airlines.  You got the acquisition of TWA--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --one of the pioneer aviation--I mean airlines in the U.S.  Pan Am [Pan American World Airways], TWA, that's (unclear) the old days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right--a lotta legacy, a lotta heritage in TWA and, and that name and what they meant to aviation and what they've built; the part of the aviation industry that they created, which American piggy-backed a lot off of.  American has a storied heritage itself, obviously; the combination of those two companies was pretty daunting.  The integration of those two companies was daunting at the time, for me, actually.  We did that integration in eight months, which is a minor miracle; it might be the eighth or ninth wonder of the world, and we did it with incredible staff and a group of talented people here at American and TWA in a record period of time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was your title when you came in?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: I was the chief information officer--senior vice president; and I report to the chairman.  And then September 11th came along and we were so far into the integration of TWA we couldn't stop it; we had to do it.
Story_ID: 217916
Speaker 1: Many people don't realize, and I didn't really realize it 'til I came here today; I hadn't thought about it for some reason, so I guess it wasn't bad pub [publicity] for American Airlines [Fort Worth, Texas], but those were American Airlines planes--both of 'em, right?
Speaker 2: Two of the four planes were American Airlines planes, and two planes were United Airlines.
Speaker 1: Two, okay.
Speaker 2: That was a difficult time, you know?  The person that's chairman now, who's Gerard [J.] Arpey, who--and I've talked about all these great people that I've worked with and worked for--he may be the most outstanding of them all.  But we have a meeting every Tuesday that is an executive committee meeting, and I was on my in with the person that was in charge of marketing at the time, and his secretary came up to us in the hallway and said, "We have a situation," and he said, "yeah, we always have a situation."  He said, "No"--she said, "no, somebody's hijacked one of our planes."  And our operations center is on the phone as we passed him the phone with--cell phone--with a flight attendant on the plane.  And so we rushed in and [Robert W.] Bob Baker was getting the information and listening to what happened and we were talking in Bob Baker's office.  He said--he was listening in the phone call and then he said, "Our plane just ran into the World Trade Center [New York, New York]."  I said, "You're kidding."  Bob said, "Why would I kid you about that?"  And so we all rushed, and we all have TVs in the conference rooms and I had one in my office, and we ran to the conference room and we're watching this plane in the side of building, and I remember just being awe struck, not knowing what to do.  And then the CFO [chief financial officer] at the time, a guy name [Thomas W.] Tom Horton, came in and said, "United's missing a plane," and he came back and said, "they're missing six planes, and we can't find four planes."  And so we were all tryin' to figure out what was going on, and as we were watching this on television and talking about it, and talking about what to do next, the second plane hit; on television, the second plane hit the World Trade Center--the United plane.  And somebody in the room immediately said, "This is terrorism."  And so we quickly gathered our belongings not knowing what was going on, what was happening in the world, and went to our operations center.  And in the operations center, there is a place for everyone to sit in the case of emergency, so I have a seat; everybody has a seat--the CFO, the operations--head of operations, head of marketing, there's a place for the Federal Aviation Administration [FAA], the FAA, and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and everybody has a seat there; we were all gathered there, and we went through the process of determining what was going on.  We immediately grounded planes and it was--it seemed surreal, and I remember watching these buildings burning on television in the room with the FBI guy, and I remember Afric- tall African American gentleman; he said, "One of those buildings is gonna collapse."  I said, "What do you mean?"  He explained to me structurally what's gonna happen and how--the physics of it.  And sure enough, it did.  I said, "How did you know?"  He said, "Well, we've got people and they knew it."  And he explained it, and it happened, and--after he had gotten word and he'd been in touch with people, I guess in Washington [D.C.], or wherever.  And that was a devastating time, and rebuilding the airline from that point in time, that was a daunting task.  And there have been several times when I thought, this is overwhelming; we can't do this.  But we have been able to do it and we're still in the process of doing it--
Story_ID: 217917
Speaker 1: What's the toughest part of tryin' to do this, I mean, you know--?
Speaker 2: The toughest part of tryin' to do it really is, is coming in every day and fighting off demons every day, and fighting the barriers day after day after day; breaking down the barriers and fighting through the walls.  But it's gonna take good, strong, quality people to do it and its--and, and the leadership that's here [American Airlines, Fort Worth, Texas] now, especially the CEO, this guy Gerard [J.] Arpey, I think he'll get it done.  But this is a--this has been the most interesting period in my professional career certainly, and this job that I have now has by far been the most fun.  It is intriguing, you know?  I have an, an office and a desk and a chair, and I often tell people, "I have a desk and I have a chair, and I have a--I have a whole chair, but I only need the edge of it because that's where I sit all the time," and there's always something new, there's always a chance to think, there's always an opportunity to make a move, there's always a decision to be made and there's always a quick reaction necessary to something, and there's always extreme competitiveness involved.  You know, every industry like ours it's heavy on capital and heavy on--labor-intensive and capital-intensive, have been regulated and then gone through deregulation and then hyper-competition, and then consolidation and then hyper-competition again.  And we're in a period of hyper-competition prior to consolidation probably, but it is the most interesting professional experience that I've ever had, and I wouldn't have traded it for anything in the world.
Story_ID: 217918
Speaker 1: --One big challenge was security, I guess, in the beginning (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Security still is a challenge--electronic security as well as physical.  And, you know, American Airlines [Fort Worth, Texas] is in a lotta different businesses.  We're in the flying restaurant business, we're in the ground equipment business of which we have twenty-three thousand pieces, we're in the airplane business which we have a thousand or eight hundred, rather now.  We have--with American Eagle, we are in the plane rebuilding business; we literally take the planes apart and build them back from scratch when we do our heavy checks and our heavy maintenance and our bases, and it's an amazing thing to see people do this.  And we're most of all in the information business, and that's where I come in.  A big part of what we do is technology.  American can't exist as a company without the technology that I provide, that--I say, "I"--the IT department--my group, my team provides.  Everything we do has a technology component to it that's part of it, and to be in the middle of that, and be responsible for that is, is an awesome responsibility, you know, and as an African Amer- as an African American especially, there isn't a day that goes by that I don't a) notice that I'm an African American, and b) feel even an--even--an even additional responsibility because of that.  I grew up in an all-black neighborhood [Stronghold, Washington, D.C.] and lived in an all-black family, and had the opportunity to go experience life outside of my circle--outside of my bubble, and realized that there were other people besides black people in the world.  But I very much live my life as a black man; never, never, never, at any point in time, did I not realize I was black, and not that I could anyway because there's always somethin' that was jumpin' up and reminding me of that.  And I feel an obligation and a responsibility not only to black people, but to people in general, to people as a whole (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you don't feel it's an imposition on you or anything like that, but you--
Speaker 2: No, no; it's not an imposition, it's an honor for me--my heritage and my people.  I mean I come from a people that were, you know, the--invented the arithmetic, the--created the greatest wonders of the world; I come from the loins of kings and queens, so at no point in time has being black felt like an imposition to me.  Sometimes it's inconvenient, relative to the things I have to do and have to go through, choices I have to make, things I have to think about that other people don't have to think about, choices I have to make other people don't have to make, but that comes with the territory.  I spend more time educating white people than I do, you know, focusing on being black 'cause, you know, most--the people that I've worked with--I always been the youngest and the darkest at whatever I was doing, although the youngest piece is fading away right now (laughter), you know, at forty-five, but--people didn't grow up with me; the people that I interacted with and who I sat next to and who I (unclear), they didn't grow up with me, they didn't know me as a kid, they didn't have friends like me, they didn't--they didn't interact with people like me, so I was different to them anyway, but I'm not different.  I wasn't the smartest kid in my neighborhood, I wasn't the most intelligent, wasn't the most gregarious, certainly wasn't the most charismatic, but a lotta those kids didn't have the experience that I had; they didn't get tricked into goin' to a boarding school [Linton Hall Military School; Linton Hall School, Bristow, Virginia] by their parents, who scrounged around to find money and get scholarships to send them there.  They didn't go live in New York [New York], they didn't go spend time in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], they didn't travel up and down the East Coast by themselves; they didn't do all of the things that I did, and the lack of, the lack of that kind of exposure has had an impact on them that really has been an opportunity; the exposure for me has been an opportunity, and I'm dedicated to turning that into something, and makin' that somethin' special--
Story_ID: 217919
Speaker 1: And I've made mistakes along the way, certainly, including over-reacting; I mean part of what I have to make sure I do is make decisions in situations--that I'm not over-reacting or responding to things that aren't really there.  One time, I was working for the vice chairman of the Associates [First Capital Corporation; Citigroup, Inc.], and we were in a meeting; the meeting was about to start and--I like this story because it, it's, it's very descriptive.  And the meeting was about to start and he said, in a room full of other executive vice presidents like me, and we were there working for this vice chairman, and he said, "[HistoryMaker] Monte [Ford], you must like basketball; what do you think of the So-and-So?"  He was talking about Kentucky versus somebody or so.  And at that moment I--it, it was one-a those decision points; it was one-a those times I had to make a decision.  Do I let this comment go, and then drive home and my gut churning and--or do I try to say the right thing and be witty?  Right?  And still make a point but only half-serious, or do I turn this into a moment and say, oh, no, stop--stop this; there's a line, you just crossed it.  I decided to turn it into a moment with the vice chairman.  So I stood up--everybody else was sitting down; I stood up at the table, at this long table in a conference room full of executive vice presidents and this vice chairman, and I said, "Why is it that the black man always has to be the one to know about basketball?  Why is it that the stereotypical views of blah, blah, blah"--a long soliloquy that went on for ninety seconds to two minutes.  And I said, "Why is that?"  And I looked right at the vice chairman, and he said--you know, I said--and I ended it with, "And why is it that the black man has to be the one that knows about basketball?  Is that what you think of us?"  And he said, "Well, no, it's just that I saw you in the gym the last three nights in a row playin' ball with the, with the fellows over at the club, so I just figured you liked the sport" (laughter).  So I said, "Oh, okay."  So I had taken it to a place where it didn't belong; he had seen me in the gym playin' basketball, which I love, and saw me and figured I liked basketball, so he figured it was safe to ask me a question about basketball, which was perfectly legitimate.  But I read somethin' else into it and I was too sensitive about it because I read more into it.  And I've had to make those kinds of decisions all my life, and I don't, I don't tolerate insensitivity, racial jokes and those kinds of things, and I don't think there's a  place for that because you never know where the line should be drawn.  Once you let that line draw out, there's no place to stop it legitimately, so I try to keep it, keep it neutral.  But you have to live life without being over-sensitized to everything so that nobody even wants to be around you or say anything around you that you--and you're not cosmopolitan enough to understand that there are differences in the world and there are different kinds of people in the world, and you are one of them--especially to somebody that's not like you--
Story_ID: 217920
Speaker 1: For a big part of my career, I worked through those things, and I've had mentors, though, to help me, you know.  Bill Bagby [ph.], works in the finance community in Boston [Massachusetts], was a great guy to bounce things off of when I didn't have anybody to talk to.  Hilton McDaniel [ph.] taught me how to be--Hilton and Sheila McDaniel [ph.]--how to be a real person in life, and treated me as a little brother, and my wife Ingrid [Ford] as a little sister, and they took us under their wing as I was growing and developing and, and I was achieving and I was over-achieving, and I've always been an over-achiever, and they, they taught me how to be comfortable being an over-achiever around other people and around my family, and how to not--don't let it go to your head but don't be ashamed of the fact that you're over-achieving.  Barry Lathan [ph.] taught me how to be--how to negotiate to be an executive.  He was an executive--is an executive, and he told me the things that I needed to know about how to be one; I didn't have anybody to talk; I didn't know how to negotiate a contract.  What should I be looking for?  What do I ask for?  What kind of office?  What kinda perks?  Who, who am I as an executive?  Ask me to be an executive; I don't know how to be one, Barry.  And Barry taught me that.  [James Ireland] Jim Cash [Jr.] took me under his wing; he's an icon in, in American history.  Dean of business school at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], did all these things at Harvard, studied, knows technology inside and out.  At a very young age, Jim pointed me out of an audience of which he was speaking, and he said, "I am going to pick you to talk to and to deal with and to focus on, and you be good, and I'll help you be good."  Jim Cash has been a major force in my life in terms of a role model; I'm not sure he knows how strong of a role model he's been, but he's been one.  So Barry and Jim and, and Hilton and Bagby and [Charles] Charlie McCord.  Neil [ph.], Keith [ph.]--my brothers--these people made me, you know--my father [Nathaniel Ford]; these people shaped me into who I am, and I'm trying to take that collective influence and experience and turn that into something for other people that I touch, and especially for my kids--for my children.
Story_ID: 217921
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, let's talk about the philosophy of what you do, and--'cause I know it's a very important--you have strong opinions about how to manage--you actually write a monthly, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A leadership column--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, a column about--
Speaker 2: --in support of--right--
Speaker 1: --you know, business leadership, right.
Speaker 2: I do.  Well, my, my philosophy is, is really focused on people.  If you take care of people, everything else will take care of itself; the people are the most important thing.  And if you treat people well and treat them fairly, and make sure they work in an environment that is open to everyone and open for everyone, the rest will take care of itself.  I write a column on leadership in CIO Magazine, currently once a quarter, and the last couple-a columns have been on taking charge in a business environment and not having excuses for delivery, and not try to measure way out of it.  A lotta times people, especially technical people, will tend to focus more on the measurement of what they do rather than the actual results of what they do, in terms of how people feel about their delivery.  It's much more important for me--for you to feel good about what I do, and you to think it's valuable, than for me to show you a buncha measures that prove it's valuable whether you think it is or not.  The latest one that I wrote was actually on diversity in the technology world, "Truer Colors."  And that's about why it's really important to have African Americans and Hispanic Americans and Asian Americans, and everybody else, a part of the technology workforce in this country.  It's big controversies goin' on right now about outsourcing and, and we are a global economy, and we have to live that way, and I firmly believe that, and I'm not a protectionist.  I believe that we live in a global world.  In fact, I work for a global airline; we better be a global economy.  But I also think it's important that we, we create an environment that allows us, companies like American [Airlines, Fort Worth, Texas] and other companies, big and small, to take advantage of the entire universe of people available in the workforce.  There are a number of people in America that would, would--could easily be trained to do jobs in the technology world of which there is a vast shortage today, that could be very meaningful for companies like American, or companies--smaller companies who pick a company, and we need to invest in Americans to do that, and there's a plethora of talent that we need to make sure we're takin' advantage of, minority and non-minority.  And so, as much as I feel would lower economy, it's important that we do that as well.  My philosophy really centers though around dealing with people and treating people fairly.  If people feel it's open and honest, there's no limit to what they can do, and nothing's better than an opportunity.
Story_ID: 217922
Speaker 1: Give us an example of this--a talking, I guess, accomplishment that's--rather than a real one, and--
Speaker 2: Okay, I'll, I'll give you an example of, of--again, that plaque in my office right over there that says, "Well done is always better than well said," is really a guiding principle for me.  This is a real-life story.  A few years ago, maybe a bunch of years ago now, there was a, a person who was at Bank of Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] that was doing a project, and it wasn't turning out well; it wasn't doing what it needed to do and what he wanted it to do--what, what the, the, the chief person responsible for the department wanted it to do, and things were floundering a little bit, and the person who was supposed to be getting it going and making it happen was busy coming up with all kinds of metrics and, and all kinds of formulas for managing, measuring things and all, and there was a salesperson from a company they were dealing with that was tryin' to help them get successful and was helping come up with this, and he was tryin' to help 'em get the job done but the person who was responsible for the project was busy measuring it, and the project really--and the set of projects really didn't get done.  And he came with all these measures to the chief and said, "Here's what--here's all the things we measure and here's why it's important and here's why this is okay."  And the chief didn't feel good about it, even though all the measures added up and all the numbers fit well and all of the things looked right on paper, it didn't feel good to him, it didn't feel like it was getting done the way he wanted it to, and so he replaced that person; even though their numbers added up, he replaced that person, and he replaced him with a guy from the company--the marketing guy from the company that he was working with trying to get it done in the first place because that guy was focused on actually getting the job done, and was trying to work at getting it done, never mind the measurements.  And I know the story well because I'm the person that replaced that guy, and I learned very early on, and going to Bank of Boston that it's not what you measure or how you measure it, but what you actually do and get done that counts.  Hard work is great, and it's often interesting, but it is not the measure of success, and so it was much more important for me to have the marketing person down the hall, or the operations person next door, or the person who manages airports, or the CEO three doors down feel good about what I'm doing, never mind the measurement, and have it add value, never mind the measurement because they always figure out a way to work with you and help you, and you help them, if what you're doing adds value, no matter what it says on paper.  But if it says great things on paper but they don't see added value, then typically it's time for somebody to move on.  And I found that to be true myself, and I think that's really valuable.  Well done is much better than well said.  So that's one example.
Story_ID: 217923
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Man, I have such a long list of hopes and concerns for the African American community that are around, you know, religion and economic and cultural issues, and I don't want us to lose our culture, I don't want us to lose our religion.  I don't--I want us to be stronger economically, but my biggest hopes are around opportunity.  I am an independent politically, and I became an independent because when I lived in Massachusetts, I was a Democrat, and a person that was running for office stopped campaigning in the black community, and he stopped campaigning in the black community because when he was asked on the news, he said, "Because--why, why should I campaign there, because I--they have to vote for me anyway.  What are they gonna do, vote Republican?  They have to vote for me.  This is a close election, there's a bunch of undecideds; I'm going after those people."  And the next day I went out and changed and register--you have to register--at least then, in Massachusetts, you have to register.  Couldn't quite become a Republican, so I registered as an independent; I figured I'm gonna vote who's best, no matter what their affiliation.  And so I want us to have opportunity, which centers around choices, and we need to have all kinds of choices--political is one of 'em, religious is another, economic is another.  Political for instance, it doesn't make sense for everybody in the African American community to be a Democrat because when Republicans get in, where are you?  Why should we be so monolithic in thought that we can't be Republicans; sure, we are.  My mother [Charity Hunt] is a Democrat but she's very conservative--incredibly conservative if you look at issues.  So we need to be opportunistic and sit on both sides of political house.  We need to be opportunistic and go into a lotta different categories of career--economic, baseline, research--encouraging people to go into technology, not just entertainment and playin' ball and things that require--that don't require a level of technological understanding and aptitude--medicine--that the rest of the world seems to be able to capture--some of which we actually invented as a people.  So, if you look at the number of inventors that are African Americans, and the things they invented, where is that legacy?  So I don't want us to lose that.  But most of all, opportunity.  The cumulative effect of all those things has a synergy to it that really can't be manifest or made known by just looking at the parts; it's the collective piece of what that community represents that I don't want us to lose, and that I'm very proud of.
Story_ID: 217924
Speaker 1: When you look back on your career and what you've done--and you're still young at this, and you've achieved a lot (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Forty-five; that's pretty old.
Speaker 1: But is there anything that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm not sure there--there's anything that I would do differently.  My mother [Charity Hunt] used to always say, and it's true--she still says, "Youth is wasted on the young."  If I knew then what I know now, I'd be more diligent about a lotta things, but I'm not sure there's anything that I would do differently.  There a couple'a situations that always had different outcomes--one misunderstanding with a person that thought that I jilted him and I didn't, and he was tryin' to get into grad school, and I'd like for him to know the truth and understand the truth.  And there's a couple'a situations with those people that are close to me that I've said things or done things that I wish I hadn't said or done, but categorically, there isn't much that I would give up, or much that I would change.  I'm proud of my life, I'm proud of my family, I'm proud of my heritage.  I don't believe in luck; circumstances occur because of situations that you're in and how you deal with those situations.  So I don't think there's much that I would change.
Story_ID: 217925
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of where you go in the future, do you--what's the ceiling look like for you right now?  I mean what's next?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know where I go in the future; I'm pretty happy where I am, but I've always been happy where I was, and I believe that God opens doors for you and gives you opportunities to go through them--sometimes pushes you through them, but I'm not sure.  I mean I feel like I can do anything; I mean I could run for an office if I wanted to, I think, because I have integrity, I'm honest, and people would see that.  I could become a CEO of a company, I could become CEO of this company [American Airlines, Fort Worth, Texas].  I, I mean I can do anything, but I'm happy with my life.  I, I earn a very good living, I'm blessed in a lotta ways, I live in a good community, I have good friends, I have a great family, so I'm, I'm, I'm blessed.  I'm not overly-aggressive in seeking new things; I believe good things will come to you if you just do what you're supposed to do.
Story_ID: 217926
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look over your career, what would you consider at this point, though young, to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy; that probably would depend upon who you ask, but I think if you look at my life, my legacy is a legacy of achievement.  My legacy is a legacy of accomplishment and actually getting things done.  I do things, I complete things, I make things happen; I don't walk away with things half-done or incomplete.  I'm a person of action and I think my legacy will reflect that.  I don't wanna say that my legacy will be my children because I don't want them to have any pressure to be anything other than who they want to be and what they should be, but like Edwin [sic. Richard] Strelecky taught me [at Perkiomen School, Pennsburg, Pennsylvania], if there's a hole in the world where you used to be--in this case in my church, in my home, my professional life--that's legacy enough.  If somebody misses me for a brief period of time, that's legacy enough for me.
Story_ID: 217927
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Charity Hunt] and father [Nathaniel Ford] think of your success?  I mean not everybody in the family becomes a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother and father think of my success--well, it depends on what part of my career.  I remember when I was changing jobs for the first time; my mother said, "Don't you change jobs.  Those people gave you that job and you just--they gave you that job and you're gon' go and leave--don't do anything stupid, don't you go changin' jobs."  And, you know, she got over that (laughter).  But she reminded me that there is risk in the world.  And then my brothers reminded me that there is no progress without taking risk.  And as Frederick Douglass says, and I live by, "Where [sic. If] there is no struggle, there is no progress."  And so I, I, I think that they were proud of me.  I know my father--before he died, I went to see him and, unfortunately, he was in an assisted care living place, and he couldn't talk at the time, and I told him that I was taking my family to Japan for vacation, and all the things we were gonna do and all the things that we were going to see, and I had been to Japan many times and told 'em what the world looked like there and what it felt like there, and what we were going to eat and what my kids were doin' and how strong they were and important they were and how smart they were and how that was his legacy, and that's part of who he was.  And he couldn't talk, but he could cry, and a tear came down his face and he said, "I know"--it's, it's tough to understand him but he said he was proud, and I told him that he should be proud because this was real achievement, this was real work that was done, this was real love that started with him.  And that was a special moment to me because I think he is proud; I know my mother's proud.  My mother's a proud woman anyway and, you know, she raised three kids that all did wonderful things and, and most of that time she did it alone, and I know that she's--I know that she's proud of who we've become and who she is, and she's proud of my family, and she loves us to death.  So her legacy is certainly of love.  There's nobody that could love anyone more than Charity Hunt.
Story_ID: 217928
Speaker 1: Now, this last question is similar to legacy but a little different, and you probably never think about this, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  I would like to be remembered as a man of action, I would like to be remembered as a man of humor, I would certainly like to be remembered as a man of God, and those things are not--they, they are contiguous, and they are connected, and they all go together, and I know I'll be remembered as a man that loves my family, and the thread through all of those things is love--humor comes from love, love comes from God--love I have for my family.  And the action comes from the faith that I have of things that I can do, and that I've been able to do and, you know, it's not cockiness or it's not over-confidence or conceit or narcissism, but confidence is required for achievement; it is prerequisite to achievement, and that confidence comes from faith, and faith without works is dead.  And the action that I have, and the actions that I've completed are representative of that faith, the faith that I've had in myself and the faith that I think God has allowed me to have in myself and other people and, you know, I know I haven't done this alone; all those people that I mentioned along the way are the people that I owe too, but they had faith in me and I'm proud of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much, sir.
