Story_ID: 6930
Speaker 1: First of all we want (inaudible), my name is Julieanna Richardson and Matthew Hickey is the videographer and I'd like to have you state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Kim Fields, K-I-M F-I-E-L-D-S.
Speaker 1: Okay and can you give your birth date?
Speaker 2: Five-twelve '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: November 21st, 2002.
Speaker 1: And the location--where (inaudible)?
Speaker 2: The HistoryMakers, Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 6931
Speaker 1: And I want to ask what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Turkey Lasagna.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: St. Lucia [Caribbean Islands]
Speaker 1: Oh really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Peace and blessings.
Story_ID: 6932
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about your family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Why don't we start out up there and your mother, can you tell us her name and about what you know about her background and her growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother's current name is Chip Fields Hurd; she remarried in '94 [1994] I believe. Her birth name, I think, Laverne Bernard, if I'm not mistaken. Her mom's name is Hortense, I don't know my grandmother's last name. But my grandmother, Hortense, had thirteen sisters, or twelve sisters because she was the thirteenth.  And I think they had one brother out of the whole lot of them and they were from the Baltimore, Virginia area. And my mom grew up, her early childhood, in that environment and then they had to move to New York [New York] because her mom wanted her up there.  And so they moved to New York and she was not a happy camper about it because she loved being in Virginia and just how--it was more of a country life instead of the city life of New York. So at first she really didn't like moving to New York.  And she went to Performing Arts High School [High School of the Performing Arts, New York].  She got pregnant with me so I kind of went to Performing Arts High School (laughs) as well. She and my father divorced, I don't recall when they got married because I wasn't there, but they divorced when I was about four or five, something like that.  My mother's background, she really enjoyed music and played the piano and acting and singing.  And so she started taking acting lessons when she got to New York.  And once I started getting a little bit older she couldn't afford a babysitter and I didn't really like staying with my grandmother and so she would take me to the acting classes with her.  And there were other people there who couldn't afford babysitters as well and so to entertain ourselves us kids we'd imitate what we saw our parents doing.  And so they looked at that and they thought, "Hey, we might have something there."  So they started an acting school for the kids as well.
Story_ID: 6933
Speaker 1: Did she [Chip Fields, Kim Fields's mother] share any other stories about growing up or even her time, you know, I mean her, maybe, first theatrical experience or--
Speaker 2: I don't know what her first, like, how she got introduced to music and theater and things of that nature.  I know she loved [actress] Judy Garland, as did I as a child.  I know that her uncle, Uncle Louis, Daddy Louis she used to call him, worked on the trains as a chef.  And he was even, I think I recall a picture that may have been a postcard from the rail line with him with his knives and, you know, him carving up, like, prime rib or something.  But I don't know how she got introduced to it. My first memory of her in theater though is when she did [play] 'Hello Dolly' with [actress] Pearl Bailey and that was my experience that sealed it for me. that, "Oh, god, this is what I want to do."  And it didn't come from this place of "I want to perform," you know, I wasn't one of those kids who every time company came over I had to get the attention and sing and, you know, dance or tell jokes.  I wasn't that kid at all but there was something when I saw what was going on behinds the scenes and however a kid processes work and work ethic, that's what was really fun to me, was what they were doing to have that relationship with the audience and with one another and that kind of stuff, you know, and the backstage of it.  So, again, I'm using words that I know as an adult, but however, as a child, that computed, that's the part of it that really was just fascinating to me.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year that was?  (Inaudible) do you know?  And how old you were?
Speaker 2: Early '70s [1970s], I was maybe five, six years old, something like that.
Speaker 1: And do you remember her excitement about getting the role or being in the (inaudible)?
Speaker 2: I have, like, very vague memories of it.  I recall us always being excited, and even still to this day, any time we booked a job. And so I recall her excitement at being in the different cities and she used to send me these wonderful boxes of clothes from different cities.  Not to spoil me but because she was at a place where she was making money and could do so and to take care of her child because we were very poor, you know, staying at grandma's or at one point we lived in the basement of a church.  And there's this awful memory that--I don't have the memory, I have the memory of her telling me of this memory.  It was a Christmas and I would stay with my aunt and uncle.  She has one sister--she had two sisters, one of them died of a drug overdose before I was born.  But her other sister, my aunt Pat, would always take care of me when mom or grandma couldn't.  So Christmas-time was coming and mom said she just felt so awful because she didn't have any money to buy me anything and she said she fell down in the snow in New York [New York] on her knees and just cried and cried and cried because she couldn't get me anything.  And to this day that's such a hard thing for me to fathom but I understand it and I understand what it feels like not to have.  Of course, when you're a child you don't know that you don't have, you know, and the people around you are really trying to make the best of it.  And so when mom was working and traveling in these different cities and getting press clippings because she was always mentioned as, you know, a great supporting actress in the role.  I remember that excitement as opposed to the specific of when she booked the job.
Story_ID: 6934
Speaker 1: Now I want to ask, I think you've sort of answered, did you know much about your father at all?  Or (inaudible)?
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: His name is Tony, Anthony, and because they divorced when I was so young, I don't really have memories and I don't even have--  I don't have negative memories, you know, my mother [Chip Fields]  never said anything negative about him.  No one in my family that I was still with never said anything bad.  A couple of times I would go and spend summers with him and his family.  And I never had feelings of--that he didn't love me or that he left us to have another family or a better family or, you know, I didn't have those kind of issues.  I just didn't, it didn't register to me that way.  And just growing up, the times that we would communicate, it really wasn't like my father it was just like a friend, you know, like a buddy kind of a thing.  When I had gotten married [1995, to Johnathon Franklin Freeman] it was nice to be able to have my literal father, you know, walk me down the aisle.  But it didn't really compute, you know, and he's got, you know, his wife and his children and so, you know, we know one another and occasionally, maybe once every few years, literally, be able to see one another.  One of my stepsisters, she and I, you know, keep in touch--just, you know, updates on how they're doing and all that.  But I'm not very close to them.  Most of it just coming because of location, you know, they were on the East Coast we were on the West Coast, and then scheduling, you know.  Other than that I do have a couple of memories when I was very young of cousins like his sister, my Aunt Eleanor.  His sister's sons, they were my cousins.  Even his wife's nephew, Walter, I remember, you know, I was watching 'S.W.A.T.' [television program] when we were kids. So I have a couple of childhood memories with them.
Story_ID: 6935
Speaker 1: Do you remember your earliest memory, of growing up?
Speaker 2: I remember my grandmother's apartment, 654 St. Nicholas [Ave.] in Harlem [New York] across from St. Nicholas Park.  And I remember living there and I remember her 'resting her eyes' is what she said, I knew she was asleep, but when I would try to change the channel, because she was watching her soap operas and I wanted to watch the 'Mickey Mouse Club' [television program], and she would fuss at me.
Speaker 1: And I was like, "But you're asleep! You're not even watching it!"  "I'm not asleep, I'm resting my eyes."  I remember the layout of that apartment and the building vividly.  I freaked out my mother and my aunt one day by describing in vivid detail, I mean, from the black and white tile on the floor, how many steps you had to walk up to get there, where the apartment was in relation to the rest of  them, the long hallway and where the rooms were and everything. I remember the kitchen and my grandmother would make, what do you call it, candied yams, from the can, and I remember when they would be in the saucepan and me picking out, I couldn't even wait until they were cooked.  I mean, they were already cooked but, you know, I couldn't wait until they were prepared her way.  She hadn't even turned the stove on good before I was, you know, picking.  Quirky things, you know, I remember a Tom Collins drink mixer being in the fridge and me eating it with raw bacon--what is that?  Being able to see outside the window and to see the park.  I really remember my mother putting on makeup; I don't know where she was going and she wasn't dressed up or anything like that but she was putting on her mascara and I just remember sitting there just looking at her.  And she used to rock back and forth as she was putting on her makeup and I find that I do that.  Just little stuff like that.  I remember my first karate outfit, my little gi.  Definitely playing, lots of memories playing, playing in St. Nicholas Park, whether it was snow, wintertime or summertime.  And for sleds or sleighs we would just take a cardboard box and flatten it out and sit on it and go racing down the hill.  Swings, you know, standing on the metal seat and standing up and pumping and then jumping off and catching the fence.  But I missed the fence one time.  So those are my earliest memories.  And [actress] Miss Pearl Bailey giving me cookies from the stage one night. That was interesting.  Oh, and throwing up at Watergate [Hotel, Washington, D.C.], mustn't forget that.  I went to visit mom.  I went to visit my mom while she was out on tour with [play] 'Hello Dolly' and we were in D.C. and she brought me to Watergate and, you know, was explaining what Watergate was and I threw up from something I ate, I guess.  And she was like, "Oh, isn't that interesting."  So those are my earliest memories.
Story_ID: 6936
Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: The sounds of Harlem [New York], a lot of children laughing and playing.  The sound of the fire hydrant being opened up and the water shooting into the street and us playing in the water because it was so hot but, of course, there were no swimming pools.  The sound of the splashing when they had this gigantic swimming pool that they had in the middle of the street and you climbed up this ladder to get to it and it was just--it seemed like it was about twenty feet, thirty feet high and then when you finally got up there, there were just kids everywhere in this big 'ole swimming pool.  Car horns, you know, taxi horns, that's about it.  Really no smells.
Story_ID: 6937
Speaker 1: That was nice. Were you living with your grandmother off and on or--?
Speaker 2: We lived with my grandmother, I think, from the time I was born, if I'm not mistaken.  And then when my mom [Chip Fields] really got into acting and going to acting classes, I think that's when we moved.  I know that that's why they got divorced because mom wanted one life and he [Anthony] wanted another life and, you know, never the two shall meet [laughs].  And then at one point mom just really didn't want to live with her mother any more and so that's when we moved into, at first the basement of the church and then we moved into 480 St. Nicholas [Ave., New York, New York].  Which from St. Nicholas Park you can see it and I think years later I think they named it the Lionel Hampton Towers, if I'm not mistaken.  So we lived there for a while, I don't think it was very long.  And one day I went to school and when I came back home mom said--  Everything was, like, packed up, it looked totally different than when I left to go to school, and she had just said, "You know, we're going to go to California."  She had been to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], doing [play] 'Hello Dolly' and she realized and most of her friends and people in the industry had told her, "If you want to do movies and TV and commercials and stuff like that, you really have to be in L.A."  So we went to L.A.
Story_ID: 6938
Speaker 1: Now, you said that you became interested, you know, that your mother [Chip Fields] and her friends, you know, started--was it a children's theater?
Speaker 2: It was a children's acting school and it wasn't mom and the people that were the students, it was the people that ran the adult school that they ended up starting the children's one.
Speaker 1: Do you think, your mother, do you think she recognized from the beginning your talent?
Speaker 2: I don't know because it's not anything that we ever discussed then or even now about back then.  I think that the people who ran the school recognized the talent and the potential that we all had collectively and a way to cultivate that.  [Actress] Danielle Spencer, who played Dee on [television program] 'What's Happening,' she actually was in that same little bunch.  Because her father was, god he was a brilliant actor named Tim Pelt, who tragically died in a car accident when she had that very bad car accident back in the late '70s [1970s].  So anyway, there were other kids that were there.  But I don't know specifically that mom saw me, you know, because she was also doing her thing. I think she was just grateful that somebody was helping to occupy our time.  So I don't know when it ever registered for her.
Speaker 1: And she sings and acts? Does she sing?
Speaker 2: She doesn't sing; she writes music and she writes musicals and musical theater. So she'll sing in order to teach somebody else a song but she's not a singer.  She'll be the first to tell you, "I'm not a singer."  And she plays piano by ear, can't read a lick of music.
Story_ID: 6939
Speaker 1: And in her [Chip Fields] side of the family besides your uncle, there wasn't really any artistic leanings?  Or was there?  I mean, do you even know how she ended up going to New York School of Performing Arts [New York, New York]?  Because--
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  What time is it?  I could call her and ask her because I don't know.  I don't know if she was one of those young people when she moved to New York that TV and movies were a way to escape a place that she didn't really want to be in and that's how the connection started.  Because even with her uncle, he wasn't in theater or anything like that, I mean, he was a chef on a train line. So I don't--I can't believe I didn't remember this--my grandmother, her mother, was a ballroom dancer.  Oh, coffee break (laughs).  But yeah, my grandmother was a beautiful ballroom dancer and was friends with [musician] Billy Eckstine and, you know, the whole Harlem [New York] scene and that kind of thing.  I don't know if that was the connection because I know for a long time my mother and my grandmother did not get along at all.  So in terms of the genealogy, if that's where it was in terms of it being in the genes, my mother's mother was very much into the arts as a dancer.  But in terms of cultivating it, I don't know.  Like I said, I don't know if she was one of the kids that entertainment was her way out kind of a thing.
Story_ID: 6940
Speaker 1: Did your grandmother influence you much?
Speaker 2: No [laughs].
Speaker 1: Okay-- (inaudible) (laughs)
Speaker 2: Because by the time I got on the scene my memories of grandmother was she was kind of old and crotchety quite honestly.  I'm sure she loved me but I think she was really undone with the idea that her daughter had had a child at eighteen and got married so young and then divorced, you know, that kind of stuff.  So I think that--and not that I ever felt she took that out on me--but also she was just an older woman and I don't think that she was really--I don't recall having, like, that grandma type of rapport with her.  My father's mother, Arabella is her first name, don't know much other than that, I spent very little time with as well.  I have a memory at her apartment. I think she lived in the Bronx [New York, New York.]; I'm not sure.  And she used to sit at her window and just watch everybody, you know, in everybody's business.  And she used to let me eat as much bread and butter as I wanted to. I could shoot her for it now.  But she just--  Bread and butter, I love bread and butter.  And she would sit there with her Miller Lite [beer] in a, I think they had the glass bottles then, and she would just sit there watching and sipping on her Miller Lite and one day she let me take a swig, sitting in the window.  I remember that.  And then right down the street there was a little corner store, a little bodega there, and one of the little guys that worked there, I had the biggest crush on him.  So those are the grandmother memories.  I didn't know any of my grandfathers.  I should say any of either of my grandfathers.
Story_ID: 6941
Speaker 1: You know, it's talked about, your debut on 'Sesame Street,' [children's television program] was there something you did before 'Sesame Street'?
Speaker 2: No.  And I have to say that my debut on 'Sesame Street' only existed in my mind, apparently (laughs).  Because when I was doing an interview when I was about, I don't know, eight or nine years old, mom [Chip Fields] was sitting in the restaurant where they were doing the interview with me, it was an interview for TV Guide [periodical], I will never forget this.  And I'm just sitting there and this is my first interview and I'm in TV Guide, you know, and the woman asked me about 'Sesame Street' and I'm like, "Oh yes!"  And I was counting and mom just says, "Baby, I don't know where you got this from but I have to stop it now. Honey, you were never on 'Sesame Street."  (Laughs)  And I just looked at her and I, "What do you mean?"  She's like, "I don't know where that came from but you were never on 'Sesame Street."  So apparently that was in the little mind of Kim and a fantastic voyage it was because that's something--  Apparently, if you go on the Internet now and look up my credits it says 'Sesame Street.'  So I made a believer out of you all [laughs].
Speaker 1: It does. It has 'Sesame Street' (inaudible) (laughs).
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. I could have sworn I was there but I guess not. 'Sesame Street' is a bad memory show because it'll make a kid think she was on it even when she wasn't.
Speaker 1: That's cute.
Speaker 2: So my first gig, and I know this to be true, was the Mrs. Butterworth's syrup commercial. That was my first gig.
Story_ID: 6942
Speaker 1: Were you in California at the time [when Kim Fields got the Mrs. Butterworth's commercial job] or were you still in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: We had just gotten to California that summer and as soon as we got to L.A [Los Angeles, California]. we lived with a couple of mom's [Chip Fields's] friends; Larry Jacobs, who you guys know as [actor] Lawrence Hilton-Jacobs who was on 'Welcome Back Kotter' [television program].  He was out there and had just started doing 'Welcome Back Kotter' and so he had, you know, this great apartment in West Hollywood [California], or Hollywood [California] or something.  And he and mom had been very dear friends; he was like a big brother to her back in New York at the acting school.  And so we were able to stay with him for a short spell.  A hotel in L.A. we stayed at for a little bit and finally got our own place.  Because, you know, everybody helps you out and especially because she had a kid with her.  So the people from New York helped and gave her some money to get out there and people that she knew from the 'Hello Dolly' [play] tour and, you know, folks that were in L.A.  So there were a lot of people, not to mention, first and foremost the Lord.  Just, my mother used to say, "God watches over fools and babies."  We never knew which ones we were, sometimes the fools, sometimes the babies, but he always was watching over us, you know.  But, Mrs. Butterworth [syrup] was the first commercial.
Speaker 1: You were about six at the time, right?
Speaker 2: I had just turned seven.
Speaker 1: Seven, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I went on the audition. When we got to L.A., of course, we didn't have any money and so we were taking the bus everywhere and bumming rides with our friends, mom's friends.  And I had just gotten an agent and she was the top children's agent in Los Angeles.  Mom, you know, asked around and found out she was the best for kids and had me go and meet with them and audition for them.  And so they sent me out on this commercial audition and we had to take the bus, it seemed like it took forever to get there, and we took the bus there.  And when we got there, there were all of these little girls.  All these little girls, and I didn't have any teeth in the front, you know, and I just felt like, "Oh my God, what am I doing here?"  You know?  And [actress/singer] Janet Jackson was there and I just really thought, "Oh God, take me home now. Get me out--."  I mean, I just, if I had broken out in hives and a cold sweat, I mean, I was just that--  When I saw her, because at the time, you know, the late '70's [1970's] the Jacksons [family singing group] had those summer specials, and so she was really famous from them and doing the [actress] Mae West bit with Randy [Jackson] and all this stuff.  And I just thought, "She's going to get it; she's fricking Janet Jackson, mom. Let's go. Why are you making this so hard?"  And, honey, my mother took me in the bathroom and she said, "Let me tell you something, don't you let anyone or anything intimidate you.  You go in there and you just do your best."  All right. And I went in there and I did my best.  And we went home and I'm still thinking, "All right. Yeah, fine, I did my best but she's still Janet Jackson."  So, you know.  And by the time we'd gotten home the agents and the casting directors had called and said that there was something wrong with either the tape or something that happened and I had to come back.  Well at that point the buses had stopped running so mom, again god watching over us, hitch-hiked and this guy, I think he was in a Porsche [automobile] or something, he stopped, gave us a ride to this audition, and I got the job.  And the interesting thing about that is even now in my thirties and from that seven year-old moment up through to my thirties, every time I've gone into a meeting or a producer session or an audition, or anything that puts me in that same kind of mode where I feel somewhat intimidated or a little anxious or anything like that, now I take myself into the bathroom and I have that same talk with myself, "Don't be intimidated, do your best."  You know, and that has just always stuck with me, you know, whenever, just whenever. It's almost like a habit now when I go into an audition, even if I'm fine and I'm feeling confident, I'll still just go into the bathroom, just because.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful. Now did your mother ever, did you think anyone ever told her that?
Speaker 2: I don't know where she got it from.  You know, if she was making it up as she went, it really was--she did a good thing, you know.  She'll swear up and down that because she was a kid when she had me and, as she was raising me, there was so much about parenting and motherhood she was clueless about.  I mean, she of course knew love.  And that and, you know, how to discipline me, but she still in so many ways, she thinks was just clueless as to raising a child and she at least smartly leaned on people who were around her from her sister and her husband, other friends, just people that helped raise me.  You know, the whole "the village to raise a child" mentality.  And I think even to this day, honestly, she's almost amazed that I credit her so much for--
Story_ID: 6943
Speaker 1: I was just saying that I'm always amazed, as far as my mom [Chip Fields] is concerned, that she doesn't--.  I'm amazed at how amazed she is at the credit that I give her for the job that she did as my mother. She's always surprised, from what she tells me, because number one she feels like she didn't know what she was doing.  You know, because she was a child herself.  And she didn't have the examples around her, you know, and had to depend on so many people to assist in the raising of me. But I guess she just never really understood the impact that I got from her; just first and foremost, of just how much she loved me.  And I never felt that I missed out on anything.  I never felt that I missed out on my childhood, you know, even though I was a child that was working.  I never feel that I missed out on being disciplined and being raised properly because I was on TV or I was a child star.  I never felt that I missed out on the parenting, which to this day if you talk to my mother, she'll always be surprised by that because I don't think she really has registered and digested and accepted that she really did mother me.  You know, and that--.  Let her tell it, she feels she's missed these chunks out of my life.  And I'm like, "Lady, are you kidding me? You know, just because you were working doesn't mean that you missed out on my life and my career, just because Aunt Pat traveled with me so much and was on the set with me so much."  And Aunt Pat and I are very close but not for one second do I feel like I missed my mother, you know, and having that relationship.  Yes, I'm sure that there are things that I missed not having a father, those things didn't register until I was in my twenties, you know what I mean?  As a young woman, the things that are needs, that you go, "Oh okay, that's a need because I was raised without my father."  And most women who were raised without their father have very specific issues and needs because that's a missing element for them.  But during my childhood and my growing up and the formative years, I didn't feel that way. I had a bit of a father figure in my Aunt Pat's husband, Uncle Lou, because I spent so much time with them.  They moved to [Los Angeles] California shortly after we did because mom was working.  She started getting commercials and soap opera work.  So I was working so Aunt Pat and her husband moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, Calif.] And so I would spend a lot of time with them.  So there was a male figure there but I don't feel like I've missed anything.  And the areas where it's apparent or it had become apparent to me, the issues and the needs and things like that, I didn't use as crutches.  You know, I tried to understand them as soon as possible and tried to work through them. I was talking to [musician] LL Cool J once, I was actually interviewing him, and he said something so interesting because we were talking about the fact that he's got, you know, children and daughters and he says, "You know, there's just so many women who grew up without their fathers."  And he said, "But after a while, especially when you get older--."  He's like, "Ladies, you've got to stop using that and looking for your dad in your mate and looking for your dad or a daddy in the men that you're dating."  Or that kind of thing.  And that's so true and it was so, so just, almost mind-blowing quite honestly, to hear that come from another man, you know.  And that was one of the times when I realized, "Yeah, that totally makes sense."  You know, so anyway--.
Story_ID: 6944
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, Kim, if we take you back to when you first went to L.A. [Los Angeles, California, 1976] because you seeing it from a child's eye in many ways, and your experience is really Harlem, New York.  So how was that whole thing because, I mean, totally different looks--
Speaker 2: Oh, very different look.  And I don't recall when I was living in Harlem and growing up in New York I don't recall having a point of reference of L.A.  I hadn't seen it like in movies or TV shows and things like that so I really didn't know what to expect and I hadn't heard much about it because I was only, you know, six, seven years old.  It was very big to me, it had this bigness to it.  In terms of big meaning wide, I guess, because, you know, in New York you've got the tall buildings and everything is very close together. And so in L.A. it's just more open.  And back in the late '70s [1970s], mid-'70's [1970s], it certainly was not as crowded as L.A. is right now.  And so the trees were really something to me because, you know, I mean, yes we had St. Nicholas Park [Harlem, New York] and the trees are beautiful there in the parks, but just down regular streets you don't really see trees like that.  And so the trees were really interesting to me and they were so tall to me.  And that it was sunny all the time.  It was sunny all the time. (Laughs)  When mom [Chip Fields] started making money in L.A., she was doing the soap opera called 'Days of Our Lives,' and then I started working regularly with a lot of commercials and then doing a series called 'Baby, I'm Back' and so we rented this house, I think we rented it, in Malibu [California] and that was just, you know, we had arrived, you know.  We, I mean, we were on the water and right there where you could just go down these steps and boom, I'm in the ocean, you know, and I loved that.  I was in the water every single day; I just loved it.  So there were a lot of moments in L.A. of us first getting there, you know, the mountains were just--  I'd never really seen that before. It had a real prettiness to it.  As I think back now, color seemed--.  Almost the way like when Dorothy lands in Oz [motion picture The Wizard of Oz] and when that door opens and now you're in color, it was kind of like that to me now that I think about that.  You know, because New York, the buildings are so drab and, you know, you've got trees but a lot of rock, you know, and things like that.  And so out there just color just seemed to be, you know, flowers and things like that.  So I think those are my earliest perspectives of it.
Story_ID: 6945
Speaker 1: Now how long did she [Chip Fields, mother] work for 'Days of Our Lives' [television program]?  (Inaudible)
Speaker 2: I want to say, I guess, like two years [1977-1978] or something like that.  She was, because she was one of those characters where people knew her and to this day, sure enough 'Days' fans, know for a fact, it's like, [actor] Arsenio Hall fell in love with my mother long before he met us because when he was in college he used to watch on 'Days of Our Lives' and had the biggest crush on her (laughs).  So there are people who are die-hard TV people or soap opera fans who know that that's who she is and she was Toni  somebody [played the role of Toni Johnson] on there.  And so she was there for a minute.  She did some commercials too.  And then, again, for the die-hard TV fans she did the TV series 'Spiderman' [1977-1978].  I think it lasted for about a season or two.  And she was the secretary [Rita] at the newspaper where Peter Parker worked.
Speaker 1: The soap opera series, they pay pretty well, right?  (Inaudible)
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  It's definitely, when you're doing soap operas, or daytime dramas as I think they're called, if you're a regular on there and you're a character that the fans are really into, it definitely is a steady paycheck because you're working, usually, five days a week and you can do, you know, contract for a year or two years, six months, whatever.  So that was very good and then I had started doing [television program] 'Baby, I'm Back,' which was a series, you know, so we were doing very well.
Story_ID: 6946
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember seeing yourself on the [Mrs.] Butterworth commercial?  Do you remember it?  I mean, because children see thing in a different ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't know that I remember me as a child seeing it on TV.  Like, I don't remember, oddly enough, I don't think I remember the first time I saw myself on television.  For whatever reason I don't have a clear--, any real memory of that. Even from doing [television program] 'Baby, I'm Back,' you know, I don't recall the excitement.  You know the way, like, when Latifah talks about, when [actress, musician] Queen Latifah the first time she heard herself on the radio, you know, and we've seen it in every movie about people who are singers and the first time, you know, from the guy who did [the song] 'La Bamba'--.
Speaker 1: (Off-camera voice)- About Ritchie Valens?
Speaker 2: Yes. Ritchie Valens, you know, the movie 'La Bamba', you saw the first time he heard 'Oh Donna' [Donna] on the radio. [Music group] The Temptations movie, you saw the first time they ever heard themselves.  You know, so, anybody affiliated with [record label] Motown and the first time they hear their single on the radio and it's that instant moment of cranking it and screaming in your car or your house and shouting out the windows for everybody to do this, that, and the other.  And I don't have that as a memory of the first time seeing myself on TV.  I have more memories of the excitement of being on the phone, of mom [Chip Fields] being on the phone saying, "She got it!  Baby, you got it!"  And us screaming and jumping up and down. I have that (laughing) more so than actually seeing the final product, which is me on that box.  Wow, does that mean something?  You know, but I think the only time that I ever wanted to be on TV, strangely enough, I was on TV.  Here it is. I used to watch [television program] 'The Mickey Mouse Club.'  I watched the first one, the black and white one with Annette and the whole gang, back in New York [New York].  That's what I used to try to sneak on everyday and my grandmother would say, [in an old woman's voice] "I'm watching my soaps."  But when we moved to California that's when they had started 'The New Mickey Mouse Club' in the late '70s [1970s]. And I wanted to be on that so bad but I was already on TV doing commercials and doing 'Baby, I'm Back.'  I don't know if it's the child's brain or whatever, but it didn't really compute to me, "Blockhead, you're on TV."  But what they were doing at Disneyland  [theme park, Anaheim, Calif.] and singing and dancing and, you know, and being all those characters and just being at Disneyland. For some reason that computed more about, "Wow, I sure would like to do that."
Story_ID: 6947
Speaker 1: Where were you going to school?
Speaker 2: When I was in New York [New York] I have early memories of being at P.S. 92 [Mary Mcleod Bethune School, New York] and I had a teacher, Miss Keys (ph.).  There were two teachers in our classroom, I can't remember the other teacher but I remember Miss Keyes.  And I remember this awful little kid named Walter.  And Walter, I don't know, for whatever reason, I don't know if he had a Napoleon complex or what, but he was a little 'ole guy.  I mean, we were all little; we were, you know, first grade, kindergarten, first grade.  But he was just--  And he had this pudgy kind of a nose and he would always pick on me and pick on me and I used to tell him, "Stop it! Leave me alone! I'm going to beat you up!"  I loved to fight when I was a kid, I don't know why I loved to threaten people with, "I'm going to beat you up."  And I remember one of my friends from the acting school who either went to that school or went nearby, he, you know, made sure Walter didn't bother me any more.  But when we moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, Calif.] I started school out there at West Hollywood Elementary School and then when I started working, you know, on commercials you're just working for a day or two and so you have a tutor on the set for the time that your working.  Once you start doing a series then you have a tutor for that whole series and you're out of school for that whole stretch.  And I don't recall it seeming foreign to me. It's just like, "Okay, this is what happens, okay" and doing that.  When I started doing [television program] 'Facts of Life' though, I wanted to know what it was like to change classes. That was a big deal to me in junior high. When you started junior high and you were no longer in one classroom for all of the school day, but you were changing classes, that was so grown up to me.  And so I went to junior high for, like, two days and then it was time to go back to 'Facts of Life.'  I know when I got to high school I decided that I wanted to interact with, you know, kids that were my own age.  The rest of the 'Facts of Life' girls had already graduated so I was pretty much the only one in with the tutor, except for when we added [actor] MacKenzie Astin to the show. And so he was there, on and off.  And when I got to high school I went the middle of my junior year and all of my senior year I would do regular high school in the morning and then go to work in the afternoons.  And I loved it.  I loved being in high school and I got so involved in student government and working in the office and, you know, being one of the biggest supporters of all of the sports.  I was the baseball team manager, I mean, I just got really involved in everything.  And I was treated like a regular person because that's how I saw myself, that's how I viewed myself, you know.  I wasn't going to school in a limo and, you know, bodyguards and stuff like that.  My first car was, you know, the family Honda; the beat up family Honda that had a radio missing.  And my younger sister [Alexis] had just been born and so I stole her Fisher Price little, you know, tape player and put it in the car.  So I had this awful bright yellow tape player, it didn't record anything, you could only play tapes. And Sade's first album had just come out and so I had to buy the tape, because that's all I had, and put the tape in that little box and that's how I was rolling to school everyday.  Star of a hit TV show [laughs] that had been on for, what, seven years or something, so, mom [Chip Fields] kept it real, kept me humble.
Story_ID: 6948
Speaker 1: That's nice. So why don't we go back to [television program] 'Baby, I'm Back'.  I mean, you were, let's see, eight?  When you (inaudible).
Speaker 2: I was eight
Speaker 1: Okay, eight.  And can you talk about what the storyline was?  Do you remember?  Are you more conscious that you remember the audition or--
Speaker 2: I don't think that I had an audition for 'Baby, I'm Back'. From what I remember being told was after I had done the Mrs. Butterworth commercial, the woman [Lila Garrett] who was the producer of 'Baby, I'm Back' saw the commercial and said, "That's who we want for 'Baby, I'm Back' to play the daughter for Demond Wilson and Denise Nicholas."  So I don't recall there being an audition.  I did recall being on the set one day and just continuing to go there.  And I remember, you know, that everybody was very nice to me.  And being on the set and being on a studio lot and being on a studio lot where they filmed TV shows like 'Isis' and 'Shazam!' and they had this whole ghost town back lot and being able to ride my bike back there and things like that.  That kind of stuff I remember 'cause it was just so much fun to be there.  I had a big dressing room where I tried to write, at age eight, a script for 'Scooby Doo' cartoons (laughs).  And I remember the show 'White Shadow' filmed on one of the sound stages nearby because I remember seeing those guys and they were just, like, so tall because I was such a little kid.  The storyline I remember and I remember being on the set and I remember filming, you know, taping the episodes.  And I do remember seeing myself on TV during that show because I was so critical of myself and what was I doing and awful habits that I had where sometimes I would look in the camera and I would steal little looks into the camera and my mother [Chip Fields] was like, "You have got to stop doing that!" (Laughs)  And then I had this awful habit, I don't know what this was, where I would just stretch my face and my neck and just these little kid quirky things that you don't do that when you're on TV and on camera, you know.  I remember seeing those things about me on TV and just cringing, now.  But I do remember, you know, episodes and my mother's favorite episode and friends of ours that had finally moved from New York [New York] to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] that were in the acting school that made appearances on the show.  I remember the big crush my Uncle Luther had on Denise Nicholas.  Who didn't have a crush on her?  What man alive?  And the storyline of, you know, this husband who they thought had been--.  They declared legally dead because he was missing for seven years, and so when she went to remarry he found out way across the country that his, you know, bride, his wife was remarrying.  And so he came back, the show took place in [Washington] D.C., and so he came back which was why it was called 'Baby, I'm Back'.
Speaker 1: (Pause)
Speaker 2: (Off-camera voice)- I hope that's the construction crew across the street.
Speaker 1: See, I live in a place with earthquakes so I'm like, "Do I need to hit the deck or what?"  So the show took place in D.C. and Denise played the wife who was about to remarry and then the husband comes back and moves into the apartment upstairs. And I played just the daddy's girl [Angie] who adored her father, even though she had no memory of him, remembered having a dog, you know, and him being around 'cause he had been gone seven years.  So she was like an infant, you know, but loved her daddy, did not want her mom to remarry and that was, you know, my character.  And Helen Martin was in the show as the grandmother.  And I just remember, even as a little kid, thinking that she was so funny to me, just so funny.  But there's a lot of the episodes that I remember of that when Denise got all dressed up in a wig and this dress trying to, I can't remember why she was dressed like that but that was one, this episode where two sets of drums were in the house and they had us banging on the drums.  I remember the pilot episode with all the wedding gifts laid out on the table.  And then when BET [Black Entertainment Television] first started showing TV shows, not just music videos in their original programming, 'Baby, I'm Back' was one of the first shows that they were running and lord, the phone calls I got, "That was you!" you know, so, kind of like that.
Speaker 2: What was your mother's favorite episode of that?
Speaker 1: My mother's favorite episode was one called 'The Gospel According To Angie' and it was one of her favorites because the dialog--.  It was a very funny episode, it was basically my character, Angie, was doing the church play, which I think was the story of Christmas, it was our Christmas show.  And some of the kids from the New York acting school, them and their families had finally moved to L.A., so a couple of them were in it, which was nice for us to hang out again.  And so one of them had on a skullcap because he was playing a biblical character--  Or it was 'The Story of Ruth' that's what it was, it wasn't the Christmas story, it was 'The Story of Ruth.'  And I guess just the things because my character was a very precocious little girl and the things that she would say and do these little asides like she was so grown up, and you could hear my mother just howling from the audience.  I mean, she just thought it was so funny.  Plus the other kids that, you know, we had known in New York and--.  But it was also a very well written episode, I do remember that even now that it was just--it was very funny to see these little kids acting out Bible stories and my character was the narrator of these bible stories, or this bible story, and it was just, you know, it was just funny (laughs).
Story_ID: 6949
Speaker 1: Now do you think at that time [1978], well one, are you being given acting lessons at the same time or that's not what the deal was?
Speaker 2: When we moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]  I wasn't taking acting lessons and very few times would my mom [Chip Fields] coach me, very, very few times.  Because they felt that I was natural, I guess, in a lot of things.  And at the time, the type of TV that was going on back then, they didn't want the kids who seemed like TV kids.  When the people that had the acting schools in New York [New York] moved to L.A. and they started the acting schools out there, I started going there for a very brief period.  When we first moved to L.A. and I went to West Hollywood Elementary School [West Hollywood, California]  my mother had spoken with the people at the school and she was able to start like a theater class and that kind of thing and do plays and special things at the school and I was always involved in that.  But after a while I hadn't taken any acting lessons and, again, it'd be very specific instances when my mom would coach me. One that I remember was an episode of Facts of Life' and [musician] Jermaine Jackson was the guest on our show.  And my character was just short of obsessed with Jermaine and he always thought it was so funny because apparently a lot of people, and Janet [Jackson] and I have even talked about this when we were younger, how much we favor one another as we were growing up.  And so Jermaine just always thought it was a trip because I favored his sister and here I am playing this girl who's just, you know, so obsessed about him.  And my character gets to a point where she becomes fanatical about going to this concert and disobeying Charlotte Rae's character and hyperventilates and gets into this frenzy about going to this concert because she's the President of the fan club and the whole nine.  And I remember my mom coaching me for that scene so that I really got to the point dramatically where I needed to get to and it worked.  It worked I mean, to this day when I see that episode I clearly remember my mom working with me on that and how important it was for me. There's certain things that I have mental notes that I remember thinking, "I really want to be good in this one" or, "I really want to be good at this point" and that was one of those times.
Story_ID: 6950
Speaker 1: Now, was the same agency working with you at the time, you know, you said the first time you (inaudible).
Speaker 2: Right. When I first came to L.A. [Los Angeles, California, 1976] and I had the children's agency who was the top children's agent in L.A.--
Speaker 1: Who was--
Speaker 2: Dorothy Day Otis.  She turned over her agency to someone else and then I was with them probably until [television program] 'Facts of Life' ended because I was on 'Facts of Life' for nine years and so there wasn't a whole lot, they thought, that they could do since I was a client that was on a series.  As I got older and began to be able to express my opinions about my career and talk to my mom [Chip Fields] about it--.  A lot of people think my mom managed me. She didn't manage me, she was never my manager but she was my mother.  And so when she would see that I would get frustrated because even though--.  You know, when you're doing a series that doesn't mean that you can't ever work on anything else.  Once you're done, when you're on hiatus or vacation from shooting or filming you've got, you know, four or five months that you can do other projects.  And I was getting frustrated that it didn't seem like I was doing anything else but 'Facts of Life'.  Like the agency wasn't doing anything to get me other shows.  At the time [television program] 'Love Boat' was on and it was a very popular show and it had guest stars and, you know, a ton of guest stars every week.  I'm like, "How am I not on there?  Isaac needs a niece, a friend, something, how am I just not on there?"  And [actress] Nancy McKeon had been on there like once or twice.  And I'm like, "How does this happen?"  You know, so that's like one thing that I really remember once I started becoming aware of the industry and the business of show business.
Story_ID: 6951
Speaker 1: Do you think that you were well advised at the beginning, you know, and did your mother [Chip Fields] play a role at all in terms of--and at what point was her career changing, you know, where she was--you were, sort of, ahead of her?  I'm just trying to--
Speaker 2: Yeah. I think in a number of ways, yes we were very well advised in terms of things like who the best agent is, what the child labor laws are, things like that.  Again, you know, often times things are trial by fire.  And so, you know, there are business managers that are great, there are business managers that are not great.  There are agents that are great, agents that are not great managers and, you know, different things like that.  And so, coupled with that, here's this woman who not only is trying to have her own career, but then, above all of that, here is this woman who is trying to raise a daughter by herself, her first kid that she had at age eighteen.  So she's in her, you know, twenties trying to raise a kid, have a career, her kid has got a career, you know. There's a lot of trial by error, trial by fire with that kind of thing. Thankfully we were never, again by the grace of god, ever in situations where we got burned.  So, you know, then going from that to whatever she had to process once I became older as now we're almost equals, especially in terms of career.  Then it becomes, "My kid is the breadwinner."  So I'm sure that there's a lot of things that my mom had to process and deal with that I never, never ever, never felt any sense of jealousy, any sense of contempt, any sense of frustration, or any of those things.  And I'm not saying that she didn't feel them, I'm just saying that if she did I didn't know about it because she did what she felt was best and not letting me see that side if that side existed.  Which, even if it didn't exist consciously, I would have to imagine there's some elements of that that existed subconsciously, she's human, how could it not.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 6952
Speaker 1: Just one other question about 'Baby, I'm Back' [television program], what did you learn about series acting at that point and did anyone influence you and take you under their wing?  Were there any things--
Speaker 2: Well being the baby on the set and being the little girl on the set, you know, everyone took me in just by default, so to speak.  I don't recall, because I was so young, I don't recall anyone from a professional standpoint taking me under their wing or giving me advice or things like that.  As far as what I learned from doing 'Baby, I'm Back' I got into the rhythm of the discipline of being on a series.  Which means you have to get up early and you have to go and be on the set on time.  You have to go to school.  You have to have a certain number of hours everyday that you do in school.  You have to keep your grades at a certain grade point average.  You have to spend the time to learn your lines.  You have to get the blocking, working with the other actors.  And so I learned, like I said, the rhythm of what it takes to, again, the work I know I've talked about how when I saw my mom [Chip Fields] doing [play] 'Hello Dolly' with [actress] Pearl Bailey and I just, I was around, "Here's what it takes", you know, "here's all that goes into doing this" I started experiencing that for myself.  And, I mean, it was just, it's like, this is what I'm supposed to do, you know.  It was great and it was fun.  I never felt, you know, like a lot of the horror stories that people have about working as a child and being overworked, I mean, I stand on their shoulders because if it were not for them, then certain labor laws for children would not be in existence.  So I am the beneficiary of those laws so that I never felt overworked because you couldn't overwork a child.  And you can't.  But I think I was too young to actually learn the mechanics of acting. There were things that I learned in terms of holding for your laughs, that kind of stuff.  I started to understand cameras; I learned to stop looking into the camera.  So those are the things that I learned from doing 'Baby, I'm Back.'
Speaker 1: And it's always taped in front of a live audience, was it taped?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was.  So now, you did that how--was that a one or two--
Speaker 2: One season  One season. Okay.
Speaker 1: I think. Was it thirteen or twenty-four episodes, one of the two.
Story_ID: 6953
Speaker 1: And then--I know--you know--it's in your materials it talks about the fact that you auditioned for [television program] 'Diff'rent Strokes' and, you know, and you were too, you were just too tall.
Speaker 2: Too short
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: Too short
Speaker 1: Too short!
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was--when [television program] 'Facts of Life' came up it was a spin-off from 'Diff'rent Strokes' and they were taking Charlotte's [Charlotte Rae] character, who was their maid on 'Diff'rent Strokes', Mrs. Garrett.  And they were giving her her own series.  And they were building it in this boarding school, the all-girls boarding school, and they used the daughter character from 'Diff'rent Strokes,' Dana [Plato].  They used her character to--I'm sorry, I just got so distracted when I just thought about her.  But they used Dana's character to bring in the girls' school and so when I went to audition, once again, going into an audition seeing all these people thinking, "I do not belong here.  Let's go.  Get me out of here."  Once again I was taken to the, infamous trip to the bathroom, and told, you know, "Don't be intimidated, do your best."  And I did.  And they really loved my audition but they said--.  First of all I was nine years old and the role was for a twelve year old, and I've always been small for my age, I mean, I'm, you know, I'm short and so at nine I looked very young, let alone I was trying to look twelve or play twelve.  And so a producer said, you know, "God I really want to just hire her.  What can we do to make her taller?"  And I don't know who had the bright idea to put me on roller skates and so they put me in this rehearsal hall with these skates just to have me skate up and down and see if I could skate.  And I didn't fall and crack my head open so that's how I ended up on roller skates for the first year.  After the first season I managed to grow, obviously very little, but I grew enough for them to take me off of the skates I don't think I've grown since (laughs).
Speaker 1: Can you explain the skates to me?  I mean, how?  Okay, I understand but I'm not understanding. Okay, when were, I mean, you were on skates when?
Speaker 2: The whole time.  And they just built it in as, like, this character quirk  It's like; remember the movie 'Carrie'?  And they had a character in 'Carrie' who always wore the baseball hat with the wings and everywhere she went she had the baseball had on. So even when prom night hit, she was in her prom dress with the hat.
Speaker 1: It was like her thing the skates were her thing, you know, she slept in skates, she went everywhere in skates, she did everything in skates.  She had, you know, skates that were all-purpose weather skates, I mean, she had all--.  And that was, you know, her thing.  And they created that as the thing for the character because the truth of the matter was I was too short and they had to make me look taller.
Speaker 2: That's an interesting story.
Story_ID: 6954
Speaker 1: Now, when did you know [you guys] were part of a hit [The Facts of Life, television program]?  Was it immediate?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't immediate.  Because the first season they didn't know if we were coming back or not, then they made some major adjustments to the show by reworking some of the characters, cutting some of the characters, adding a character.  And when we heard about the changes, you know.  I don't know if it registered then as much as it registered when I got older but, you know, the black person is always the first to go; first to get killed in a movie, first to get cut from a show.  So I was like, "I'm surprised that I'm still here."  And, you know, yet they kept me and I think maybe by the second, somewhere during the second season, maybe into the third season.  And I don't know if it registered as "I'm on a hit show."  What was registering was a lot of requests for me to appear here, be here, go here, a lot of media and press things happening and doing interviews and things like that. So, that part of it increased. So I don't know that it ever registered, as we were a hit.  And also because we were never received by the industry, we were never a critical success although we were in the top twenty to top twenty-five most of our run. We were a success with the public.  We had loads and loads of fan mail We had people that let us know how they really identified with the show.  We had that kind of public outpouring.  And you don't really feel that until you go out somewhere and people recognize you or you go to different cities and hoards of people are there to see you and to get your autograph and things like that.  But we--I think the only nomination for Emmys [award] from the Academy [of Television Arts and Sciences] that we ever got Charlotte Rae may have gotten.  I think Charlotte Rae got one late into our run.  So we were never that critical success and on the cover of this, and that, and the other.  We weren't that kind of a hit by the industry standards.
Story_ID: 6955
Speaker 1: But you, you know, who would have thought?  And even when we were doing it and even into the seventh, eighth, ninth year [of television program 'The Facts of Life'], you know, you really don't see it because you're in it.  And so you don't see the impact that it has.  You don't see that people regard it and you as a part of pop culture.  You don't see that people regard you as an icon.  You don't see any of that until, you know, you're out there and that's the feedback that you're getting, you know.  And in retrospect and when people start to tell you the effect and the impact that a show like that and the part that you specifically played in it had on them.  That kind of stuff is overwhelming. That kind of stuff is very surreal and, to me, doesn't even begin to come close to any kind of critical or, you know, industry kudos that we may have received.  The public impact, you can't top that, you know.  Having people that come up to you and say that they still remember certain episodes.  I had a friend of mine who is the Sprint guy in the trench coat [wireless phone company advertisement], he says, you know, he can't believe that he would sit there with his sister and his mother and father and they would watch the show religiously, and now we're friends. You know, he's like, "I'm friends with a TV icon, how does that happen?"  And, you know, my friends will tease me about it or something like that, but that's very real though, for the public.  And not just here in the States but to go abroad or to have people that are here and know who you are and know your work.  That kind of impact is, like I said, it's very surreal, but in a way its so marvelous because you realize how blessed you are to be able to touch someone's life and to have an impact on someone's life with the work that you're doing. (Shakes her head in amazement)  I mean, sometimes there are just truly, there's no words to describe it, you know and, again, certain things that you don't know or don't realize or don't see when you're in it.  It never occurred to me that I was the only black girl on television for a certain amount of time.  It never occurred to me when people used words like, you know--I think they use words kind of haphazardly like, you know, trailblazer or pioneer.  I don't think any of that stuff, I mean, people their perception is their perception.  But for even people who are my peers. For [actress] Erika Alexander, for me to work with her on [television program] 'Living Single' and yet for her to tell me, "I used to watch you, girl, and wear my hair like you."  What do you do with that?  I mean, it's fascinating, you know, and the fact that I've grown up in people's lives and people's homes and people regard me that way.  When they see me in the street they feel like they can just come up and hug me and don't realize, if a stranger came up and hugged you, how would you react?  You know? But I'm supposed to just be cool with it and understand and hug you back and that kind of thing.  So it's amazing.  It's, again, I can't fully articulate, being blessed to have that kind of an impact and to be affiliated with a show that has that kind of impact. That now other generations--
Story_ID: 6956
Speaker 1: I have this nephew, my surrogate nephew, he's like my just (shows affection with a smile), and he's eight now and the last few years he's understood the concept of, you know, Auntie Kimmie is, you know, a celebrity or, you know, that I'm an actress and that I'm on TV.  I was a big deal to him.  And that was a big deal to him because, I mean, of course, just as Auntie Kimmie, but then you add to that things like, you know, "Wow she directs, she knows [actor] Kenan [Thompson] and [actor] Kel [Mitchell]." He didn't really compute directing and producing but he knows I work on the show 'Kenan and Kel' or [television program] 'Taina' or [television program] 'The Jersey' and all the stuff I do for [cable station] Nickelodeon  and [cable station] The Disney Channel.
Speaker 2: So I'm kind of, you know, important in big stuff because of that.  But when [television program] 'Facts of Life' came on and that thing hit with these kids now, now I'm, "This is Auntie Kimmy, the one from 'Facts of Life" (laughs) and it's just amazing to me.  The little girl [Dee Dee Davis] on 'Bernie Mac,' she saw me.  I was checking my mail one day and we live in the same area and she just looks at me and goes, "Mommy, Tootie!"  And I'm just thinking, "How in the world do you, at five, know that this adult is that same little girl?"  I don't understand that.  And so the people who grew up with, you know, round one, the original version of 'Facts of Life' they tell us all the time that now they're just getting such a thrill and a kick out of now sharing that with their children.  I mean, that's just--there's some stuff that, you know--you can't do too many interviews like these because you will get a big head (laughing) if you sit around and reflect on, you know, the greatness and the wonderment of it all I mean, it's just, it can be a little much.
Story_ID: 6957
Speaker 1: The thing is with the time this show came on which is--
Speaker 2: [Television program] 'Facts of Life' was '79 [1979] to '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: Now, that time period there's not a lot of girlie programs that appeal to teenagers.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Right.
Speaker 1: And that was sort of a unique thing and I didn't really know about it spinning off--
Speaker 2: [Television program] Diff'rent Strokes.'
Speaker 1: 'Diff'rent Strokes.'  It's a different type of--
Speaker 2: Family show.  It was more family, sure.
Speaker 1: But you also--but has that been studied at all?  You know the only reason I'm asking is (inaudible) there's a friend of mine, [movie producer] Debra Martin Chase, that had a--
Speaker 2: I know her.
Speaker 1: We went to law school together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay And she had the success with [motion picture] 'The Princess Diaries.'
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And it was, you know, and she's now doing this Disney thing and it's all on these girly things.  You know, it's the same type of,  you know--but the question, I want to take you back though, because you grew up in front of all of us, you know, I mean, grew up like a teenager and all the things that teenagers have,  the looks, you know, if you look at them (laughs).  But what was being on that set like?  Did life, you know--because remember you said, in  [television program] 'Baby, I'm Back,' you played a precocious child did you ever become that child?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  In my self-perception, I don't think so.  I don't think that I became or that I was the character from [television program] 'Facts of Life' either I mean, of course, there were certain parallels, I mean, just the fact that we were both girls growing up, my character and in real life, and growing up around a predominantly white, in a predominately white environment.  I don't know, they used to have this awful, I hated this term that they used to describe my character from 'Facts' [The Facts of Life] and it was always "perky."  And they had me in these argyle sweaters and these, you know, the argyle socks and, you know, that kind of stuff.  I mean, first of all, the '80s [1980s] were just an atrocious period for fashion as far as I'm concerned and I hope it never comes back.  But that's neither here nor there.  But to then, you know, be trapped as a teenager in that period, you know, I wasn't just wearing, you know, jeans and a shirt.  And the ribbons in my hair and the zigzag part and, you know, the skate keychain and stuff like that and lots of color, they always wanted me in color.  So I don't know that those things were ever me.  There were, you know, again, elements and traits that just come through because sometimes, especially if you're a character for a very long time, sometimes it's just going to infuse.  But other than that, you know, yeah growing up and being awkward and a teenager and, you know, your whole life and everything in that fishbowl.  Being on that set there was wonderful camaraderie, you know, it was nice because, again even though I was the baby again, at least there were other kids, you know, we were all young people.  And so we were growing up together and dealing with growing pains together, which was very nice, very welcomed.  We had so much fun together also, an enormous amount of fun. And respect for each other's talents.  When all that is said and done we weren't catty, we weren't, because again we were kids and we were kids that were growing up and we had a good time with one another, so it was never a well, "She's got my lines" or, you know, "what's going on here" and jealousies, that wasn't who we were and what we were about.
Speaker 1: None of that?
Speaker 2: None of it None of it, ever
Story_ID: 6958
Speaker 1: So give the real life name of the people that were--
Speaker 2: Ah, Lisa Whelchel who is Blair, Mindy Cohn who was Natalie, Nancy McKeon who was Jo, Charlotte Rae was Mrs. Garrett, I think in the eighth season Charlotte left the show and Cloris Leachman became a part of the cast [of 'The Facts of Life'], and then MacKenzie Astin became a part of the cast later into the season.  And then, of course, the infamous George Clooney became a part of our cast for a moment, which was great working with him.
Speaker 1: (Off-camera voice)- Can I have a moment?
Speaker 2: ...I mean, no.
Speaker 1: I've had so many blessings in my life on so many different levels and when you bring up things like stage mothers and that whole type of environment and to think, "God, I wasn't a part of that."  The parents of the 'Facts of Life' girls were really cool, you know I mean, my Aunt [Pat] was watching me, Lisa's grandmother was on the set with her until she, like the first season until she was a legal adult.  Nancy McKeon, her dad and her mom would, you know, trade off in terms of who was going be on the set Natalie, Mindy Cohn who played Natalie, her mom who is this real cool, low-key lawyer would sometimes be at the set.  So the thing about all of those family members is that they never stopped being parents or grandparents or whatever the authoritative figure in our life. They didn't believe the hype.  They didn't get caught up.  They didn't start living vicariously through us, which I think is so important because that means that they never lost sight of what their role was.  What we needed them there for which was still be the parent. You know, if I start cutting out, you got to get me.  And so then when we hit our teens we had a really solid foundation in terms of our home training, you know.  You can tell folks that don't got no home training, you could just tell, and folks that got home training.  Folks that got home training got good sense I mean, they've got home training.  People who don't just run all kind of every which way, shooting off at the mouth, doing whatever they want, no regard, no respect, that wasn't us.  And that's not how we were brought up, you know, individually, collectively, I mean, it's just that that wasn't our style. You know, we weren't--.  And it's funny, they had, I think E! [Entertainment Television, cable channel] did like one of those [television program] 'True Hollywood Stories' on us and people are always amazed when they tell me about it because they say, "It was like a big love fest."  It was, I mean, and that's not say that, you know, somebody doesn't get on your nerves every now and again or, you know, you have a run-in with somebody, you know, maybe they rubbed you wrong that day, or whatever.  But, I mean, we were together nine years, like sisters.  Tell me, and the closest of most wonderful families But ya'll going to have, you know, you're differences or whatever, but there weren't the egos, there weren't the fights, there weren't all those just horror stories that you hear about, you know, from either us or our families.
Story_ID: 6959
Speaker 1: Now your connection with the black world, was that mainly through your Aunt [Pat] at that point?
Speaker 2: My Aunt, my mother [Chip Fields], our family and friends, I never--and people who were on the crew, I mean, we still had people that were, you know, a part of our crew.  I never wanted to be white, or, "Oh wow, I wish I was a white girl like them" or, I never felt different or ostracized.  I never felt like I have lost touch with my blackness, so to speak, or anything like that.  I never felt that.  I know they had a couple of episodes of [television program] 'Facts of Life' where my character addressed that and felt those things and had to deal with that and those storylines, I understood them, but I couldn't relate to them because they were not feelings that I had ever had and issues that I'd had to deal with.  My mother made sure that I always knew who I was and was very proud of that.  And it's not she had to beat me over the head with it or like every day was Black History Month at home or anything like that.  It was just, I mean, it was just, you know, I'm a kid from Harlem [New York] and I'm out here doing this thing and, you know, I'm doing what I really like doing with people that I really enjoy.  But I never felt less than, I never felt like anybody was better than me, I never felt that, you know, "Wow, I wish I lived at their house because they have this, that, and the other."  None of that, none of that whatsoever.
Speaker 1: Now what--describe--
Speaker 2: I'm being on the cuI-  I'm sorry, but also, the black community, the black community embraced 'Facts of Life', not just Kim Fields.  I wasn't treated as a token. They loved all the girls, you know, they love 'Facts of Life.'  They loved that 'Facts of Life' had representation of their community and that I was that.  They embraced the actress, Kim, not just my character.  But the black community embraced Kim, the actress, wherever I went, you know, and making sure that, from our standpoint, making sure that I was always a part of and continue to be a part of the black community.  So if I'm in the [Martin Luther King Jr.] King Day Parade, if I'm doing whatever for Black History Month, if I'm visiting the inner-city schools, because hey, that's where I'm from.  That's my connection.  Yeah I can go and visit, you know, people in boarding schools or, you know, the private schools or different elements, sure that's fine too.  But here's what my foundation is.  The black press embraced me, as well as 'Facts of Life' so you know, 'Jet' magazine and 'Ebony' [magazine], Johnson Publications has always been just, you know, one of my biggest supporters since [television program] 'Baby, I'm Back.'  Since 'Baby I'm Back' I remember being in 'Jet' magazine and everything. When I graduated from college [Pepperdine University, Malibu, California, 1990], 'People' magazine didn't give a rat's tail, even though I had been on television for, you know, for ten, twelve years,  was on a hit show for nine years.  [Actress] Brooke Shields graduates from college, she's on the cover.  I graduate, I'm this week's best photo in 'Jet' [magazine] though, which is more important than, you know, being anywhere else because that is showing how proud my people are of me.  That meant the world to me and so when I have my photos from my graduation, yeah it's kind of bizarre but the truth of the matter is that my photos are not just from the cameras taken with or pictures taken by my family and friends, but right there in that frame is the fact that I was one of the week's best photo, I was the week's best photo for graduating from college from 'Jet' magazine. That right there--look I'm about to call Sylvia [Flanagan, Senior Editor, Jet magazine] right now, "Could you blow that up please? I need a twenty by twenty of that!" (Laughs)  But that just meant the world to me, you know, and that they never--because the black media or the black community could have, you know, taken it into a completely different direction, you know.  I could have been the token or I could have just been, you know, I'm on that white show.  Or for people who are, even today, people who are the only black person on a white show, you don't know them at all.  They don't get no love from either media or from either community.  And I don't know if it was because I was a kid, I don't know why, again, I'm blessed.  But that's my reality is that the black community and all the facets of it from the people who are the church leaders and the community leaders and the politicians and long before I could vote, long before I was tall enough to reach the podium to introduce somebody who was running for office, the black community and black politicians community leaders, I was a part of that whole system and still am to this day.  [U.S. Congresswoman] Maxine Waters, she's mamma Maxine to me. Reverend [Jesse] Jackson, please, that's a whole other, you know.  I'm up there, "Vote for Jesse Jackson, I can't vote for him so you do it for me!"  You know, that kind of thing, I was like ten, eleven, twelve, whatever until I could.  So again, that's a part of my upbringing and a part of my foundation and that kind of stuff is just embedded, that's a part of the grain that is me.  And so that's who I am today, without question, absolutely.
Story_ID: 6960
Speaker 1: What is forming you during these years?  I mean, what is--.  What is, informing you as a person?  What is influencing you?  What are the--you know in this nine-year period, what are the critical steps along the way?  Because nine to eighteen, that's a big gap.
Speaker 2: Nine to eighteen, age nine to eighteen is a very big gap and you're including a number of formative years in that gap and there were different things that influenced me.  And also, again, you're in the '80s [1980s], again, just god, the '80s [1980s]; Reaganomics [the economic policies of U.S. President Ronald Reagan] and, I mean, you know, again bad, big hair just, oh god. But the things that influenced me, I was doing an interview the day before yesterday, a phone interview and the interviewer said, "I'm going to say some cast members--."  (Pause)  So I was doing this interview and the guy asked me, he would just say a cast member's name or somebody that I had worked with and to describe them in one or two words and when he said Nancy McKeon's name who played Jo on our show [The Facts of Life], I said, "Wonderful big sister in some very important formative years."  I said that because Nancy and I were very close, she was the cast member who I was the closest to on the set because I spent more time with her than anybody else.  Nancy and I had the same tutor so even when the show would be on hiatus for a week or whatever, Nancy and I would still be together in school.  We would do personal appearances together, we lived close to one another, so we spent just a lot of time together.  And so she really was a big sister to me and I was a little sister to her.  And so just the things that I learned from her, it's funny, the one specific that truly stands out is I learned how to shave my legs (laughs).  Because I looked at my legs one day and I thought (laughing), "It's probably time to do something about that."  And so I, you know, I got a razor and I thought well, "What do I do?"  And I called her up and I'm like, "What am I supposed to do?"  And she goes, "You go from the bottom and work your way up and you take it and go in the up position and--."  "Oh, okay, thank you."  I mean something as small and as simple as that that, you know, you just, that was, you know, again something that's so, just a very big memory for me.  Even though I was on 'Facts of Life' during those years I didn't spend everyday, all day there.  So I still was with my family, I still was with our friends. When I was fourteen I got saved and became part of the church so the people that were at church were a big part of my life.  I had a high school sweetheart and so his family was a part of my life. So there were all sorts of people, up to and including, of course, my mom [Chip Fields] and my aunt that formed who I was becoming as a young lady, as a young adult.  During those years I start dating, you know, not knowing at the time that I was one of those girls who was dating who didn't grow up with her dad so she's looking at, you know, as soon as we start dating, "Oh, you're the one."  You know, I was very involved with high school and so I had friends from so many different backgrounds and cultures and religions that were friends of mine, you know.  Starting college [Pepperdine University, Malibu, California] and, you know, in college you're really exposed to people from, you know, people from India and Africa and the States and, I mean, just, you know, it's just all sorts of people.  And also, like, going out and traveling while I was doing 'Facts of Life' for personal appearances or for other projects that I was working on and so I was able to see some parts of the world and meet other people.  So my world was not this micro chasm of celebrities or TV people or just the people at 'Facts of Life' or just these white girls.  You know, it was a lot broader than that.  You know, wonderful family friends who, you know, you don't tell your mom everything and so you have other people in your life who are your confidants and that kind of thing and people who, you know, just teach you things as you start living life.  And they're people that are in my life to this day.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, but I also remember like anyone else, TV and movies also had an influence on me as well.  And so the '80s [1980s] was the whole Princess [of Wales] Diana era and Lady Diana [Princess of Wales] and the big wedding and she was this fairytale and, you know, I was one of those girls that got caught up in that whole fairytale of, you know, the prince charming and, you know, all of that and just Princess Diana this, that, and the other.  So that had, in terms of being a girl or being a young lady, you know, that was, oddly enough, an influence quite honestly.
Story_ID: 6961
Speaker 1: Now, was there any episode [The Facts of Life] that was your favorite episode in those nine years [1979-1988]?  Anything that stands out?  A favorite?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there are a few, I mean, the movies that we did.  We did two movies, one we went to Paris [France] [The Facts of Life Goes to Paris, 1982], one we went--, TV movies, one we went to Paris, one we went to Australia [The Facts of Life Down Under, 1987].  And those are favorites because I got to see a part of the world or parts of the world on somebody else's dime (laughs).  You know, and be able to experience other cultures and places. There were episodes--
Speaker 1: (Inaudible) How old were you then? Sixteen?
Speaker 2: With the first movie I was twelve in Paris, second movie I was about eighteen, seventeen or eighteen.
Speaker 1: Now when you were twelve was your mother [Chip Fields] traveling with you?
Speaker 2: Mom did go on that trip.  Mom went on that trip.  Child please (laughs), my mother sent Aunt Pat a lot of places but mom isn't going to miss out on Paris.  So mom went to Paris,  aunt Pat went to Paris, a really dear family friend who was like a grandmother figure to me, Betty, I think Betty went to Paris, or my cousin, some other folks went to Paris with us.  Australia, folks didn't seem like they were trying to go, so.  And that's not to dis Australia by any means. But also I was older, you know, I think either seventeen or eighteen years old and I had learned from the first 'Facts of Life' movie, take a hairdresser with you because you are the only black thing out there with your kind of hair.  So by the time the second movie came, the hairdresser went with Kim.  But I don't know, I mean, the episode like I said before with [musician] Jermaine Jackson [Starstruck, episode 44, 1982] is a favorite just because I remember how hard I worked on my acting for that episode because it had a lot of dramatic moments to it. There were fun episodes that we did, there's one episode where we were in a car, it was called 'Cruisin' [episode 112, 1984] and almost the whole show took place while we were in this car.  We had an episode where we got engaged in a paint fight [Four Musketeers, episode 45, 1982], you know, stuff that was just kind of fun and crazy.  But possibly the episodes that are my most favorites are the ones where they truly had an impact. We had an episode about a young girl who committed suicide [On the Edge, episode 205, 1988] and we got letters, so many letters from kids saying that they wanted to commit suicide and that they were so close and that they were going to until they saw that episode.  In that timeframe I also testified before Congress because the teen suicide rate was just going, I mean, just out of control.  So that's one of my favorites for very different reasons.  Episodes where we dealt with issues that really we were dealing with or that our fans were dealing with and that they were able to make a difference in someone's life.
Story_ID: 6962
Speaker 1: Was there a time when you hit, sort of, a wall during that, you know, that nine-year period that you didn't want to go back for another season that it, the show seemed irrelevant or--
Speaker 2: I think the time for me was probably about our eighth year because they were starting to add a lot of characters to the show. And my frustration was, "Do you all not remember, our first year we had all of these people and they said that they had to cut characters because there were too many characters for a half-hour show; too many characters to try to follow, too many characters to try to service.  Do you not remember our own history to know that that was the case? So why then are we going full circle and getting right back to that and having all these characters so that you can't service them or you can't service your regular characters." That was a frustrating time and it was a time I was just starting to find my voice and my confidence in my belief about what I knew about the industry.  So that was an important time because I was no longer a child, I was an adult. I was a young adult, but nevertheless I was an adult.  And, I was an adult who had been there since day one so I really knew, you know, and those of us who were there really knew.  And it was frustrating. It's frustrating to be in an environment where you feel like you're not reaching your potential and it's not about, you know, well now this person has more lines than I do or anything like that, but it's just being true to the characters and being able to service the characters, you know, even if it's, you know, a small storyline or a small bit in this scene, or whatever it is.  But if you've got a ton of people, and I remember thinking and saying at some point because [television program] 'L.A. Law' had just started, and I said, "You're trying to make 'L.A. Law' in a half hour. You can't do that. There's a reason 'L.A. Law' is an hour, because they've got a ton of people on there that they have to service. And they have that luxury in an hour, you can't have the same amount of people that's on 'L.A. Law' on [television program] 'Facts of Life'. It doesn't work that way."  So there were times when I had that frustration and I just felt like, "Okay, I don't know how much longer, you know, this will go on."  I wasn't savvy enough in the industry to know that you had options in terms of, you know, leaving the show or reducing the number of episodes you do that season or if I were to move on what else was I going to do.  I wasn't in the industry like that and didn't have that kind of team around me, you know, I still had agents that were, you know, that inherited me when they got the agency, that were never really working for me, they were sitting around collecting their check from a show that I booked before they even got there.  So I didn't have those kinds of people who had forethought to say, you know, "The eighth year you should probably, we should make this kind of move."  Or I didn't have people that were designing, you know.  And, again, my mom [Chip Fields] was not my manager; my mom was not a manager.  So it's not on her. She up there trying to figure out her own career and be a mother, so that's not her job, you know.  So there were those times but, again, it didn't have anything to do with the people that were on the show and the cast and the crew, I mean, we still really enjoy each other. I mean, we have reunions every couple of years at someone's house or a pool party or, you know, whatever, just to stay caught up and in touch.
Story_ID: 6963
Speaker 1: Did you ever disagree with the writing [for television program The Facts of Life]?  Or is it the same?
Speaker 2: Very rarely because they really got the show, they really understood the show, they understood the characters and they had just a lot of really good stuff.  There was only one time that I remember I just flat out disagreed and would not do what was being asked of me.  And, again, these kinds of things didn't happen until we're older, you know.  And they didn't happen much because, again, we had excellent writers, and producers, and directors, and things like that and the network was behind the show.  You know, those were the days of [National Broadcasting Company, NBC, Programming Chief] Brandon Tartikoff and so they really, you know, they knew that it was a solid show even though, again, it wasn't a critical success but it was a solid show that the public had--  We had a very loyal base.  But they wrote an episode [It's a Wonderful Christmas, episode 195, 1987] that was--.  It was a Christmas episode and it was to be kind of like a take on the movie 'It's a Wonderful Life' and this was about in our eighth or ninth year, once Cloris Leachman had joined the show.  And so the storyline was Cloris's character [Beverly Ann Stickle], you know, has that same kind of feeling of, you know, everybody would be better off without me being here.  And so they do this, kind of, a dream sequence-y type thing where we see what our lives would be without her being in them. And so for my character they said that I would be pregnant and I wasn't having that because I was like, you know, at the time teen pregnancy was a huge issue for society and especially among the black community.  And I was like, "I'm not doing that."  And furthermore, Cloris's character, I met just now as a young adult, if anybody, it would be Mrs. Garrett [character on The Facts of Life] who taught me about, you know, sex and sex education and things like that so I could see if you guys were saying if Mrs. Garrett wasn't in my life, this, that, and the other. I might have a little more tolerance, but even then, why the black girl got to be the one that's knocked up?  You know, and unless you're going to do something meaningful with it, the fact that there are teen girls, teen black girls who get pregnant but they still go to school and graduate and they still have a supportive family.  If that's the road you're going to take, I might entertain that part of it, but I'm definitely not going to entertain it by saying that because Cloris's character and, again, it's no reflection on Cloris, but it was the character. That they're saying that a woman that I just met a year ago had that kind of influence and impact and we haven't seen that, I don't buy that.  And so I said, "I'm not comfortable and I really don't, you know, I really just, I'm not cosigning that, you know, any of it."  And so when we did the table reading, and it's a questionable call, I think, about professionalism, because when we did the table reading where all of the executives and the writers and the producers sit around and hear the cast read the script for the first time, when I read that part of the script, I read it real flat, didn't give it nothing, wasn't really acting.  And so the producer got a little salty with me and I knew that if I had done it and really sold it, they would have loved it. I learned that much to know, I'm not giving you all even that much to be able to "let's work with it," no. So, you know, and I say it's a questionable call because, you know, was I unprofessional by reading it that way?  Some could argue yes, some could argue no because I wasn't trying to give them something, anything that they could hold on to for that storyline. That they said, "Oh she really sold that" or "She made it work."  Because I had seen it where, you know, they'll say if you say, you know, This line I'm not really comfortable with" or "Can we find a different line or a better line or a better joke?"  And they'll say, "Well sure but, you know, just do it for rehearsal or whatever."  And you do it and you make it work and then they go, "Well, you made it work."  And then you get stuck.  It was my job to make it work but that doesn't mean that it has to still be here.  So that was my argument about why I wasn't even trying to make it work. I don't want you to see that it could work. So that was truly the, probably the only time that I was like, "No. I'm not really feeling that one."
Story_ID: 6964
Speaker 1: Now who else, black, in Hollywood [California] was a big deal like you?  Was there anyone?  [Actor] Gary Coleman, was he around that time?
Speaker 2: Gary and [actor] Todd [Bridges] were around at that time, there were no girls because [actress, musician] Janet [Jackson] had not joined the cast of [television program] 'Good Times' at that point and [television program] 'The Cosby Show' had not yet started so for a while it was just me.
Speaker 1: And did you have a relationship, any relationship with Gary and Todd?
Speaker 2: Well we taped our show next door to where they taped 'Diff'rent Strokes' so we were always near one another and sometimes their characters would be on our show and our characters would be on their show so I certainly had seen them and known them and, you know, I had the crush on Todd when I was a girl like, you know, everybody else.  Then you've got the black media, 'Right On!' magazine that, you know, there was only us three on TV so, of course, we were paired up at everything.  So we would definitely see one another and develop a friendship but not in terms of us being really, you know, close.  And because our show was done by the same company so we'd see each other at all sorts of events and things like that.  But you'd see them in the hallway or their schoolroom is next to yours and that kind of thing so you certainly see them, develop a friendship.
Story_ID: 6965
Speaker 1: Now why, you know, it's such a stark, I know people (inaudible)--but such a stark contrast. It's--
Speaker 2: I don't know how the [television program] 'Diff'rent Strokes' kids their lives took one turn and the [television program] 'Facts of Life' kids took another turn. I couldn't tell you because it's not just, you can't just chalk it up to, "Oh well, it was the parenting." Because, you know, Todd's [actor Todd Bridges] mother [Betty A. Bridges] is a great mom, she's a great parent, you know, and his parents got divorced and, you know, but she's still a great parent and a great mom and so, you know, I don't know what it is. I honestly, when I've been asked, it's the same thing, I don't know. You know, our--  As individuals we were all very different, you know, [Actress] Dana [Plato] and Todd, they liked, kind of, as they got older in their celebrity, they liked hanging out and going to clubs and stuff like that, most of us didn't.  And it's not that, you know, oh the 'Facts of Life' girls are boring, or they're prudes, or this, that, and the other, it was just, you know, our orientations were just, you know, what appealed to us was not the same thing.  No one ever experimented with drugs on our set. No one ever had that kind of desire.  I don't know. I don't know.
Speaker 1: And [actor] Gary Coleman (inaudible)--
Speaker 2: Yeah. One of the most difficult things that I've done, but I was glad that I did it, was when I went to visit Todd in jail.  It was really difficult to see someone that you had grown up with for so long, you know, and had the crush on and all that stuff and seen him at his best and at his highs, not in terms of drugs but just in terms of when you're on a high from doing your--you're on a hit show and you've got money and you've got this, that, and the other, and to see him and to see how his spirit seemed broken and how just physically he seemed just, you know, just broken, that was hard. I'm glad that he beat all of that.  You know, to see the things that I hear or see about Gary and with Dana that, you know, with Dana Plato and her lifestyle and everything and to see her son who looks just like her. I mean, you can completely see her legacy just right here (outlines her face with her hands), you know, and how he just adored her, you know, absolutely adored her.  But I have no idea. I have no explanation for it.
Story_ID: 6966
Speaker 1: Okay. But this happens with black and white.  I mean, it's not many people who've made it through [being a child star] ever. And you, yourself haven't been totally left unscarred, right?  Do you think--you said you got saved? At fourteen--do you think that had something to do with it?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I mean, having god as the head of your life and making that a part of your lifestyle, it doesn't make you immune to anything.  Shoot, at times it probably makes it even harder at some points.  But again, I don't know. You know, because I know people who are saved who have been tore up from drugs and alcohol and, you know, that was after they got to the alter and, you know, asked Jesus to come into their hearts so, you know, I don't know.  I mean, there are just certain things that may be are a part of your makeup in terms of the things that you're curious about, the things that you, you know, that are a part of a lifestyle or something like that.  I don't know, it's just, that just wasn't my experience.  Even today, I'm not really one to, you know, I might go to a club once every other blue moon, you know, I've never been one to be curious about drugs.  And I can't even say that it's because I have an aunt that I never knew who died from an overdose because I didn't know her and I don't really know the impact that that had in my family, so.  I don't know.
Story_ID: 6967
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're eighteen and is it assumed that you're going to go to college?
Speaker 2: For me it is, yes.  It was never a thing in my family where it was a discussion or anything like that, it was just that's what you do next, I mean, in my mind.  So it was never a planned out decision, you know, well let's talk about this do you want to go and where do you want to go?  I mean, when [actress, musician] Janet Jackson and I were little kids we had talked about going to Pepperdine [Pepperdine University, Malibu, California] together because we both loved Malibu and it was so pretty there and years later I had done two episodes of a show called 'Battle of the Network Stars' and that was like a big sports things that happened twice a year where they got celebrities from all three networks to compete in various sports, you know, touch football or, you know, the dunk tank or tandem bicycle riding, just various, you know, events and things and it was taped at Pepperdine University.  And so that's when I really fell in love with the campus, I was like, "Oh my God, it's beautiful here."  You're right at the ocean and you're in the mountains and that kind of thing and it was just a great school, you know, academically.  So really the only conversations that ever came up was, was I going to stay in California?  Because when I started college I was still on [television program] 'Facts of Life'. So I was, you know, thinking well I can't really apply to out-of-state schools, can I go as far as San Diego [California] and commute, or should I stay in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]?  Did I want to go to UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles]  or USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles] and be a film student and those were really the only discussions but only after the fact, you know, did my aunt and my mother [Chip Fields] ever reveal to me how proud they are.  I mean, not how proud they are, but how proud they were because I was the first to go to college.  I didn't even know that.  You know, so that kind of thing, it wasn't like and episode of 'Good Times', you know, where, you know, "You my baby and you the first to go to college and I--."  You know, it wasn't that type of vibe at all, it was just, you know. I was already in the school mode from being tutored and going to high school so it's just something you do. I also had recognized at that point the importance of having a degree and the importance of having--  In some circles having that piece of paper does validate you.  I didn't think that I needed it to validate me, but I did realize that it was important for me to make sure that I had something to fall back on as well, and so education was very important to me.
Speaker 1: What made you realize that?
Speaker 2: Well, from the time I was about a teenager my mom had always started telling me, "Be sure you have something to fall back on because, you know, 'Facts of Life' could end tomorrow, you may never work as an actress again."  The entertainment industry and actors in general, there's so much rejection, you know, I'd already heard about all the horror stories of being a former child star, you know, from the specials and the books that you read and things that you see on people from the shows in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].  And I just didn't want any of that for my lifestyle, you know, I didn't want to be someone that couldn't cope if I was never on TV again.  I just, that just wasn't appealing to me.  You know, and so having something to fall back on and to that extent, you know, to me in my mind, well then you need college for that.
Speaker 1: But going to Pepperdine, wasn't that different than going to high school and still being on 'Facts of Life', I mean, because you weren't there a year, you over lapped a year, right?
Speaker 2: I was in high school all of my senior year and half of my junior year so I was already in, again, the rhythm of the discipline of going to school, then going to work.  So whether it was going to high school [Burbank High School, Burbank, California] or going to my classes at college, you know, to me the discipline of just going to school then going to work that was the norm.
Speaker 1: But what I'm trying to ask, so it was one year that you overlapped? I mean, your ninth year, that was your freshman year at--?
Speaker 2: I took seventh and eighth grade together so I got out of high school a year early.  That's why, chronologically, I was, I guess, seventeen as opposed to eighteen.  And then in college I went to school during the summers and things so I graduated in three and a-half years instead of four.
Speaker 1: That's why (inaudible).
Speaker 2: That's why.
Speaker 1: Okay. because I even (inaudible) you with two years--okay, okay.
Speaker 2: See I forgot about that stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay. But then, you know, but I'm saying you have spent all of your formative years, you know, you've spent all your formative years, really, on this one show [The Facts of Life]. And then that's over with.  And, you know, and you're no longer a child anymore.  You know, so what happened during this period of time at Pepperdine, I mean, what are you finding about with boys--
Story_ID: 6968
Speaker 1: ...about that period, you know, because all this time you've spent on this, you know, show [The Facts of Life].  Really, even though, I know you have life outside, but you know this is really life outside and you're not doing.
Speaker 2: What was I doing.
Speaker 1: Not what were you doing, but how were you growing as a person?
Speaker 2: When I finished doing 'The Facts of Life' [1988] and I was able to be a full-time student, I mean, I was literally a full-time college student. And I called my agents; I had changed agents at that point.  And I called them and I said, "Listen, I don't want to frustrate you guys or me, so don't send me out right now because I'm so focused on school [Pepperdine University, Malibu, California] and I have such a full load with my schooling."  I was taking night classes, morning classes, working at the TV station, at school; I was doing a lot.  So I still had that same type of work ethic, but now I was just, you know a full-time student.  And so my college years were not, you know, that time where I was like finally I'm away from home and I get to cut up and act crazy.  I mean, I was focused on my schoolwork and, you know, I joined one of those, you know how they have the different organizations on campus.  And I joined one thinking that, you know, oh, I'd really get a chance to meet people, it was some kind of international something or another.  And I thought I'd get a chance to meet people from all over the world this, that, and the other, and it was nothing but just a reason for folks to drink.  And because I don't drink, it was like, well, this is no fun, I mean, you know.  And again I had such a full load, I mean, I was taking about three classes in the morning, then sometimes a night class once or twice a week, and then,  like I said, just working at the TV station at school.  But I loved it, I didn't feel like I was missing anything, I wasn't watching TV going, "Oh God, did I miss doing that part, or did I miss out not auditioning for that" or anything like that, you know.  I was still working, and again, my work ethic was still being satisfied, it's just that I was, you know, I wasn't doing the show.  And I didn't feel like, "God, I miss doing that."  I don't know if it was because I've been doing it for nine years and it was nice to have the breather, or if I was just so caught up in really enjoying my life at school.  You know, but I didn't feel like I missed doing the show, or like I missed being an actress at that point and time. Because what I was doing was so important, and I was still dealing with entertainment in terms of what I was getting my degree in, the work I was doing at the TV station.  Eventually having my own talk show up at the school that I produced and, you know, got celebrities to be on and things like that.  So I just felt like it was a nice change, that's really what it was because I had been in that same, you know, routine doing 'Facts of Life,' and it's a great routine, don't get me wrong, but it was nice to do something else.
Story_ID: 6969
Speaker 1: You know I have one other question about Tootie [Fields's character of The Facts of Life], your name wasn't really, it was Dorothy?
Speaker 2: The character's name was Dorothy Ramsey, I don't know where they got it from, I don't know where it came from, I have no idea.
Speaker 1: But it started from the beginning you were Tootie?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When did you become aware of the business of entertainment?
Speaker 2: Somewhere in my late teens, both [actress] Nancy [McKeon] and I started to ask about things like directing.  Not directing an episode of the show, but to talk to our directors about the whole concept of directing.  Talked to the camera people about camera shots, talked to the lighting director about lighting.  So we both had an interest in that in terms of that part of the business.  The actual business-business of it, I really didn't get in to until I started doing [television program] 'Living Single' [1993].  While I was very involved in hands-on in everything I'd, you know, I'd gotten a lawyer who was terrific in making sure that I was not the kind of artist that was just, you know, "I'll just sign wherever you tell me."  But he really, you know, mapped out everything for me.  I understood agents, I understood what kind of power I had as the artist, I wasn't doing them a favor and that they worked for me.  And, you know, those kinds of things that you just start to get a better understanding of.  After I got out of college, but before I started doing 'Living Single,' I was doing some theater.  My mom [Chip Fields] was in a relationship with someone who was a manager, and so I was able to understand the business of show business even more.  And then also talking to my friends who were in the industry and, you know, just all the things that we'd all learned at different points in our lives, you know. And I was in my early twenties so I was able to just comprehend things, you know, that you don't know to comprehend at fourteen, fifteen years old.  So it was during that time, right after college, that I started to understand it a little more. And then the more I got exposed to those sides, and I didn't run away from it.  There's certain artists that will just say, "Look, I'm just creative and you handle everything else."  And, you know, I think that's fine if you recognize that about you so that you at least get people in your camp who then will pick up those areas.  But I like having a very thorough working knowledge of it, and being able to speak for myself.  And the more I got involved in directing and producing, you know, by the time I started doing 'Living Single,' I had a very good working knowledge of most, if not all of the, facets of the industry.
Story_ID: 6970
Speaker 1: You may have already answered this question, but did you feel that you had been well managed, I mean, from a monetary standpoint?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, oh sure, you know, to me the bigger picture is how you deal with the design of the career.  I'm a big sports fan, a huge sports fan, and for me, part of my--  Hold on for one second.  (To someone off camera) What is wrong with you (laughs)?  (pause)
Speaker 1: I was asking--
Speaker 2: The career. I'm a big sports fan and so I find a lot of parallels with, like, mostly football, some basketball. (Pause)  So as a sports fan when I'm watching football, mostly football and basketball, but just the concepts of sports, you know, you have your general manager and your head coach and then, of course, your owner.  And they are all in place to help the team win. Yes, of course, everyone is getting paid and getting paid extremely well, but after awhile the checks almost are secondary if you're losing, you know, or if you are constantly, you know, last in the league in every single category, you know.  And so for me I've had to find different teams at different points in my career to feel that I'm being managed effectively.  And I still don't think I've really reached my full potential.  Some of it is based on decisions that I've made either parts or projects that I really didn't want to do, timing, things that were important to me at one point in my career, not so important now, that kind of thing.  Who the other players are, you know, who's the flavor of the month now, that kind of thing.  So I think that the design of my career, and I'm looking even now, I've made some very specific moves with a new manager, looking at who the next set of agents will be, because I don't have an agent.  And a number of ways not having an agent over the last couple of years, I know it's hurt me in some ways, I still have worked, but there's different levels to it, you know.  So again, yeah, you're taken care of and you do well financially, but there are so many other things that go into, again the design of the career.  And for me to continue to have longevity, that is just such a blessing, I have to always reinvent myself, as well as the team that is supporting me and that's around me to take us, you know, to the next level.
Story_ID: 6971
Speaker 1: So Natalie [character from television program The Facts of Life], what is she doing now?
Speaker 2: Mindy [Cohn] actually is doing a couple of things, she's the new voice of Velma on the 'Scooby Doo' cartoons, she does a lot of voiceover work for cartoons, and she's producing a couple of independent film projects.
Speaker 1: So you didn't feel that your life was over?  Did you ever get a sense of where your career--  Remember how we were saying that, you know, you're sure that your mother [Chip Fields] sort of at some point, you know, felt something, but it was never articulated or you weren't aware of it?  Did you ever feel that you had sort of lost your place or uncertain before '[television program] Living Single' was filmed?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, transition is an awkward time for anybody in any profession.  I mean, it's the nature of the beast of transition because there's uncertainties, that festers insecurities, that festers doubt, I mean, there's all sorts of things.  Transition is traditionally not a positive time for most people.  It can be if you choose to look at it that way in terms of oh, what's on the horizon?  Versus, "Oh my god, I have no idea what's going on, and what am I going to do, and did I leave too soon," you know, looking back as opposed to looking ahead.  And so yeah, I can sit here in hindsight and say, you know, oh, every transition was smooth or this, that, and the other, and that's not the case.  Just because you all aren't read about me in Jet [magazine] "nuttin' up" doesn't mean I didn't "nut up", you know.  I mean, I'm a very private person, and for as long as I've been in the public eye, I'm thankful to god that I've managed to still have so much of my privacy.  So having said that, transitions are very difficult.  You know, those periods where you just sometimes you go, "What am I going to do?"  The phone is not ringing or, you know, I've made career moves, you know, to become a director, to become a producer so that I didn't rely on just this one element of my career.  And yet when it's all said and done, weeks and weeks have gone by where I'm not working.  For somebody who works on a consistent basis, that's, you know, is a difficult time.  You know, there are times when you may see other people and you go, "God, how did they get that?  You know, they're not nearly as talented or their look is this, that, and the other," or whatever it is. And for all that I love about the industry, there's so many things I hate about it.  You could have zero talent, but if you have a certain look or if they can create a certain look on you, you know, football, you can either catch a ball or you can't.  If you can catch a ball, nine out of ten times you're going to red shirt somewhere, be third, fourth string, whatever it is, but you're going to have a gig.  There are people that I know that are so talented and have whatever the look may be, or the look for character acting, or whatever, and they never work as an actor or an actress, never ever, ever never.  Or they may work here and there, but you'll never know their name or, you know what I'm saying?  Because it's just so subjective, it's so political, it's so who you know, and all of these different things.  So there are times where you can't get frustrated, you can't compare and go, "Well I, you know, I'm five pounds lighter than so and so" or, "you know, well I invented this look for me so how come they got that?" You don't know what's going on, you don't know if they have the same agent as the writer so they never even saw somebody for that role, I mean, there's just so many other elements that go into it.  So that makes transition even harder because there's no formula for this thing.  It's not like you go, well, I have dynamic resume and I'm going to hit, you know, hit this, this, this, and this, these human resource departments, and have these meetings, and get a job. You know it's not as pat as that.  Transition is difficult when it's your friend's turn at bat, you know, and you have to find it in you to be very supportive.  When I was in college [Pepperdine University, Malibu, California] 'A Different World' was the show, and so I had friends, you know, who were on that show and I'd visit the set and that kind of thing, and sometimes you'd got that little, "How come I'm not here?"  You know, then what quickly slapped me in the face was, "(unclear), you were on the show for nine years then another show before that, shut up, give some other people a chance.  Go sit down somewhere and be happy for them."  You know, but that's real, and I would be lying if I said that, "Oh, no, I didn't have any bad days, and, you know, I was fine and this," no.  There are times when it's not fine.  And you do wonder wow, was that the last hoorah?  Should I have really, you know embraced it more so because that was it?  You know, this kind of thing it's not like an athlete where your body tells you, "Hey, it's time to retire," you know.  The picture on your wall of somebody who was a hundred and something year's old who's an actress, so you can still keep doing this thing.  There are some people who may not get another gig for another ten years and then bam.  [Actor] John Travolta, quintessential comeback story, you know, I mean, it's just how does that happen, but it happens.  So I recognize that I'm very blessed that the transitions for me have not been long, the dry seasons have not, although they seem enormous, you know, that they're not.  You know there's always, I mean, of course, in everything in life there's always someone that's worst off than you as they say, and so you make everything relative to you and your perspective, but you have to just know that the transitions are not the destination, you know.  Just like if you're at a gig, I mean, yeah, I was blessed to be at a gig for nine years, but that's not the destination, that's a phase. That too will pass; something else will come, after that, something else.
Story_ID: 6972
Speaker 1: Now [television program] 'Living Single,' tell the story of how that even came to be.
Speaker 2: 'Living Single,' the woman who created the show, Yvette Lee Bowser, at the time she was just Yvette Lee, and she was working on a show called 'Hanging with Mr. Cooper,' as a writer/producer.  And I had finished college [Pepperdine University, Malibu, Calif., 1990] and I had done some guest-staring roles on shows like 'Fresh Prince' and  'Roc,' and so I was seeing that the industry was responsive to me and not tossing me aside like they are so known for doing.  And so I was looking at, okay, I'd like to do another series and I'd like to do, like a romantic comedy.  And so I was talking to different writers, writer/producers that were in the industry.  And at the time you had shows like 'Martin' and 'Fresh Prince' [The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air] and 'Hanging with Mr. Cooper,' so you had some black people that were behind the scenes at that time. And so I met with Yvette about a project that I wanted to do and she said, "Well, I'm kind of busy because I'm developing a show for [television network] Fox and [television production studio] Warner Brothers," at the time it was called 'My Girls.'  And [actress] Kim Coles and [actress, musician] Latifah [Queen Latifah] were attached.  So that's what she was developing. She said, "But there's a character in it and I had you in mind when I wrote it.  It's this, you know, kind of diva from the 'hood kind of a vibe."  And I was like,  "Huh." And so I read it and I, you know, met with the producers, the network, that kind of thing, and after the pilot they changed it to 'Living Single,' and the rest is beautiful history (laughs).
Speaker 1: Now why did she think of you as the, you know, that was a different role.
Speaker 2: It was a very different role, and I don't know because I had never played that type of a diva before, or that kind of almost diva who's still got some 'hood in her kind of vibe.  I had done a play [Vanities, 1994] with Tommy Ford [Thomas Mikal Ford]  from the 'Martin' show and Wendy [Raquel] Robinson, who later would go on to do Steve Harvey's show.  And I don't know if Yvette ever saw that play, but in that play I play this real diva who was hiding the fact that she was, you know, around-the-way girl kind of like.  But the blessing from that was that playing that character in that play allowed me and gave me what I needed to create or breed life into Regine [charter on Living Single].  Because I wouldn't have known where to begin with that kind of character, and to make it my own and not just bite off of or pull from people who had played similar characters.  You know, every role you really have to put your stamp on it and make it your own as an actress, that's how I feel about it.  So I don't know why she thought of me, but you know, hey, I'm grateful she did.
Story_ID: 6973
Speaker 1: You know what's interesting; you were at NBC [National Broadcasting Company] [on Facts of Life] when it was [Programming Chief] Brandon Tartikoff, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then just putting this in historical context, [television network] Fox was, you know at the time, Fox had started to rear its head, I mean, there had been three networks, and it was saying, you know, we're on the scene. (Inaudible) the brother, Wayans.
Speaker 2: [Television program] 'In Living Color'.
Speaker 1: 'In Living Color' had really made the Fox, right?
Speaker 2: That was one of the signature urban shows that had really helped Fox because Sinbad's Show [The Sinbad Show] they didn't give that the chance I think it should have had.  But 'Living Color,' yeah, it certainly helped make the urban audience pay attention to Fox.
Story_ID: 6974
Speaker 1: Did you know from the beginning with [television program] 'Living Single' that it would hit like it did?
Speaker 2: Again, you don't know when you're in it, you know, you could think something is so funny, so perfectly cast, you know, so perfectly shot, and it doesn't get picked up.  Then you see crap and that gets picked up or visa versa, so it's always a crap shoot, you don't know how the audience is going to respond, you don't know (in a lower voice), "Is television ready for this kind of a show?"  Because, you know, there was no show like that.  So for me personally, no, I had no idea. I knew that we had great chemistry, and that we got along so well, and that these people were really talented, and that the writing was very, very good, I mean, just extremely good.  And again, that there was nothing like it, and I felt that the audience especially our target audience was ready for something like that, but, you know, the audience could be ready and the network isn't ready and so they don't, you know, get behind it or whatever.  So when you're in it and doing it, you don't know.
Story_ID: 6975
Speaker 1: Remember how you were saying you on the set of [television program] 'Different World,' and you were thinking, "Well, why couldn't I be here?"  And I was even wondering at that point because you had not been part--.  You know the beauty of the [television program] 'The Cosby Show' and 'Different World' was it was all black.  And it was black and it was proud in the way, you know, and it was about us and it was relevant to the times, you know, it showed a different side of things.  Before, you know, with, you know, with your program, it was a modern day version of almost [television program] 'Julia,' you know, it was that prior to the black community, you know here's someone who represents us and she's there and she's at the table.  So I'm just wondering, but at the same time you're talking about you've been in these places where there's been a lot of camaraderie with the cast.  Now, were you able to influence this show, you know you're older right now, or your character?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When a show is pretty new, it has to find it's own life, you know, and the cast, unless you're in a position where you are also, you know, one of the show's producers and you've got that kind of say.  It's like [actor/comedian] Damon Wayans he's, I believe, a producer on his show, or [actor, comedian] Bernie Mac, or something like where you are involved from the inception as far as having say, you know, in the content and that kind of thing.  If you don't have that kind of pull so to speak out the gate, you have to evolve to that as the artist and as a commodity.  But otherwise the show is going to find its own life based on the direction the producer and the writers take it based on their own talents, and then that gets affected by a network and a studio that also has their say.  So with all of that, you know, it's not like we had a lot of say at the beginning, but there wasn't a whole lot to say anything about because it was so strong, it was so good, it was, you know. I mean, you can certainly have input like, you know, I don't really know that this joke works here, can we maybe look at something else?  Or, you know, what about this line, or something like that, or have ideas it wasn't a dictatorship, it's a team effort, but still, you know, there are boundaries and things like that.  Now, as the show gains more success and we become more comfortable in those characters, then we have a little more leeway to say, hey listen, what about this?  Again, we're not producers of the show, we don't have that kind of say and input, but it becomes even more of a team effort to that extent.
Story_ID: 6976
Speaker 1: Now Latifah [actor/musician Queen Latifah], at that point, she was still, was this her first series at this point because she was really making a transition from rap star to a TV star.  Did you have any sort of trepidations yourself, you know, about working, what her talent was?
Speaker 2: Not at all because I had seen her work, I had seen Dana [Owens] do, Latifah do, you know, she was in [motion picture] 'Jungle Fever'.  I saw an episode she did of 'French Prince' [The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air].  So I had seen, you know, pieces of her work to know that she was good, you know, and that she was committed, and that to me is the main thing.  If you've got the commitment and the discipline for it, you know she really committed to it.  She truly committed to being there and when she wasn't able to because, you know, she's in the studio doing her album or she's, you know, now got to be on tour to promote the album, she still gave [television program] 'Living Single her best shot.  Even if it meant working twenty-five hours a day being a TV star, then being a rap star, and being a movie star, that's not easy to do. And I just, you know, even for the times when it may have been frustrating both to her or to us because we feel like, "Well, Dana's tired right now."  Well, of course, she's tired, you know, or whatever it is.  And not just her, I don't at all mean to imply that I'm picking on her, it's just she's the example in this instance because she had the most on her plate.  But I never stopped applauding, and to this day never stop applauding, her commitment to her focus.  When she sets her mind to do something and she's committed to it, then that's it, you know.  We didn't move to [New] Jersey to film the show because that's where she was and that's where her people were and all of that.  She moved out there to do it, you know, and still kept her ties in Jersey.  And still would go back there to do whatever she had to do, and run her company, and do everything because she was Queen Latifah before she was on this TV show, you know, and that had to be factored in.  So I wasn't at all, I mean, I was a fan of hers, and I actually knew more about her as an actress than I did as far as a rapper because I only knew like a very small little portion of one of her songs.  I mean, of course, you know who she is, but I didn't know her like that, I wasn't in to rap music like that so, you know.
Story_ID: 6977
Speaker 1: So now, you start in 1993, right?  And the show, [Living Single] does the first season, does it take off the first season or does it take the second, was it one of these cases?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't remember.  I think it did, I think it found its audience pretty quick, and they did a lot of promotions about it. And there was some, you know, people who were saying, you know, "Oh, it's male bashing" and it's this that and the other, so you had that kind of stuff swirling about it, but I think it took off pretty quickly.
Story_ID: 6978
Speaker 1: Do you have, you know--I've asked you about favorite shows, you know, one of the favorite episodes, do you have one for 'Living Single?'
Speaker 2: We did one.  Well, in keeping with my tradition of having my favorite episodes are ones that have an impact on the audience and help people.  We did one where my character had a breast reduction [My Cups Runneth Over, episode 38, 1994], and it was just a really funny episode, very well written, but it helped a lot of people, it helped a lot of women.  So that would be a favorite, but my all-time favorite, I think, is the one when they flashback to when we first started moving, we first started living together [Back in the Day, episode 96, 1997], and it was a flashback of like five years prior to the show.  And they had me in this [actress, musician] Janet Jackson whole look back when [Janet Jackson album, 1989] Rhythm Nation [Rhythm Nation 1814] first came out, and I looked so much like her it was scary, but it was so funny because, you know, I was wearing all the military garb that she made popular in the '80s [1980's].  But we had to do Erica [Alexander] and I had to do this fight scene, and it was the funniest thing I think I've ever done in my life as far as physical comedy.  They had these stunt doubles kind of entangled that were doubling Erica and I, and then they rolled down the steps as us and behind the couch.  And so Erica and I were already behind the couch, so after the stunt doubles rolled down the stairs and got behind the couch, then we pop up fighting.  And she, that crazy girl, pulled me up onto her shoulders so I'm, like, across her back and she's spinning me around.  And my feet kick over this lampshade and then we start fighting some more and then she just starts tickling me and then I do something to her, and it's just so funny.  So we tear up the house with this fight and then Dana [Owens, aka Queen Latifah] comes into the scene and she's pissed off because we're tearing up everything, and then when she sees that one of her favorite little pieces of crystal is broken, then she gets upset and starts going off.  And it was just--.  It was so funny, I mean, it was so funny the way that it all kind of unfolded.  And then Erica trying to, at the end of the fight, she started getting interested, so she's bouncing around like she's a boxer in the corner.  And she picks up, totally spontaneous, she picks up a trashcan and spits into like it's the bucket in the corner of a boxing ring.  It was just so funny, so that's probably my all-time favorite one.
Story_ID: 6979
Speaker 1: What do you think the show [Living Single] taught, you know, did in terms of talking about, you know, relationships between black females?
Speaker 2: I think it did a lot in terms of exposing the beauty of the sisterhood, and some of the realities of the sisterhood that your girlfriends can get on your nerves, and your girlfriends you don't always see eye-to-eye, but you still love each other.  And you need each other, desperately need each other, even when you try to run with all your might, so I think it did that.  And then I think it showed the respect that's within the sisterhood because often times we're portrayed without self-respect or without respect of others and, in this case, we were just the opposite.  There were times when it also portrayed the beauty of love and the beauty that we as black people experience in love, which was something that we weren't seeing on television as well.  And just that chemistry that you have when you are with your girls and with your boys, you know, there's nothing like it, there's nothing like it whatsoever. And so I think it brought all of those elements to the forefront so that the people who can relate to it related to it.  The people who had never experienced that can experience that.
Story_ID: 6980
Speaker 1: Now, you'd gotten married [to business executive Johnathon Franklin Freeman], like, two years into the show, right, a year.
Speaker 2: '95 [1995] I got married.
Speaker 1: 1995.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The show [Living Single] started in '93 [1993], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so yes, two years.
Speaker 1: It said that he proposed on the set.
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you're having this sub-thing happen, I mean, no, I'm just--
Speaker 2: (Laughs) Right, I've just never heard it called that that's so funny.  That's great.
Speaker 1: So you're a newlywed and, you know, you have this show, but the thing that struck me is that the marriage ended about the same time the show ended [1998].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Being on 'Living Single' was amazing, and even for all the gripes and my leaving the show early, it still was such an amazing show to be on.  And again to be on a show where the public has such regard for it, it's just incredible.  And to have co-workers that you just, I mean, you just adore them, that stuff was incredible.  So to be doing all of that, to have the kind of past that I had going into 'Living Single,' which was already incredible, I'm the one that's still working.  I'm the one that made the transition, only the grace of god because, you know, not the little black child from Harlem [New York], I mean, that just doesn't happen.  You know, out of all [television program] 'The Facts of Life' girls or just all the child stars, and all of that stuff that I transitioned and I'm still doing this thing, I mean, and I don't take that for granted at all.  We can't even go there because my makeup looks fabulous and then five minutes from now it won't so.  But being on 'Living Single' and then having the dream of becoming a bride, and becoming a wife, having that become a reality, again having those things happen at the same time was just incredible.  I mean, it was a great time in my life and I'm, you know, in my mid-twenties and, you know, I mean, it was a great time. When it all ended, whoo!  (Laughs)  Girlfriend was in therapy, thank you Jesus for therapy.  And it's funny because I was just reading Halle's [actress Halle Berry] cover story in 'Essence' [magazine] this month [November, 2002].  And I loved that she, and I sent her an e-mail telling her this, I said, "I love that you were comfortable enough to share the fact that you have been a part of therapy and counseling, even at a young age."  Because we as black people, we don't do that, you know, we don't talk about that, and we don't go to therapy, and we don't seek help outside of our girlfriends who know the same stuff we do, what kind of help is that?  You know, or we go to big mama or auntie or whomever, who's formed their own opinions and attitudes based on the lives that they've lived and experiences that they've had that are not your own.  So you may get some wisdom, but that's different.  So, yeah, my tail was in therapy too.  I was in therapy before the marriage ended or anything, just because I'd gotten to this point where I realized that a lot of the things that I had developed that I thought were me, that I thought was working for me, wasn't.  Being able to speak my mind did not mean I was unprofessional.  Being able to, you know rocking the boat is not always a negative thing.  Being able to say that I have needs does not make you needy, does not make you weak.  So there were things that were very specific that I just had to work through and while that was happening, my marriage was not working, you know, or started not to work.
Story_ID: 6981
Speaker 1: So, and when [television program] 'Living Single' ended [1998], I actually left the show a few episodes prior to it ending.  And some people would say, "Why would you leave a few episodes?"  But I was that unhappy to where, you know, those episodes--  The time when I left, I was trying to leave by the end of year three for a number of creative reasons, and personnel reasons away from the cast.  The six of us are just as close today as we were then, and adore each other, and adored each other while we were working together.  And again, same kind of family thing though.  That does not mean that sometimes your brother or your sister aren't going to get on your nerves or say something one morning that, because you're already pissed off about something else or, you know, all sorts of things that come with being a family.  But the bottom line is we're a terrific family.  But having said that there were still some issues that in some ways we were all having collectively and then some that were just unique for me.  And so I just had to--such as, you know, after awhile you feel like maybe you're not reaching your potential.  After awhile you feel like maybe the network is not behind your show.  After awhile you feel like the baton keeps changing hands so many times.  And in terms of the creative staff running the show and, you know, you just want to know are you able to service the characters the way that you were when we first started?  Are you able to have us meet our potential as artists, you know, and really maximize these characters in us, and everyone having different visions quite honestly, I mean, that's really what it comes down to as well.  You have your vision for your character, the network has their vision of the show, they like the fact that, you know, we just sat around on the couch.  Well, that's not New York [New York], that's not, you know, people in their 20s and 30s in New York that are about something are out doing something and they're about things and they're not sitting around their couch, you know, and so there was those kind of issues that after awhile you felt like you're just, like you asked before, about hitting a wall.  And so having said all that, I just felt like I was shutting down, slowly but surely.  And I was you know, just retreating to my books, and just constantly reading so that I would just, you know, come in, do my part, and then leave.  Have a good time with the cast, and then leave.  And, you know, to me it was like I didn't do this just to get a check, and after awhile it started to become a check and, you know, then you have no passion and the desire.  And so at that point, hey, then it's maybe time to move on or work through this to get to the other side so that you can find that passion again and it just didn't happen that way.  So that happened and right after that happened and working through that, then my marriage started to go as well.
Story_ID: 6982
Speaker 1: You blossomed on [television program] 'Living Single' (laughs) (inaudible)--
Speaker 2: I did, I did.
Speaker 1: So did men approach you differently because before you were, what would you say, perky?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah it was perky, yeah, well, the character [Regine] was.  Yeah, I mean, of course, I mean, from the fans that, you know, followed me from 'Facts of Life' to 'Living Single,' just as I had grown up, they had grown up.  So I'm a woman, but guess what? They're men now, you know, and so, of course, the approach was very different because I'm not this cute kid or, you know, this chesty teenager anymore, now, I'm, you know, this full grown woman.  Ohh girl and when I lightened my hair, baby, all hell broke loose (laughs).  But anyway, so as much as they hated the fact that I was this, you know, this--well not--she [Regine] wasn't, she was very smart and very--she was very calculating.  She chose at times to be shallow because there is actually this group of women out there that think that that's attractive to a man, and that totally exists.  And I appreciated being able to portray that type of a person to be able to shed light on, "No, they don't appreciate that and if they do, they're really not worth being around."  Be yourself; be true to yourself.  And so evolution in coming into herself and, you know, coming to grips with her insecurities, and so her coving up the insecurities with the makeup and the hair and the clothes instead of dealing with what her needs are and who she is, that's the kind of stuff I identified with Regine.  Not the, you know, the hair and the makeup and the clothes and all that, all it is just because that's right there, but I don't look like this all the time and have no desire to.  This is work, being all pulled up all the time, I couldn't do that, and I marvel at the people who do.  Child please, I would be in sweatpants and a big old sweater in a heartbeat because I like to be comfortable, but Regine the fans definitely appreciated that I was doing something different. And that's the stuff that I started, when you asked me when did I become aware of the industry, that was something for me, that was a turning point because I knew that from now on I want to do things I hadn't done and play characters I hadn't played before, and so Regine was a marvelous next series to follow-up what I had done with [television program] 'Facts of Life.'
Story_ID: 6983
Speaker 1: Now, can you say something about each of the people [on the cast of Living Single], what you like about them or what is special about their personality?  Like Kim Coles?
Speaker 2: Kim Coles is very funny.  She's got all of this energy and at times she's even goofy, you know, she's just as a part of what she tapped into when she was doing her standup comedy, the types of characters that she would do on [television show] 'Living Color,' but she's very sensitive.  But it's a side and like most standup comics, most of them are highly, highly sensitive and have a lot that they're dealing with or have dealt with and they've used their comedy as that outlet and as that shield, you know, to get them through.  But she's a very, very sensitive woman.  Not in a negative way, you know, and again women our self-perceptions is that if we're sensitive that we're weak, not so.
Story_ID: 6984
Speaker 1: And what about [actress, musician] Dana [Owens, aka Queen Latifah], who you refer to as Dana?
Speaker 2: That nut, I love her, she's so funny and she's so talented. I mean, she's just so, so talented at whatever she puts her mind to, you know.  If it's singing, she has a beautiful singing voice.  If it's her rapping, if it's her transitioning  her own career as a musical artist, let alone as a TV personality with her talk show, with the TV show, with her movies, I mean, she's so talented and she's smart as Hell.  She's so smart, and she's savvy, and I adore those things and I admire those things in her.  And see the similarities in the two of us in a lot of those areas because we've achieved a lot, an enormous amount of success at very young ages and most of which have come from our own talents, you know.  Most especially in her case, you know, I was in a series where people were doing the writing and I had costars and things like that.  Hers is just truly, you know, is from her writing and her rapping and her being a solo artist and those things at a very young age.  I think she was like sixteen when she was, you know, Queen Latifah.  And so I really admire all of that and the pain that she's been through and continue to goes through, you know she's very strong.  She's very strong because she's had to be.  I understand a lot of that, I understand when you are a woman that has any kind of authority or power either in your own company or on a project or whatever, that's a lot and sometimes you have to be strong when you truly don't want to be.  You have to, you know, kind of be pulled up by the boot straps where you have to do the pulling, and you want somebody to pull you up, you have to be the cheerleader when you want somebody to be your own cheerleader.  You know, and that's the female side of us that so many women in power try to act like it doesn't exist or keep shunning.  And I have learned over the last few years that you have to embrace that part of you, as well as that other side.
Speaker 1: And did her brother [Lance Owens Jr.] die during the series?
Speaker 2: No, he had already passed.  Yeah, the accident happened [1992] before we even started doing [television program] 'Living Single.'
Story_ID: 6985
Speaker 1: And then [actress] Erika Alexander?
Speaker 2: God, Erika, another one who's crazy.  She's so funny, good god in heaven, she's funny.  She's very spirited, you know, and people try to use spirited as a politically correct way of saying, you know, she's arrogant or whatever, and I'm not using it like that all. I mean, she's spirited in that she's--  In like the '20s [1920s], and '30s [1930s], and '40s [1940s] Erika would have been a broad, you know what I mean?  And I just adore that spunk, she's got fire, you know, a lot of the life that was breathed into Max [Maxine Felice Shaw, Erica Alexander's character on Living Single] is Erica, the character, not at all.  Erica actually hated most of what her character was doing, she hated the fact that she was always eating and greedy like that, she hated always being at our place.  She's like, "I'm a lawyer with my own place.  I'm a lawyer, why am I always over here on the couch?  How come I'm not out practicing law?"  You know, so there were things that she hated about the character, but the life that she breathed into it from her line reading.  She would say a line, and I've been in TV for a long time, and I would never have heard anybody even attempt to deliver a line that way, you know, she is the definite go against the grain.  And she goes against the grain not for shock value or for the sake of going against the grain, that's just her and it's like a breath of fresh air.
Story_ID: 6986
Speaker 1: And  [actor] T.C. Carson?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, T.C., big brother, you know, total big brother, very protective.  Very--  I think often times misunderstood quite honestly, especially there, in that environment, I think Mister white man didn't always know what to do with T.C. quite honestly because T.C. is a strong black man and strong in terms of his thoughts and his opinion.
Speaker 1: That doesn't mean to say he's opinionated, but he's very strong and committed with what his passion is and what he's believing in.  And a lot of people don't know what to do with that sometimes, you know, and to be able to not go for the okey-doke.  You know, there are plenty of times when I don't go for the okey-doke, and have been interestingly enough, not very often, but once or twice been called difficult.  Which is so funny to me because if I won't let you pull the wool over my eyes, it doesn't make me difficult. That just means don't try to B.S. me, you know, I'm young, but I'm still a veteran.
Speaker 2: I know this game, you know, I know who the players are, I know how to do this thing.  And so as far as T.C. goes, you know, he's not the kind of an artist that's just grateful for the gig and, you know, "Okay," and, you know, that kind of thing.  He will say, "Unh-uh, what are you doing, what are you talking about?"  You know, and not all the time, not at all because, you know, again that means we're difficult and that's not the case.  But just when it comes to things especially basic right and wrong, you know, or basic agree to disagree or whatever, you know, and that kind of stuff.  So I think to that extent that he's been misunderstood at times.
Story_ID: 6987
Speaker 1: And [actor] John Henton?
Speaker 2: (Laughs)  God.  I might have to get back to you on that one.  All of that is because John and I dated (laughs).  John and I were a hot and heavy romance for the first year of [television progam] 'Living Single,' the first year, year and a half of 'Living Single.'  I mean, hot and heavy romance, we were, you know, photographed all the time, we were--I think 'Ebony' [magazine] dubbed us as one of the hot couples of that year, you know how they do the celebrity couples in February and stuff.  So we were working together, practically living together because I was either always at his place or he was at mine.  So, you know, we were together all the time, so it was a very, you know, like I said, we were just this gigantic, hot, heavy romance thing.  And there's a lot of love there, a lot of love there that goes so far beyond the professional adoration that we all, the six of us, had and have for one another. And the love that we all had as a family as brothers and sisters, but just so much love that's still there, you know, for both of us.  And he's a wonderful friend; we're wonderful friends.  When he was here a couple of weeks ago, you know, I was in town for about five minutes actually because I was up in Green Bay [Wisconsin] at the time working.  And just every time that we talk to one another, you know, it's just a lot of just really good feelings.
Story_ID: 6988
Speaker 1: Really, and John [Jackson], John [Henton], and Jonathan [Franklin Freeman]?
Speaker 2: I know, isn't that a trip?  Somebody once said, "Kim and her Johns."  I was like, " Oh, that sounds awful."  Yeah, so--not hard to make a mistake in bed though that's for sure (laughs).  I'm sorry.  "Did little Kim say that?  Kimmy said that?"  Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: That's cute.  You weren't on the rebound were you?  Were you on the rebound?
Speaker 2: What when I got married?  No, when John [Johnathon Franklin Freeman] and I broke up, it was really a surprise to everybody including us because John and I we were so in love, but so different.  You know, the twenties are a great time in your life, but they're also the worst time in your life because you don't know shit.  And I don't mean to curse, but you really got to put it like that, and if you've got to bleep it out, I understand, but you really don't know anything when you're in your twenties.  But the problem is that you're at this point where you feel like you know everything and it's this horrific oxymoron that you are living for a decade.  And so I'm in my twenties late twenties, he's in his late thirties, and the patience that he had with me is with hindsight one of the things that I just adore and appreciate about him because I know I frustrated the heck out of him because I was still trying to find my way.  I was trying to find out who I was as a person and what I was becoming, you know, I had just kind of gotten some stability in terms of my work as an actress and being on the show.  And feeling like I was getting comfortable with growing on that show as an actress, but as a person, I mean, I was, you know, twenty-four, twenty-five, twenty-six, I didn't have a clue, you know.  I knew what all the articles said and what the interview said and that kind of thing, and what I'd hope I was becoming and I knew in general, but in terms of the specifics, I felt, you know, just like there were no specifics.  And so I was either researching or creating what the specifics of me were, and when you're doing that, you can't possibly give to somebody because you don't really know what you're giving.  In general, again general, you're giving love, but what are the specifics, you know.  And so as I was trying to, and it sounds very L.A. [Los Angeles, California] (inaudible) to say, as I was trying to find myself and I wish I could come up with another phrase.  But truly, as I was trying to find who I was becoming as a woman, as that was getting more and more definition, it kind of pulled us further apart.  There were things that I just loved, I loved that he seemed this kind of bad boy image, you know.  He was the rebel, and he smoked, and he was in the standup comic lifestyle, you know, so that meant the comedy bars and the club scenes and, you know, that kind of thing.  And he was this brother from Cleveland [Ohio].  And, you know, hell, I hadn't dealt with my, you know, real blackness for lack of a better word, you know, in years.  I mean, hell, I was a [television program] 'Facts of Life' girl, you know what I mean?  And so, not that I felt whitewashed, I don't mean to imply that, but I didn't have any specifics again, I didn't have any foundation. I didn't have--I had my spiritual foundation in my family, but again coming into my womanhood, those were the defining points.  And so as I'm trying things, I'm, "Does this work?  No, I don't really feel like that's me. Does that work?"  You know, it's like trying on clothes almost, you know, you see what you like, what you don't like, what's flattering, what's not flattering?  What's in your closet that you've had forever that you know does not fit anymore? That's how I felt in trying on my womanhood, you know, and it's a process, it is such a process and I'm certainly not through with it.  But that process had started right as we were, you know, together.  And so the things that I felt I was making as definitions of Kim and Kim as a woman started to no longer gel with what we were about.  And it was unfortunate because I knew more than anything that he loved me so much, but again, this is just where I'm at.  So that's why you see all of that on my face when I think about John because he put up with so much of me, you know, just trying on and figuring out.  And unfortunately, you know, at this point now we're such good friends and that romantic thing is not there, so that as I feel I'm a little closer to more of the definition of the woman.  Now I'm just not in that kind of woman space to share with you as a man (laughs).
Story_ID: 6989
Speaker 1: Where's the Kim Fields, where are you today?
Speaker 2: Professionally?
Speaker 1: Professionally, personally?
Speaker 2: Professionally Kim is kind of, I think, near the end of another transition.  You know, once I left [television program 'Living Single,'] I started doing more directing for TV with [cable television channel] Nickelodeon and [cable television channel] The Disney Channel and I started doing more theater, which was a welcome change because theater had always been a part of my life since I was a kid.  So it was nice to do theater and do projects that really challenged me as an actress.  Which again from the time I started doing 'Living Single,' I only wanted to do things that really challenged me as an actress because I felt like okay, I've been doing this a long time so I've got the mechanics and the basics, now I want the challenges of it.  So I did the [play] 'Vagina Monologues' in Chicago [Illinois], did a couple of stops with the touring company, directed some theater.  And so right now I'm producing and staring in a theater project, 'Barefoot in the Park.'  The reason why I said I feel like I'm at the end of this transition is because I think with 'Barefoot' it certainly is a great challenge acting wise, and the audience sees me in yet another light.  They've seen me grow up, they've seen me as a kid, they've seen me grow up, they've seen me as the single girl in the city.  And in this piece, they see me as a newlywed and dealing with, you know, trying to understand and work out what it's like to be married, and that give and take, and that kind of stuff, so I'm excited about that.  And again, being the show's Executive Producer, again putting to use what I've learned about the business of show business and then learning much more because the business of theater show business has it's, you know, very different ways than television or films.  So it's not been without it's challenges, but it's, at the end of the day, it is and will be very rewarding.  I definitely look forward to returning to television, I'm not burned out on doing series, whether it's comedy or drama, I really don't have a preference.  I think I would prefer the schedule of comedy because it's not as grueling of a schedule, just literally the routine is a little bit different than film or drama shows.
Story_ID: 6990
Speaker 1: Personally, I feel like I'm in a really good space, which I marry, spiritual with personal.  And so while I may not be the vigorous churchgoer, I actually feel like I'm closer in my relationship with the lord.  I read this amazing book while one of a series of books of 'Conversations with God' [Neale Donald Walsch], and it's really been very enlightening for me and in terms of my relationship with god.  I hope to definitely--  Not hope, I will be married again and have children and, you know, I'm not sour on men or sour on marriage or anything like that just because, you know, the first time [to Johnathon Franklin Freeman] didn't, you know, didn't last forever.  I'm not gun-shy, you know, I've jumped back out and, you know, gotten knocked around a few times, but, you know, you get up.  I don't mean that literally, I don't mean that literally, that is not my testimony.  I'm one of those sisters like, "I wish a brother would try to be-", yeah, no, I don't mean that.  I meant, you know, emotionally kind of thing where, you know, you think, you know, hey, this is the one.  No it's not, you know, and I'm gone through that phase of oh, "I'm just dating," and you know, that whole thing.  But I definitely look forward, you know, with great anticipation, not trepidation for the day when I do remarry and have children and start a family.  I really welcome all of that, I absolutely do.  I welcome not working so hard, I thoroughly welcome it.  In fact, if it happened this moment, I would not be mad, I mean, I really look forward to that.  I look forward to, you know, being able to have the option of whether I want to work or not.  And not from a monetary standpoint, but from a standpoint of because there's other things to do.  "Well, you know I can't do this film right now because you know what, that's right during soccer season and my boy is all star or all pro," whatever it is, you know.  Being able to have that kind of decision to make, you know.  "Can you do a guest star on this episode of so and so?"  "I'd love to, but, you know, my daughter is doing this that or the other, or my husband needs me to be Mrs. whomever at his thing, in his life, or his work."  So I welcome having those decisions to make as opposed to going at it so hard on the battlefield that I have been in the last few years.
Story_ID: 6991
Speaker 1: Now, several questions I have.  Are you seeing yourself more as a director now?  Do you want to go--you say you want to return [to television]?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay. But the relationship with [cable television channel] Nickelodeon and [cable television channel] Disney, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: When I started--when I was doing [television program] 'Living Single,' somebody at Nickelodeon read that I had started directing, and that I had directed an episode of 'Living Single' and that I directed a short film [The Silent Bomb, 1994].  And so they asked me to come down to Florida and meet with the people who were doing [television program] 'Keenan and Kel.'  And so I met with them and I started directing, I did half of just about every season of that show as a director and I loved it.  From there, you know they had other shows that they were doing, and they just kept asking me to do other shows for them.  And the same with The Disney Channel, with the Disney Channel it was more the gentlemen who was producing the shows, it wasn't really the network.  It was people that were producing these shows, and then from there, relationships developed.  I really prefer, quite honestly, directing those types of shows because they're visually more creative because their, you know, their target audience is young people, and so you have to be visually creative to keep their attention.  And so I appreciate that instead of it being just kind of, you know, the routine of, you know the shows that are on regular network television.
Speaker 1: And was [play] 'Barefoot in the Park' the first thing that you've executive produced?
Speaker 2: It's the first project and certainly the first theater piece that I've executive produced.  A little over ten years ago I associate produced a show called [play] 'One Monkey Don't Stop No Show' and we did a national tour with that, but this is the first time that I've executive produced and been, you know, the true head of the ship.
Story_ID: 6992
Speaker 1: Now, you know, I've found that, I mean, you talking about your dreams personally I found that, you know, had a very warm and fuzzy feeling, like a lot of pink in it, you know, with balloons (simultaneously laughing).  What are we going to pink this time, with little ribbons in your hair or your kids' hair?
Speaker 2: No, no, my kids will not be wearing pink and ruffles, not at all.  But having said that, I mean, I understood the work that goes into maintaining or having or being in a relationship and most especially a marriage.  And so I don't mean to imply that I view it with rose color glasses, not by any means I had that view that realistic view before I got married [to Johnathon Franklin Freeman, 1995].  So now having been married and divorced, it's still enforced, you know the realities of it.  But the way that I view it, I mean, being a wife is work, being a partner is work, being a mother is work, you know.  And to me when you're in a marriage, you are that helpmate, I mean, you know, there's some very biblical sound truths and fundamental foundations for that stuff.  And I believe that with my whole heart and that all takes work, that doesn't just happen, you know.  The difference--and the same with motherhood, I assume.  The difference to me--the difference between going to a job that you love and going to a job that you hate, it's still work, but you either love it or your very, very, very unhappy and working.  I would prefer to be in a situation where yeah, it's work, and sometimes it is damn hard work, but at the end of the day you go, "But I love what I'm doing," you know.  What do you do?  This is hard work maintaining this and interviewing all these people and doing all that you do, and that's just a sliver of it.  So for all that you do, but you love it.  You have tried other things, done other things.  This right here you know this is what it is for me.  And so to me that would be the same thing, you know, yeah, I understand that professionally, but even personally yes, I've tried other things and, you know, this is it right here, you know.  I've been with other people and I've been married, this that and the other, but this is it.  So yes, it's work and I'm challenged in it, and sometimes I want to give up or whatever, but I keep coming back to, but I love this thing.  So that to me is the difference versus you're in a job, and we've all had jobs and gigs that we just are like oh god, thank god for this check because otherwise I would not be here.  And in the back of your mind, you're like, "This is no way to be, I need to get out of here soon because I don't have a passion for it, I don't love it, this is just a check," you know.  And some people, they stay with that mentality and twenty, thirty years later they look up and they're still in that same place and extraordinarily unhappy.  And it shows up in the performance of their work, you know, that stuff shows up in how you perform in your marriage.  So for me, yeah, its work, you know.  Raising kids, please, that is work.  And nowadays with all the blended families, raising somebody else's kids, please, of course that's work.  No question about it, of course it's hard work.  Sometimes you want to knock everybody out, but at the end of the day you know what, I love this and I love them.  And that's what keeps it okay, and that's what keeps you from walking away or going up somebody's head, or you know, whatever that makes it really just unbearable.
Story_ID: 6993
Speaker 1: You know I want you to address also the work of the profession.  And, I mean, that to be successful a lot of people think, you know, oh well, she got found at, you know, this age, and she was cute, and she just had, you know, a silver spoon in her mouth.  Will you address the issue of what being in this industry takes and what it really is like?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Being in the entertainment industry, especially if you are an artist, especially if you are on camera, be it as a singer, rapper, dancer, comic, you know, actress, actor, you have to have extraordinary mental strength because you will be rejected for things that are completely out of your control.  It's not like somebody will say can you do the line differently and you do it differently.  Then they go, "Oh okay, cool," and you get the part.  You could do the line at fifty different ways from Sunday, but if you're too short, you're too short, there's nothing you can do about it.  If the director's brother's cousin, you know, is the one who they want for the part, there is nothing you can do about that.  So you will get rejection after rejection after rejection.  You will get highly frustrated at the politics of it, but when you finally do get that break, because that's what it is, it's a blessing, but it's still a break.  When you get that break or that opportunity, then you better work it like a two-piece baby, because you don't know when it's going to be over with.  And that means a lot of hard work, you know, if whatever your look is, you have to maintain that.  I'd hate to be [musician] Britney Spears and [musician] Christina Agu- [Christina Aguilera] whoever because that would be too much work to maintain that look. I would nut up trying to maintain that, please, you know, but that's what they do, you know. [Musician, actress] Janet [Jackson].  Janet works her butt off year after year after year to achieve what she's achieved, physically, mentally, you know, she's been through Hell. [Actress] Halle [Berry], you know, these people just didn't just happen upon it and if they did, we look up and they're still here. Janet's been making hit records since the mid-'80s [1980s].  Not a whole lot of folks can say that, you know, Halle's been making movies even though she's hit her stride in recent time, she's been making movies for a minute.  So it takes a lot of work, I mean, just the literal routines.  If you're doing movies, you're on a set about six A.M. filming all day or you start at the set at 10 P.M. and you're working through the night and through the morning, you're not done until maybe seven or eight in the morning.  You know, if you're a comic you're out late at the clubs, you have to write material, you always have to stay current, you have to know how to read because you need current events, you know.  So there's work that goes on, you know people have to exercise and workout because yeah, you've got to look a certain way.  If you are going to be in the entertainment industry, you have to look a certain way.  That's just the bottom-line.  So yeah, there's a lot of work that goes on, you have to have a work ethic, you can't be lazy.  You cannot be lazy and think it's just going to happen or that Puffy [musician Sean "Puffy" Combs] is just going to see you in the mall and be like, "Oh wow, he's wearing my gear, let me put him in my next video."  It doesn't happen that way, it truly does not happen that way.  Puffy's got some kind of show [Making the Band] on [cable television channel] MTV where it's showing him and how he--  It's kind of like the [television program] 'Osbournes', I guess, but it's more about the business of what he does, not the at-home stuff.  And I'm so glad about that because these kids are able to see Puffy when he is not the artist, he's working his tail off.  He's working his tail off as an artist, but when he's, you know, being the man behind Sean John [clothing company] and the man behind Bad Boy [record label] and dealing with artists, and artist development, and contracts, and record labels, and concert promoters, that's a lot to deal with.  Not to mention I have a staff of people that I have under me that I have to make sure that they're doing their thing, but who's livelihood I'm responsible for.  If you are the head of a tour and you're the artist and you don't keep yourself in mental and physical condition, if you cancel a show, that's hundreds of thousands of dollars that people lose.  That means portions of people's checks. You've got to break it down like that, you know.  That's how serious it is when you talk about the work that goes on behind this thing.  You're the star of a show and you decide that you're going to go out and party and this that and the other.  And so now you've got a hangover, you're too tired, or you're out trying to be cute with your chest and stomach out and you get a cold, and now you can't do your show.  Well, that means that we have to not only cancel this and pay everyone, but reschedule and pay people for when we do.  So you've cost us money.  You do that once or twice, you ain't got no career. I'll keep my stomach covered for that (laughs).
Story_ID: 6994
Speaker 1: Now, is there anyone in the industry that you really respect?
Speaker 2: Yes.  (Pause)  Oddly enough there aren't very many actors or actresses, and just because how I think and what inspires me.  That doesn't mean to say that I don't know who they are in terms of the pioneers and the trailblazers and, you know the [actress] Diane Carroll's and the [actress] Beah Richards and, I mean, I know my history to that extent.  But who really speaks to my spirit and keeps me going, are actually athletes.  Again, me being the sports fan that I am, yeah, I watch as a pure fan of the game, but when I look even further, what I can appreciate like this season let's take the [football team, Chicago] Bears.  Chicago Bears are having an awful season; they had a great season last season, an awful season this season, roller coaster ride.  Same in acting, one minute I'm on a series, next minute I'm not.  How do I rally my troops?  Even if I'm the only troop, how do I rally to be able to number one, to still go out there to keep playing?  Let alone to come back next season.  Do I come back to that team; do I just go and do something else with a completely different team?  Is it time to retire and go into the front office?  You know, is it time for me to retire and just be behind the camera?  So there's things like that.  That's how I relate to it more so than actors or actresses.  You know, people like [professional football player] Brett Favre and [professional football player] Emmitt Smith who have been in the game a long time, they're very talented, but in very literal sense is what I appreciate is the fact that they create opportunities when there isn't one.  There may be no receiver open and Brett will scramble around until he finally finds the most unlikely candidate to catch a ball, but you qualify so let me get it to you and just make a play, you know.  Emmitt Smith looking down the field, no holes, no holes, no holes, I'll run over top of you if I have to reach my goal.  So after I'm the fan, that's how things register to me, you know, so that when there just doesn't seem to be an opportunity in sight, if I have to create it, that's how [play] 'Barefoot in the Park' came up.  If there just doesn't seem to be anyone else to go to and I have to do it myself, then I will, you know.  If I'm having a winning season, great, if I'm not having a winning season, how do I encourage myself and encourage the troops to still hang in there because we're being challenged right now, but it doesn't always stay that way.  So those are the people and, I guess the entities that really inspire me.
Speaker 1: And you're in a do-it-yourself mode, right?  You said you were without a manager right now, right?
Speaker 2: I just got a new manager, yeah, and probably once the New Year [2003] starts, we'll start meeting with agents, but I don't have an agent right now.
Story_ID: 6995
Speaker 1: Now, what about the industry in African Americans in the industry, I mean, are you happy with the state of things now?  Do you see a lot of more people behind the scenes and doing things?  You're just a tad ahead of, like when you said of [actress, musician] Queen Latifah, you know, because a lot of people look at the, you know, the rap and hip hop industry and they're trying to understand it, but they understand that those people know how to make money.
Speaker 2: I don't know if honestly will ever be quote unquote satisfied, and I don't at all to mean to sound like a pessimist, but I'm a realist to a certain extent that there are just certain people that run things.  And until we do, certain things just, you know, are only going to change, but so much.  And history is certainly, you know, always repeating itself.  So just the same, right now [television network] UPN is, like, the network and has the black night, and [television network] Fox was like that year's ago then Fox got rid of all their shows. [Television network] WB [Warner Bros.] was like that when they got started, you know, so there are patterns that develop.  Yeah, of course, I'm thrilled that people are working and that people of color whether they're black or, you know, Latin or Asian, Native American, whatever, that people are working.  I'm, not impressed, what is the word?  (Pause)  I find it interesting that society has opened its mind up a little bit more so that you've got shows like [television program] 'Sex in the City' or the [television program] 'Sopranos' or [television program] 'Six Feet Under' or [television program] 'Will and Grace.'  You know, you've got shows that weren't traditionally for television because society was not there yet.  But now we're so there, that those are, like, the number one shows.  I'm thrilled that they can accept [television program] 'Bernie Mac Show' now, you know, Bernie been trying to get on TV forever and they couldn't find the niche yet.  He would even say that, you know, "Maybe America's not ready for me just yet," that kind of thing.  Obviously they are because he's got a hit show, and his writer [Larry Wilmore] is the writer who won the Emmy [award given by the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences for outstanding achievement in television] over all them white boys and girls.  So, you know, there's something to be said for those things and they're marvelous achievements, absolutely.  So I think that we are, we, of course, will have a long way to go, but we've made some really good strides in the last couple of years, sure, you know.[Actress] Halle [Berry] and [actor] Denzel [Washington] winning [Oscars] on the same night, I mean, that's, you know, that's great.  So yes, the industry, the society has opened its mind up a bit, but, you know, we still have a ways to go.
Story_ID: 6996
Speaker 1: And I often ask people, there are people of legacy question, and I don't know if I want to get to that, but I do want to ask you a legacy question right now.  I mean, but you're so young, so you've lived a long life.  But, I mean, I'm asking at this point, well, you're thirty-two, right?
Speaker 2: Thirty-three.
Speaker 1: You're thirty-three, okay.  So what do you want your legacy to be because we came back, like, thirty years later and asked some questions?
Speaker 2: I think to some extent my legacy has already begun in terms of the body of work that is in my wake thus far.  I received a fan letter the other day from a guy in Green Bay, Wisconsin.  And he was saying how he'd been a fan of mine for so many years and all the shows that I've done and the characters that I've played, but especially on [television program] 'Facts of Life' and [television program] 'Living Single.'  And so I think, you know, when people are channel surfing and they can catch me at age twenty-six or nine, you know that it's kind of started already.  I marvel at the fact that you can turn on the TV and see a show like 'I Love Lucy,' that's still like a huge hit and all four of them [Lucille Ball, Desi Arnaz, Vivian Vance, William Frawley] are gone, and that's such a tremendous legacy.  Not to mention the legacy that [actor] Desi Arnaz left as pioneering the whole way that TV shows and TV comedies are recorded and shot.  I don't know that I'll reinvent the wheel or do anything new like he did or be as innovative, but I hope that a good strong body of work, first as an actress then as a director and producer is what my legacy is.  Projects that the black community embraced, projects that women embrace, projects that young girls or characters that young girls can take something from.  That professionally right now would be what I would say that I would hope would be my legacy.
Story_ID: 6997
Speaker 1: And when you have children, would you want any of them to be a child star?
Speaker 2: The game plan for me as a mom would be to be able to expose my children to everything that's positive and everything that's healthy and everything that's creative.  I mean, believe it or not math and science and law, that's creative as well.  I mean, just expose them to everything and then let their spirit guide them and if it guides them to that, then so be it.  I've certainly have lived through it to know how to be able to help supervise it, and I've not had such an awful experience that I would shun them from it. It's not something I'd push them towards or away from, but that's with anything because I think once you, you know, let them see everything, then they'll naturally go to whatever is in them.
Story_ID: 6998
Speaker 1: Now, your mother [Chip Fields], what is she doing now?
Speaker 2: Mom is a director and a consultant, and she's on [television program] 'The Parkers.'  That's her main show.  She also directs [television program] 'One on One' and she has directed [television program] 'Girlfriends.'
Speaker 1: So she transitioned into directing?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did, she did.  Yeah, she did. I think it was, yeah, it was after me.  And she'd been teaching for such a long time and coaching, that's really how she transitioned into it.  Because she was coaching all of these people, [actor] Mark Curry, [actor, comedian] Steve Harvey, [musician, actress] Da Brat when Brat had a pilot for a minute, so she'd been coaching a lot of the singer comics who were having, you know, film and TV projects and not knowing what to do with them.
Story_ID: 6999
Speaker 1: ...that way.  But you've, you know, but I think a lot of times people really--.
Speaker 2: Well, if that's the jumping off point, and for some people it is, I know someone who wanted to get into acting because they were an athlete and they had a career-ending injury and decided that they wanted to be in acting because they missed getting the accolades.  That's not why you, what, are you high, I mean, what are you saying?  I can't know that, I mean, that's not why you do it for the applause or the fame.  And, you know, when I go and I speak to young people and the cast of [play] 'Barefoot in the Park,' my cast mates, we go and, you know I've spoken to young people.  And, you know, we tell them, "Make sure that if you want to get into entertainment that you understand you've got to get in it for the right reasons because you love to do it or you want to entertain people or, you know, it's not for the applause and the money and the laughter, you know, and the accolades because those things may never come.  It may never come.  You may not make a dime as an actor.  You may not hear one laughter, one bit of laughter as a standup comic.  You may not ever get an award as a singer, or get money as a singer, or as an actor, or, you know, those things just might not ever happen if you're dealing with the surface of it.  And those things are surface. 'Oh, I want to be in movies so I can go to the premieres.'  You know that's like saying I want to be an athlete just so, you know, I can make a lot of money.  You ask any athlete that's not what they're in it for, you know.  Did [Microsoft CEO] Bill Gates get into computers and everything because he saw he could make a lot of money or because he knew that he could help people with what he was doing and make something that already existed better.  Most doctors, most of them will say I want to help people.  I want to heal people.  Teachers aren't, well, we know teachers don't get in it for the money, but the point is that, you know, you can't deal with things on the surface.  You have to have that deeper passion for it so that if none of those things happen, you still have satisfied your desire, you know, and that's what is going to be a point because otherwise you may not ever get it satisfied."
Story_ID: 7000
Speaker 1: But you asked me about my legacy, and one of the projects that I'm spearheading right now is in the park that I grew up in back in New York in Harlem, Saint Nicholas Park.  And we've already started dialoguing with some of the parks department and things because I'm looking to put like a small amphitheater playhouse in there in order to bring theater to that community.  Because if you want to see theater, you've got to go down to Broadway [New York, New York] or go down to the [East] Village [New York, New York], or, you know, it's not really accessible, the arts are not accessible.  And to be able to bring that, you know, where I've been successful, being able to bring that to the community that nurtured and developed me, that's something that I definitely hope happens.
Story_ID: 7001
Speaker 1: If you take yourself back to that, you know, because you were so vivid in your description, you know, I usually ask people favorites sights, smells, and sounds, and you've described the sights so vividly.  But even, you know, to the child who was sitting there with, you know, trying to watch [television program] 'The Mickey Mouse Club,' because your grandmother with her eyes (inaudible)--.  When you see that child and you see yourself today, what changes have occurred or what is still the same?
Speaker 2: I think what's the same if we go to the child who was there watching [actress] Pearl Bailey in [play] 'Hello Dolly,' and watching my mom [Chip Fields] in 'Hello Dolly,' and being behind the scenes and seeing all of that.  If we go to that child, that child is still in me that says, "I love all of this.  I love the work that is going on to make this all happen.  I love the relationship between the people on stage and the people off stage, you know, out in the audience."  Not I'm performing for them, but the give and take that's happening here, what I'm giving to the audience, what I see these people giving to the audience and what the audience gives back.  That child is still in me, you know.  Again, to use this example of an athlete like a [professional football player] Brett Favre or an [professional football player] Emmitt Smith, you know, a lot of the commentators will often say and comment on how, and especially in Brett Favre's case, how he still has such an enthusiasm for the game.  And for what he does that it's almost childlike when he, you know, completes a pass or makes the touchdown or wins the game.  It's like a little boy that lights up, you know, that you could probably have seen when he first started playing football when he was, you know, whatever eight, nine years old, whatever.  And so that's how I see this where for me I've been doing this for a long time and yet there are certain things that still that I respond to the way that I would, you know, as a child when I was first being introduced to these things. Some things I still find that are new to me, you know and new energy for it.  So that's where I'm the same.  Where I'm different is just, of course, and the basic, you know, just progression of life and what I've learned that makes me a women now and not, you know, a child in a woman's body.  So I don't know that there's anything from then that would be, you know, here except for that one thing.  Everything else is very different.  I've experienced so much in life and in love and in spirit and in work.
Story_ID: 7002
Speaker 1: So what roles would you like to play or maybe you're looking for now?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, I've played a killer, I've played the single girl in the city, the cute kid, the kind of awkward teenager, and currently playing the new wife, the new bride.  I've played a mom, but I've only played a mom once when we did [television program] 'The Facts of Life' reunion, and I enjoyed playing a mom so much, I loved it.  So I'd love to do that, more dramatic roles, more comedy roles.  Again, even I've been in this for so long and I've been blessed to have great opportunities, there's still a lot that I haven't done, you know.  And so nearly anything outside of those roles would be a challenge to me because I've not, you know, I've not done them.  I just did a romantic comedy in independent features.  My first time I was kind of like a leading lady.
Speaker 1: Was that 'Me and Mrs. Jones?'
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  You know, and just because I played something once doesn't mean I can't play it again, you just play it differently in finding the challenge in that.  But there are some things that I play for a very long time, I mean, I played the single girl in the city for five years [Living Single, 1993-1998], you know, 'Facts of Life,' I played that character [Tootie] for nine years [1979-1988].  So, you know, certain things that you go, okay, "I did a--."  It's like when people first asked me after I finished 'Living Single' what did I want to do TV wise and I said, "Have my own apartment."  And they laughed, but I'd been the quite essential roommate for fourteen years of television for two series living with some chicks.  Can't I live for a brother for a minute?  (Laughs) You know, so at that point my requirements are real simple, let me just have my own place, you know, let me just be in a relationship for more than one episode.  So other than that, you know, after that the sky's the limit.
Story_ID: 7003
Speaker 1: And what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: You know, in the grand scheme of things, I would love to be remembered again for the body of work, you know when we lost people like [musician] Sammy Davis [Jr.], or any member of the Rat Pack [Frank Sinatra, Dean Martin, Peter Lawford, Joey Biship], but [actor] Jack Lemmon, [actor] Walter Matthau, they were known for a body of work.  Even though people had their favorites, you know, [television program] 'The Odd Couple' or, you know, whatever depending on who it was, you might have your favorite, but they were still known, again, for the whole.  And I would hope for that for myself, that, you know, for the whole thing.  Like when I go, I really, lord have mercy, I don't want the newscaster to say, "[Kim Fields's character on Facts of Life] Tootie died today."  That would suck, I mean, that would just freaking suck.  That just would, I can't even front, that would suck, you know.  "Actress Kim Fields, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah," and then throw in, you know, the best known for [television program] 'Facts of Life' and [television program] 'Living Single.'  But that other way, you know, I mean, that like my tombstone is going to say, "Here lies Tootie."  I mean, it's not going to be that way, do you know what I mean.  Come on, that's not my destination, that's a part of a whole.  But again, you know, I still recognize the fact that that character was endearing to so many people as a part of their life for so many years.  People invited me into their homes to grow up on my own and with them and their families for nine years, so I'm not knocking it by any means, and I think people misunderstand that about me.  Like, you know, when they play 'The Facts of Life' theme song when I go to do an interview, come on, give me a break with that.  And it's not that I don't like the song or that I don't want to hear it, but I want you to acknowledge the fact that that's a portion of a larger whole, you know.  I wouldn't even be as mad if they played the 'Living Single' theme song, number one it's hipper.  But number two, at least it's either also recognizing that that existed or at least existing something that's more current.  You know and these are my crosses to bear as the artist, you know.  But I already understand.  Here's when it became crystal clear to me.  [Actor] John Henson and I were hosting during our first season of 'Living Single,' second season of 'Living Single,' we were hosting a [television network] Fox New Year's Eve special, live from Las Vegas [Nevada].  And you know, in [Las] Vegas New Year's Eve they close down the strip so there's no cars that's coming through there, but it's truly curb-to-curb people.  The whole, I mean, it's just packed for miles with people crammed in there.  Let alone we were shooting right outside of [hotel, casino] Caesar's Palace, so there, you know, TV cameras and all that stuff, there's really just, I mean, just thousands of people there and it was live.  At a commercial break so, you know, John and I are standing there talking with some of the crew whatever and we hear this chant that's starting to develop and we're looking around, like, "What is that, what are they saying, what are they saying?"  I have this strip of Las Vegas on New Year's Eve filled with predominantly white men chanting, "Tootie, Tootie, Tootie."  What do you do with that (laughs)?  What in the world do you do with that?  Then the next commercial break, "'Facts of Life' rules, 'Facts of Life' rules," like it was on yesterday.  You know, so that's when it became kind of crystal clear that look honey, you can be the artist all you want and people will recognize you from a number of things.  And by the grace of god, people do know my name, they know Kim Fields, but there's that but that always comes, so you know, again that's my cross.  But you know, if you've got to have cross, the Tootie cross ain't a bad one (laughs).
Story_ID: 7004
Speaker 1: So do think [actress] Sally Field would be an example? She has a body of work, right?
Speaker 2: She does, she does, sure.  But for the longest time it was [television program] 'Gidget,' 'Gidget,' "Gidget,' 'Gidget.' or [television program] 'The Flying Nun,' 'Flying Nun,' 'Flying Nun,' but she had to, you know, first of all she had to grow as a person, as a woman, grow into her womanhood, and then when she did roles like [motion picture] 'Norma Rae' and other film roles, number one she changed mediums.  She got out of people's homes.  There's something about being in people's homes that makes you a little more seemingly accessible.  When you're in a movie or you're on a record, you're not in their house the same way.  In those mediums they have to pay to see you, and on a movie screen in particular you are on a gigantic screen so you don't come across as one of us, you are literally larger than life based on the nature of the medium.  So I think all of those things happen, you know.  And yeah, of course, people kill when they say, "Don't you want to do movies?"  (Sarcastically) "No, I want to stay in television all my little life."  Of course, everybody wants to do movies, anybody who's an actor will say, yes, they want to do movies and theater and this and that.  Doesn't mean the opportunities are always there.  But yes, you know and now that I'm having the opportunities to do some independent films and to be on the big screen and hopefully those will garner more opportunities, but I think change in the medium, absolutely helps, absolutely it does.
