Story_ID: 261267
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure, it's Cheryl, C-H-E-R-Y-L, McKissack, M-C-K-I-S-S-A-C-K, Felder, F-E-L-D-E-R [HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder].
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Yes, Joan.
Speaker 1: Okay, J-O-A-N?
Speaker 2: J-O-A-N.
Speaker 1: All right, now, do you have any middle names or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I mean any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Nicknames, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now this is an interesting spelling of McKissack.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you hardly ever see it like this.  Is there any story attached to that spelling?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, we've been told that our name was, the spelling of our name was the original spelling and that our relatives in South Carolina changed the spelling of the name to I-C-K (laughter).  But I recently have friends who were in Ireland.  And they actually saw a tombstone with McKissack on it, spelled that way.  So it was a name given in slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay, and it's probably the original spelling of that person's name--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --whoever the slave master was.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 15, 1961, Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a civil engineer and president and CEO of McKissack & McKissack.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 9, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In McKissack & McKissack corporate headquarters in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 261268
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight People magazine-ish kind of questions that The HistoryMakers always asks.  And they only require a short answer.  They're kind of a warm up.  Okay, can you tell us, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  No, I love all food.  There's not too much I don't like.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like all seasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The islands.
Speaker 1: Okay of the Caribbean?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean islands.
Speaker 1: All right, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me" [Philippians 4:13].
Story_ID: 261269
Speaker 1: Now I'd like to ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side and your father's [William McKissack] side.  We'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, her name is Leatrice, L-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, Buchanan, B-U-C-K, I'm sorry, B-U-C-H-A-N-A-N, McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is August 27, 1931.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace those ancestors?
Speaker 2: To my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was, and I don't know if I could spell this (laughter), Alrutheus, A-L-T-H-R-U-, I don't know, T-I-S.  I don't know, T-H-I-S [sic.], Alrutheus.
Speaker 1: Alrutheus, okay.
Speaker 2: Taylor [A.A. Taylor].
Speaker 1: Taylor.  Now, is there a story behind his name, first of all, his first name?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but he, there's a story with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He received a Ph.D. from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 1929 [sic. 1936], and he was provost for Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] and wrote the history for Fisk University.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so he was at Fisk University when Charles Spurgeon Johnson was there, and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, as the provost, okay.  So does he come from a long line of black educators or was, do you know anything about his father [Lewis Johnson] and mother [Lucy Johnson] or where he came from?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I do not.  I know more about my father's ancestry.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it would seem to be some information written about him since he wrote the history of Fisk, that there'd be something about his own history.
Speaker 2: He's listed in 'Who's Who.'
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did you, do you know anything about your grandmother on that side?
Speaker 2: I know her name (laughter).  Miriam [McKissack]--I'm sorry.  That's my father's grandmother, Catherine [Buchanan] Taylor, with a C.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us much about her?
Speaker 2: She came from Missouri.  And her father was a landowner out there.  And she moved from Missouri to Tennessee which is where she met my grandfather, Keytesville, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your grandfather got to Harvard?  Now, that's something that was very unusual for those days, and he was a black person in graduate school at Harvard.  That's a big deal.
Speaker 2: It's very unusual.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I guess when you talk to my mother (laughter), you could get a better story on him 'cause she would have that information.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there're no stories passed down in the family about how he got a chance to go to Harvard or any of that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's important.  That ought to be passed down (laughter).
Speaker 2: They ought--that, you know, there's been more focus on the other side because when I was like fifteen, I did the family tree.
Story_ID: 261270
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] talk about growing up?
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: I mean, do you, wh- what do you know about your mother's growing up and education and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother grew up in, well, until she was twelve or ten, she lived on a farm in Keytesville, Missouri with my grandmother's [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] first husband who was her biological father who passed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And his name was Buchanan.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was the biological father, and Mr. [Alrutheus] Taylor was a stepfather.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And she moved to Nashville [Tennessee], I guess early adolescence.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And moved to the Fisk Campus [Fisk University, Nashville Tennessee], went to Pearl High [School; Martin Luther King, Jr. Academic Magnet School, Nashville, Tennessee] and then went to Fisk.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she met Mr., Professor Taylor at Fisk as a student?
Speaker 2: My grandmother met Dr. Taylor (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Dr. Taylor, right, right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And I believe at the time, she was working at Fisk.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, does your mother have any stories about Fisk in those days or any stories she shared with you about growing up?
Speaker 2: She did.  She, because her father was an educator and a historian, he was very good friends with Arnaud Bontemps [Arna Bontemps]. Thompson [ph.], Langston Hughes.  So they would come to her house when she was a little girl and meet for dinner.  Aaron Douglas, the famous artist, did all the murals at Fisk and various other places.  These were her parents' friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's quite a--
Speaker 2: Arna Bontemps lived right next door.
Speaker 1: Now, he worked at the Fisk library, didn't he?  Or was he, he was a librarian at Fisk, I believe?
Speaker 2: He was a librarian, um-hm.  And before, I guess, I mean and then he became a well-known author.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, did she ever mention Arthur Schomburg [Arturo Alfonso Schomburg]?  He spent a year at Fisk studying how to be a librarian for--
Speaker 2: You know a lot (laughter).  I did work at the Schomburg Theatre in New York [New York], so that's what, my limited knowledge of Schomburg, but she never mentioned him.
Speaker 1: But you built the new theater, you helped build the new theater there or did--
Speaker 2: At the time, they were building the new theater, Turner Construction [New York, New York] was the contractor, and I was working for Turner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I was an estimator on the project.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the new building.  I think it--
Speaker 2: Call it Countee Cullen.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Countee Cullen Library [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yep, that was like '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Right, '89 [1989].  I've got the poster at home on the wall.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Opening of the new building, you know, the Jacob Lawrence poster.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Right, right so, that's something, yeah, but Schomburg spent a year at Fisk learning, you know, training to be a librarian because he knew Charles Spurgeon Johnson, you know.  The New York Public Library [NYPL] bought his collection so he was actually on campus too.  He probably knew your grandfather as well, you know I would guess.
Speaker 2: Probably so.
Story_ID: 261271
Speaker 1: Well, tell us, give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name is William DeBerry, D-E-B-E-R-R-Y, McKissack.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, does the DeBerry from--?
Speaker 2: Doctor, there was a Dr. Deberry in Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That seems like a last name, middle name, sort of.
Speaker 2: You're absolutely right (laughter).  You know a lot (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, just guessing.  But so what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, his date of birth is August 29, my parents' birthdays were two days apart, and she was '31 [1931].  He was '26 [1926].
Speaker 1: Okay, and was he born in Nashville?
Speaker 2: In Nashville.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: A lot.
Speaker 1: Now, as we came in, we could see the pictures of several generations on the wall out here in the lobby.
Speaker 2: Five generations.  Well, my I'm the fifth, myself and my siblings.  It's probably easier to start with 1790 when the first descendant [Moses McKissack] from our family came to America as a slave from the Ashanti tribe in Ghana.  He was given as a wedding gift to a William McKissack.
Speaker 1: Now, how did the family come to remember that?  Was it passed down through the family as knowledge or is it written some place, some other place or how did you all find that?
Speaker 2: It was passed down, and then it was written.  So we have this now documented.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know his name?
Speaker 2: Whose name?
Speaker 1: The name of the Ashanti who was given as a wedding gift?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, but that's where you can trace, at least as far back as you can trace.
Speaker 2: That's as far back as we can trace.  Now, my father did go to Ghana.  He met with people from the tribe that his ancestor came from.  So we might be able to get that information.
Speaker 1: Now, was the story passed down in the family that he was an Ashanti?  Did people say that?  I mean was it passed down?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In that case, you all are extremely lucky because a lot of people just don't have any idea.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But we do know in those days that some people did know, you know, even in the 1900s, I mean in the 1800s, they knew what tribal group their people came from even, you know.  Even some of the abolitionist knew where they came from.  But nowadays, it seems like hardly anybody knows.  But I guess they were closer to it than we are now.  But is there any more information about him that was passed down?
Speaker 2: There's a picture of him out there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, is that, and we were looking at that, and is that a--I know they didn't have photography way back then, so was that from a drawing or a painting or something or how did you get that?
Speaker 2: It has always looked like a photograph to me.  But you're right, it had to have been a painting, but it always looked like a photograph.
Speaker 1: He has a very bushy beard, with a top hat on and a bushy beard.  Now, he possibly could have been, it could have been a photograph--I know it's been retouched in some way.  I can tell that, but it looks like it's, it could have been a photograph if he lived long enough.  Now, if he was sold in 1790, but he could have lived--we had photography by 1840.
Speaker 2: Oh, so it could have been.
Speaker 1: It actually could have been a photograph.
Speaker 2: It could have been a photograph--
Speaker 1: So that's like fifty years after he was brought over.  And he does seem to be an elderly man sitting there with the bushy beard, though people in those days didn't live--some of them, most of them didn't live as long as we do today.  But some did, you know, so he, yeah.  So was he sold as a child or do you know that part--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure what the age was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it could actually be a photograph, actually.
Speaker 2: Because it looks like, it always looked like a photograph.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah, but it couldn't have been a 1790 photograph, but it could be one from later because he could have lived longer.
Speaker 2: Right, I mean that's with his wife [Miriam McKissack]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who was Indian [Native American], Cherokee Indian.
Story_ID: 261272
Speaker 1: Now, what does the original photograph look like?  Do you have, have you ever seen the original (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The original photograph was black and white--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and then it was colored in.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  But is it on a, do you know whether it was on--I'm just curious now.  Was it a tin-type or a carte de visite or--
Speaker 2: That's a little technical for me (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  I'm just taking a risk asking, so I don't know, you know.  But somebody, whoever in the family still has possession of it probably knows because they probably had it looked at by some authority, I guess or something in photography.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Something that old ought to be looked at by someone who--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --an antiquarian, so they can tell you exactly what to call it.  They had several different types of photographs in those days.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, well, so he [Felder's paternal great-great-grandfather, Moses McKissack] reached fairly old age.  Did he remain in slavery his whole life?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: William McKissack gave him his freedom and taught him the trade of building.  So he was a builder.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me get this straight again.  William McKissack lived where?
Speaker 2: Spring Hill, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's interesting too because William McKissack must have really been a pioneer because Tennessee at that time was the frontier of the United States, pretty much.
Speaker 2: I know Memphis [Tennessee], and all the cotton and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the far west.  In the 1790s, Tennessee was like, you know, going to California or something.  You know, you could, you were right on the border of French territory basically cause they, you know, the territories that used to be New France, they're right on the edge of something that had just been opened up to settlers from the United States.  So, yeah, so they were really out there on the cutting edge.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And now, Lewis and Clark [Meriwether Lewis and William Clark] didn't travel across the country until 1802 or something like that, 1803.
Speaker 2: That is something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so they hadn't even, no one had walked across the United States and documented, you know, the whole length of it until Lewis and Clark.  So--
Speaker 2: But the slaves were coming in South Carolina and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, but you're saying getting as far as Tennessee was a big deal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was a big deal, is a big deal.  I mean a lot of it was surveyed, but, you know, it wasn't, it would be a big deal to get there in the 1790s.  You'd be out on the edge of U.S. civilization then, basically.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And in the, as far, I mean as, just back to the 1840s, they referred Western Pennsylvania as the West of the United States, the western part of the United States.
Speaker 2: Interesting.  So they traveled and settled.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  So he was given his freedom, and he was taught a trade?
Speaker 2: Of construction, building.
Speaker 1: Building. Okay.
Speaker 2: And the story goes, he passed that trade down to his son who is [Gabriel] Moses McKissack.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when was Moses McKissack born?
Speaker 2: Oh, the first one was Moses McKissack, did I tell you that?
Speaker 1: Oh, the slave?
Speaker 2: The slave.  His name was Moses McKissack the first, and his son was Moses McKissack II.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So his son was Moses McKissack the second, and when was he born, do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he grew up in Tennessee too?
Speaker 2: He was in Tennessee as well.
Speaker 1: All right, and any stories about him?
Speaker 2: Not too many stories about him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had fourteen children.  He had seven girls and then seven boys (laughter).  And I guess growing up, we used to have to remember all the boys' names.  And I'm trying to remember cause the last, well, Moses McKissack III because he was the first boy born after seven girls, he was given all the boys names that the parents would have given if they had had boys.  So his name was Moses McKissack John Henry Edward Lewis McKissack III (laughter).  That's interesting, but that's what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So Moses McKissack III, very interesting man.  He incorporated our business, McKissack & McKissack in 1905 with his brother, younger brother, Calvin McKissack.
Story_ID: 261273
Speaker 1: So they're [Felder's paternal ancestors, Moses McKissack III and Calvin McKissack] really the founders of the family business [McKissack & McKissack] as we know it now, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And in 1905, there were no such thing as architectural license.  So they were just considered builders, constructors.  And they built homes basically.  And they built homes for the very wealthy in Nashville, Tennessee.  In 1921, is when the state instituted architectural licensing, and it was a requirement to have a license to practice architecture, which they had already been practicing for fifteen, sixteen years.  So they went to architectural school through correspondence and then petitioned to take their exam.  Of course, they were denied because they were black.  And, but they continued to pursue the process, and being denied over and over again.  They finally met with a board member who found favor in them, and he convinced other board members to let them at least take the exam.  They took the exam and passed the first time.  Then they were denied their license.  So the board member again lobbied on their behalf and the State of Tennessee finally granted them license 118 and 119--117 and 118 in the State of Tennessee.  And those are the licenses are out in the lobby.
Speaker 1: And when did they finally get their license?
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-two [1922].
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's not too bad.  They're about a year, but they had to take the test over and over again.
Speaker 2: They didn't have to take the test over.  They just, it was just getting--
Speaker 1: Oh, lobbying.
Speaker 2: Right.  They're the first black men known to have architectural licenses in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, now before they required licenses, did they experience, it seemed like they were fairly successful as builders and designers of buildings and architects prior to the licensing, but I mean in a state like Tennessee which is a prejudice place, I mean in those days, and Ida B. Wells was run out of Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] started in Pulaski, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly, so I mean that's not the easiest place to operate a black business necessarily.  So how were they able to, are there any stories about, you know, what they had to do to remain successful in that kind of environment?
Speaker 2: It was a period of time where black people really worked together to build economic strength.  It's interesting you ask that because over the holidays when I was home, my mother [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] and I had that conversation because I do a lot of travel because we have an office in New York [New York].  But New York is only ninety miles from here [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  They did work not only in Tennessee, but Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, on, you know, the East Coast.  And so, I mean the conversation, the question is, how did they travel?  Where did they stay?  How did they, you know, get around the prejudice and, you know, your life was on the line everywhere you went.  And they were in Texas.  And so my mother was telling me what happened, they had crews all over.  And they had friends.  So they could stay at their homes when they traveled.  And they would get in a car and they would drive all day and barely get out of the State of Tennessee and stay with friends.  And while they were there, they would check on their projects in that area.  Then they would move on to the next city and to the next city and to the next city.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in those days, I mean were they primarily working on black projects, black building projects because I know in those days, people were building black schools.  The black colleges [HBCUs] were being built?
Speaker 2: They did black colleges.
Speaker 1: Churches.
Speaker 2: Black churches.  We built Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama], a lot of those projects there.  We built the Tuskegee Air Force Base [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama], Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi]--
Speaker 1: Down in Holly Springs [Mississippi], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, so it's a list, Xavier [ph.].  There was some work done there.  At Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], we built all of the buildings there except for one; Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  In, actually, in 1990, we renovated a building at Tuskegee that my grandfather [Moses McKissack III] built in the early 1900s.  So can you imagine traveling from Nashville to Tuskegee, Alabama?  We have done probably two thousand churches.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they had crews everywhere.
Story_ID: 261274
Speaker 1: This is fascinating.  So they, your [paternal] family was responsible for building most of these, a lot of these black colleges and universities [HBCUs]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: And I think---I would guess that most black people don't know this, that black builders and contractors and architects were working on these sites.
Speaker 2: Yes, these men [Moses McKissack III and Calvin McKissack], they did work for Papa Doc [Francois Duvalier].  They were in Haiti.  We have brochures that are in French.  We have bank notes where they borrowed a hundred thousand dollars at a time in those days.  They built a five hundred-unit housing complex [College Hill Housing and Apartments] in Nashville, Tennessee, and they were the developer.  That's pretty impressive.
Speaker 1: It is, it is, indeed.  Now, did they ever have, were there stories about difficulties of getting contracts or what they'd have to do to maintain--I know a lot of these contracts are coming from black institution.  And that probably wasn't difficult, but did they have trouble getting federal contracts and local contracts?
Speaker 2: You know in the record, I don't see, well, the federal contract that they won was the Tuskegee Air Force Base [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Was that the first one?
Speaker 2: Yes, first one.  It was the largest contract ever awarded to African American firm by the federal government.  But when I look at the work that they've done or the most, the majority of their work was not for the government.  It was private.
Speaker 1: Okay, and some of the stories from those days, I know, I've talk- interviewed a few people who talk about some educator in their hometown or some businessman in their hometown putting his or her money on the line to build a school, you know, a high school for that town, and that sort of thing, where they would save--I know my father tells a story of how Mr. Dotson [John Dotson] in Princeton, Kentucky who was a junk man who saved his money, he saved up money to build the school there.  You know, and it's named after him.  It was called the Dotson [High] School [Princeton, Kentucky].  So a lot of the segregated schools in the South had that kind of--so those kind of projects I guess were always--
Speaker 2: They have a school named after them.  It's called Moses McKissack [Middle] School [Nashville, Tennessee].  They have a park, McKissack Park [Nashville, Tennessee] (laughter).
Speaker 1: In Nashville?
Speaker 2: And my grandfather [Moses McKissack III] used to build the churches at cost so he didn't make a profit off of them.  And I remember I met some people here actually, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] who worked for him as bricklayers, as laborers.  And they said they would work on the weekends for the churches for free.
Speaker 1: That's something.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did any of them work on Mother Bethel [A.M.E.] Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] here in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I know Mother Bethel Church.  They're gonna redo some work though, Mother Bethel.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--
Speaker 2: That's on the Underground Railroad.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  So, the firm [McKissack & McKissack] was established in 1905--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, it sustained itself off of contracts from black institutions basically.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, absolutely.  And like I said, they went to Haiti.  And there were quite a few wealthy, white Tennesseans who still had them build, designing and building homes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's something too.  So that wasn't a burden, I mean that wasn't a barrier to doing that kind of work.
Speaker 2: No, there wasn't.
Speaker 1: I mean people who had the money who appreciated their work, so it must have been quality, considered quality work?
Speaker 2: It had to be quality.  I mean I look at it today.  I mean going to the bank and getting $100,000 in 1940.  They didn't go to a black bank (laughter).  They had to be well respected.
Speaker 1: That's something.  So they--
Speaker 2: And this is long before, you know, minority and women-owned businesses and goals and things of that nature.
Speaker 1: Now, did your grandfather ever talk about or do you know any stories about how he was able to maintain those relationships and to keep the business viable?
Speaker 2: The stories I hear are about integrity, quality work, relationships, good, strong relationships with people.  And I think that's what's impacted me the most with my business.  I've, I have used that page out of my ancestors' book over and over again.  And that's building relationships, and I work hard at that.  I see, I have no respective person.  I love everybody, and I feel that if I produce quality work, then I have op- then I should have an opportunity to pursue anything in this country and this world that I like.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I do that, and I do that through leveraging my relationships.  And I have relationships with all, with people from all walks of life.
Story_ID: 261275
Speaker 1: To continue this story, your father [William McKissack] eventually becomes the head of McKissack & McKissack, right?
Speaker 2: He was the youngest of six boys from Moses McKissack III.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when did he take over?
Speaker 2: He took over in 1956.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so, now, did your father tell you about growing up, any stories about growing up and, you know, about his schools days or days learning the business, the family business or anything?  Did he ever talk about that?
Speaker 2: He talked a lot about Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  He loved Howard University, and we had absolutely no choice where we were going to college (laughter).  And he would call it Halvert (laughter).
Speaker 1: He would call it what?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Halvert, Howard and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (laughter).  And he would tell us that's the only place we could go to college.  And that's what we did.  And we looked forward to it.  He had a good experience at Howard.  He was Omega Psi Phi [Fraternity].  He was there when they built the Que sundial [The Dial], and that's where he went to architecture school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story about how he and your mother [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] met?
Speaker 2: There is.  Now, let me remember that (laughter).  I think they met at a small gathering and maybe somewhat of a introduction, a blind date type of situation at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] campus even though he didn't go to Fisk.  She went to Fisk, but they met while my mother was in college.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and when did they get married?
Speaker 2: That I do not know. Let's-- that would be hard for me to calculate (laughter).  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: I came on the scene much later.
Story_ID: 261276
Speaker 1: Do you have any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I have an older sister [Andrea McKissack], who's eleven years older, and then I have a twin sister [Deryl McKissack].
Speaker 1: Okay, are you identical twins or fraternal twins?
Speaker 2: We are identical twins.  She actually has a residence in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have offices in Chicago?
Speaker 2: She does now.  She opened an office in Chicago about two years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there's a McKissack [& McKissack] office here.  I know there are six of them now, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Around the country.  There's Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I guess, well, Nashville [Tennessee], of course, Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Well, I closed the Nashville office.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: I have just New York [New York] and Philadelphia.  My sister is running Washington [D.C.], and then she opened Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And does she operate in the same capacity that you do basically for those?
Speaker 2: Yes, but she started a, we both started our own firms, my sister and I.  But then I went back, and I bought the original firm from my mother [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--
Speaker 2: That's why I have all the stuff in the lobby (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'd let her use it though.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 261277
Speaker 1: Do you have a first childhood memory, an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my [twin] sister [Deryl McKissack] kicking me out of my mother's [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] stomach (laughter).  That's why I was born first (laughter).  I didn't wanna leave (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's the first time I've heard that one.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, have you interviewed a lot of twins (laughter)?
Speaker 1: You know that's the first time I've heard that one.  So, now, that's quite a earliest childhood memory, yeah.
Speaker 2: I had to rough it first.
Story_ID: 261278
Speaker 1: Now, describe where you grew up.  Now, you all should be pretty well off, I would think by this time with all these generations of people, you know, doing all this great work?  So did you, I mean, did you really have it made when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: We had a very nice, wonderful childhood.  We were, I would say we were middle class.  We weren't wealthy, but we were middle class, and both of my parents [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack and William McKissack], being that they were educated and their parents were educated.  There was a lot of intellectual discussion.  There was a lot of culture.  We all enjoyed art, probably more African American art.  We spent a lot of time at the college campuses, Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], in particular, my mother's love.  She's on the board now, and she's now looking at how to publish the history there.  We spent a lot of time at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] campus because that's where my father did a lot of work.  So we came from a strong background of who we are and what our identity is.
Story_ID: 261279
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights were, I remember beautiful foliage.  Tennessee has nice beautiful hills and everybody had a lot of space, and we had lake property, so we would go to the lake and it was a beautiful place to grow up.  The life style was very different than here.  The smells were, a lot of flowers, a lot of good, southern food.  That's what I can remember, recall.
Story_ID: 261280
Speaker 1: Now, what did your neighborhood look like and who lived there, you know, basically?
Speaker 2: We lived on McKissack Hill [Nashville, Tennessee] (laughter).  The property was owned.  It was a hill, and it was owned by my grandfather [Moses McKissack III], and he sold all the lots, and it was very nice homes, you know, three thousand square-foot homes.
Speaker 1: So basically, it was a developer of your, your family's development, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Well, each, each family built their own home.  They just bought the lot.  We built our home, and it's a very beautiful lot.
Speaker 1: Can you describe the home for us?
Speaker 2: The home was probably built in the late '50s [1950s], and carport, very large, what we would call today a great room, or the kitchen, the dining room and the living room is all combined.  My parents [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack and William McKissack] entertained a lot.  We had two, three bedrooms and a master bedroom and a lot, a lot of art.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was it built on the '50s [1950s] kind of straight line type architecture or what kind of architecture was it?
Speaker 2: No, it was nothing straight lined. (Laughter) It was a--my father probably designed it so he was more contemporary.  So our furniture was more contemporary, and that kind of went with the theme of the house.  It was different than the other homes there.  The other homes were more colonial, traditional.  Ours was not.  It was brick, but the roofing system was very different.
Speaker 1: Was it a flat roof or--
Speaker 2: No, it was, it had, it had slants to it, but it was different--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a lot of windows.
Story_ID: 261281
Speaker 1: What kind of a little girl were you?  What were you interested in?
Speaker 2: I was a tom girl, and I enjoyed sports, but at the time, sports was not what it is today.  Sports for us was kick ball (laughter), softball, in the street, and then I always was a runner, so I would jog and run through Centennial Park [Nashville, Tennessee], miles, you know, distance running.
Speaker 1: I mean when did you start running distance?
Speaker 2: Probably about thirteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you were growing up, now, you're a twin.
Speaker 2: I'm a twin.
Speaker 1: Was your twin [Deryl McKissack] a lot like you?  Were you all a lot alike and did you do a lot of the same things?
Speaker 2: We were opposites.  She was definitely a girly girl (laughter), and she was very good at it, and still is.  I grew into that when I went to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  But we were very different in our personalities.
Speaker 1: Okay, you look just alike, right?
Speaker 2: Identical.  Identical.
Speaker 1: Did you ever try to fool people?
Speaker 2: We did, we did.
Speaker 1: I know it's gotta be a temptation if you're a twin?
Speaker 2: Yes, and then when you get to college, and, you know, you wanna miss a few classes (laughter), we'd stand in for each other.  And we were very close, very close.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to the same school and everything together?
Speaker 2: Same school.  We were roommates in college.  We roomed in the same room our entire childhood, teenage years.  We stayed in the same room, even though we could have split up.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any funny stories about getting mixed up or that come down from being a twin?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] said she's not really sure who's Cheryl and who's Deryl 'cause we did.  We looked so much alike, and we still do.  So what she did early on was put a blue bracelet on me.  That's why that's my favorite color.  And she put a red bracelet on Deryl.  And she said one time, she had to take it off because she said, she needed to wash the area where the bracelets were.  And she wanted to wash it really good. And she really couldn't remember who was who (laughter).  But she thinks she got it right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually might be--
Speaker 2: Deryl (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, okay.
Speaker 2: So that's an interesting story.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is when you were little, huh?
Speaker 2: Babies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She said it was very difficult.  And she had two all the time.  And at that time, they didn't have Pampers.  You know, you washed diapers.  The milkman came.  She said it was a very difficult time.
Story_ID: 261282
Speaker 1: Now, what grade school did you go to?  Can you tell us about that?  What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: Because my mother [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] was a teacher, and she wanted us to have the best education, she wanted us to go to a private school, and it was called Peabody Demonstration School [University School of Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee].  Peabody was a school for teachers, but they also had a private school.  And at the time, it was one of the elite private schools in Nashville [Tennessee].  And my [twin] sister [Deryl McKissick] and I were probably, were the second and third black kids to go to that school.  And we went to that school from kindergarten to twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: So this would be 1966 or so?
Speaker 2: Right, like sixty, I would say like '66 [1966] so we were like five years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, through the twelfth grade?
Speaker 2: Through twelfth grade.  We graduated.
Speaker 1: And when did you graduate?
Speaker 2: In '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So Peabody went all the way to twelfth grade?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I take it this is an integrated school by now, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No heavily integrated.
Speaker 1: It was mostly black or mostly white?
Speaker 2: Mostly white.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Yes, math, absolutely.  No questions.
Speaker 1: And that's unusual.  Most girls don't say math.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: They usually don't.  They don't, well, that's pretty much, most people say that now that more girls get involved in math now than ever before, but they were sort of discouraged from being interested in math at one time.  But yours was math in those days.
Speaker 2: Well, it was easy.  Numbers just are easy for me.  It's exact.  I like exact things.  I can remember numbers easily, and it was just a natural.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your sister have the same aptitude for math?
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers or mentors in school?
Speaker 2: First grade (laughter).  I liked my first grade teacher.  It's amazing the impression they have on you, Mrs. Dickerson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have any black teachers in school?
Speaker 2: No, we had one black P.E. [physical education] teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, for all the twelve years of school?
Speaker 2: All twelve years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you, were you involved in school activities with the different clubs and did you run for office or anything like that when you were in school?
Speaker 2: No.  Our social life was back in our neighborhood at home.  So we really didn't participate in the prom.  We didn't participate in running for president of, you know, the class or anything like that.
Story_ID: 261283
Speaker 1: You were born right during the sit-in movement in Nashville [Tennessee], when the Civil Rights Movement in Nashville was really heatin' up and Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], you know, had all the great leaders like James Lawson and [HistoryMaker Reverend James] Bevel and Diane Nash and all those people, and [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni was at school there.
Speaker 2: You know all these people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, it was really the, that was the center of all the sit-in activity.  The Freedom Rides started out there, you know.  That was like before you, that was when you born.
Speaker 2: I remember that.  I remember the riots.  My godfather was Avon Williams who was a civil rights attorney.  I remember going to, you know, his son's birthday party, and we came out and a cross was burning in the yard.  And we were probably about seven years old.  I remember, you know, my father's [William McKissack] aunt at Fisk University in a telephone booth and bullets going all around and him having to go get her.  And there was a curfew that was imposed.  So everybody was to be home at dark, and I remember that night worrying about him.  So I remember those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, so even as a little kid, it made a big impression on you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember my mother [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] crying when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, [Jr.] was shot.  I remember my father, my mother crying when Kennedy was killed.
Speaker 1: When Dr. King was killed you were maybe seven?
Speaker 2: Seven, six or seven.
Speaker 1: Yeah, six or seven years old.  Right.  Were there riots in Nashville when King was killed?
Speaker 2: There were.  And Mahalia Jackson.  I remember her coming to town and I can't remember what it was for, but we went to it.  It was at Fisk University, and I remember some riots breaking out at that event.
Speaker 1: Now, you had a fairly prominent family.  Did you get a chance to meet any of those civil rights leaders during those days as a kid?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were all around.  I mean Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], he would come to Fisk University, and my parents would definitely attend those things.  I mean as far as in the later years, you know, Bill Cosby is--came to our home, [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.].
Story_ID: 261284
Speaker 1: Tennessee State's [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] right there in town too with the famous track team.  Were you inspired to run track by that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wilma Rudolph used to live with us (laughter).
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: She used to live with us.  My mother [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] somewhat adopted her, I mean not in a real sense, you know, formally, but informally, mom was like her adopted mother in Nashville [Tennessee] when she was at Tennessee State.
Speaker 1: So that was before you were born actually, right?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And she ran in the Olympics in 1960, yeah, the Rome Olympics [1960 Summer Olympics, Rome, Italy].  I think that was the only one she--is that the only Olympics she participated in, the Rome Olympics?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but I just remember that, and she maintains and maintained a relationship with mom for many, many years.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you mother ever teach at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] as well as--
Speaker 2: No, she taught metro public schools in Nashville.
Speaker 1: How did they meet and how did they get acquainted?  Is there a story behind that?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  You'd have to ask her.
Speaker 1: And she actually stayed with your family?
Speaker 2: She did, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And did you ever get a chance to meet her later on?
Speaker 2: I met her later on.  They did a movie about her, and I was one of the extras in the movie (laughter).  And so she was a part of that production, so we got a chance to meet her.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now, the Tennessee State Tigerbelles, now, they were a force in track and field, probably the greatest women's track athletes in the country, all during the time you were growing up.  Did they inspire you to run distance?
Speaker 2: No, maybe that was it.  I don't know.  It could have been (laughter).  It could have been.  I enjoyed running.  I still enjoy running.
Speaker 1: So did you run for Peabody [Demonstration School; University School of Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee] as a formal type of thing or did you run for another track--
Speaker 2: No, our school was really not, did not push and was not high on sports.  It was really for the academic side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we didn't have a football team.  We didn't have a basketball team.  We didn't have a tennis team.
Story_ID: 261285
Speaker 1: Tell me about high school [Peabody Demonstration School; University School of Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee] now.  When you were in high school, did you pretty much know that you wanted to carry on the family business [McKissack & McKissack] or did you think, I'll be an opera star or something else?
Speaker 2: No, I did not want to be part of the family business as a professional, even though I started working for my father [William McKissack] at the age of twelve (laughter).  For me I just figured that's just what you do.  You help your family out, even though I wasn't helping, (laughter) but I didn't think I was gonna be in the family business.  I knew I was gonna be an engineer or architect or in the construction profession, but I didn't think I'd be with the family business.  The only place I wanted to live was New York City [New York, New York].  And I wanted to work in New York for a large company.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a specific career aspiration then?
Speaker 2: Yes, and it was to be in the construction business.  Engineering, since I like math was the likely choice.  However, my father wanted me to be an architect, so when I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] (laughter), he had us both doing a, my twin [sister, Deryl McKissack] and I, a dual degree.  So we were architects--architectural and engineering, civil engineering students.  We did that for two years.  It was very hard.  We took twenty-four credits every semester.  And as an engineer, you're learning statics and dynamics, but on the architecture side, you're in the design studio all night drafting.  So it was very hard.  So after two years, we convinced him that we just wanted to be engineers.  We wanted to drop the architecture.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it wasn't hard to convince him or was it?
Speaker 2: We had our mother [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] do it (laughter).  We had her give him the news.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you graduated from high school in '79 [1979]?
Speaker 2: Graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Is there anything about high school you wanna tell us before we go away completely from high school?
Speaker 2: Well, high school was another, you know, good experience.  I went to school with a lot of kids whose parents were influential in Nashville [Tennessee], and then they actually became influential in their own way.  They were wonderful people, developed very good relationships.  The preparation as far as academics was outstanding, outstanding.  So it was--it prepared us very well.
Story_ID: 261286
Speaker 1: What about Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?  Now, this is your first time in an all-black school with black teachers, and so you start Howard in the fall of '79 [1979]?
Speaker 2: We started Howard in the fall of '79 [1979], and we were so excited because we had not had a black experience in school.  And Washington [D.C.] at the time, the City of Washington, I mean where Howard was, was really an African American community.  So we really enjoyed going to Howard and we looked forward to it.  And having black teachers, it was a different experience.  We liked that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you all were like part of the black college trained community, I guess, in Nashville [Tennessee] so you knew a lot of the black clubs and black social organizations and stuff?
Speaker 2: Right.  I mean my mother [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] was, had us in Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.] events.  All of our social events were back in our neighborhood with our parents' friends.  So while we were in a school that was predominantly white, it wasn't much past that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, so, I mean it really helped in grounding who we are.
Speaker 1: Now, what was going on, on the campus of Howard when you got there?  I mean was there anything exciting going on?  Or [HistoryMaker] James Cheek was president, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, Jim Cheek was the president.  He was very respected.  The students really liked him.  He focused on economics, which was good for the university.  But the university, you know, initially was very overwhelming.  It was a big city (laughter), a big campus and fifteen thousand students.  So it was just an eye opener to my [twin] sister [Deryl McKissack] and I, and I finally realized I need to put on a dress and look cute (laughter).  So I went to the best consultant I knew, that was my twin sister.  I need to borrow your clothes to go to a party tonight (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you were socially awakened at Howard, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 261287
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers that you remember at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?  Any outstanding teachers that you remember?
Speaker 2: We had [HistoryMaker] Lucius Walker who was over the architectural school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we had Taft Broome who was over the engineering school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lucius, as an architect, was very good friends with my father [William McKissack].  And so he kind of took us on as family.  But Taft Broome was, he did a lot of research and he published a lot.  And so I really was attracted by the amount of research that he did.  So I kind of tailored my engineering degree and my engineering academics around his work.  And as a result of that, I ended up going to a master's [degree] program, and he was my sponsoring teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, any other students there, memorable, that you, I mean that you remember in particular at Howard that made an impact on you?
Speaker 2: Any other students?  The very smart ones (laughter).  We had one African guy, Yusuf [ph.], I wanna say Ali [ph.]; never came to class.  He only showed up for the test, and he always broke the curve, just extremely bright.  I would love to know what he's doing today.
Speaker 1: Okay, and had he had training before or?
Speaker 2: No, he was our age.  He was just, just got it (laughter).  He already knew it.
Story_ID: 261288
Speaker 1: So you went on to graduate school at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] too.
Speaker 2: I went to graduate school at Howard, and it was a program that was between RPI [Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute] in Troy, New York which is a very well-known engineering school and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  It was a consortium.  And the three universities came together to work on structural projects.  And so a lot of my research was done at RPI and at MIT, and also for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  NASA funded a lot of the research that Dr. Broome did.  And at the, he would only take on one student at a time for a master's degree.  And so I was his only student.  And that opened a lot of resources up as far as our computer technology because NASA paid for a lot of the equipment that we had.  And a lot of the research that we did, they paid for.  So it was very interesting.  I ended up writing a thesis on the load correction method which dealt with solar panels and geosynchronous orbit, twenty-five thousand feet above the earth where the gravitation force no longer exist is where geosynchronous orbit is.  And these solar panels were to sit there.  They were operated by sensors and they collected energy that would then beam down to earth.
Speaker 1: Now, that's quite a project.
Speaker 2: It was quite a project, and it took two years to complete the research and to write it.  And portions of it were eventually published in some civil engineering magazines.
Speaker 1: Has there been an attempt to put that research into practice?
Speaker 2: They probably used some of it, but I'm not aware of them actually putting a solar panel out there.  But what we did was, we worked on the Crays in Los Alamos [New Mexico] which were supercomputers of the time.  They did what our laptops do today (laughter).  And we had those little cards.
Speaker 1: Yes, COBOL or something.
Speaker 2: Right.  And so we wrote software.
Story_ID: 261289
Speaker 1: So that went on into my professional career right out of, right when I left my master's [degree] or completed my master's [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.], where I wrote software for silos for missiles determining structural strength for silos for missiles for a company in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: So you were on the cutting edge of the information technology, sort of, then too?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  We designed embassies against car bombs which wasn't really a big thing then, but it's a huge thing now.  And one of my coworkers, Eve Hinman, has become a national spokesperson on designing structures against car bombs.
Speaker 2: Let's deal with that a little bit.  How do you design a structure to withstand a car bombing?
Speaker 1: Well, it's, it would, it was similar to the silos that we built to hold the missiles.  And so it was a natural segue for this company that I worked for.  We worked for the [U.S.] Department of Defense, federal Department of Defense.  We all had security clearance.  And so it was how you design the reinforced steel in the concrete that created the strength in the concrete for silos.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, okay, so it's the same technology that you designed embassies then to withstand that--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --car bombs?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That's something.
Speaker 1: Just more strength.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But these formulas were not formulas that were easily, resulted in concrete strength or rebar strength.  It required technology.  It required running massive computer programs to determine these strengths.  And technology then wasn't as advanced as it is today.  So we would have to write the programs so that they could determine these strengths over and over again.  So that's what I did when I finished my master's.  I wrote software.
Speaker 2: Okay, for the U.S. Department of Defense basically?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, for, as an engineer for a company called Weidlinger Associates in New York.
Speaker 2: How do spell Weidlinger?
Speaker 1: W-E-I-D-L-I-N-G-E-R.  And my boss, Paul Weidlinger, was internationally known for the works that he did with the Department of Defense.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, now, what did--how long did you do that, and what did you next?
Speaker 1: I did that for about two, three years, maybe four years.  And then I went to work for Turner Construction [New York, New York] in their New York office.
Speaker 2: So where does that put us year wise?
Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988].
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So--
Speaker 1: Turner was '89 [l989].  Let me see, '89 [1989].  Turner was '89 [1989].  Weidlinger was '85 [1985] through '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: Okay, and Turner was '89 [1989], okay.  Now, what did you do at Turner?
Speaker 1: I was an estimator.  And I estimated construction projects.
Speaker 2: Now, is this when you worked on the Schomburg Theatre [New York, New York], outside the Schomburg Library [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  That was one of my notable projects.  Kings County Hospital [New York, New York] is another project I worked on.
Speaker 2: Kings County Hospital, now, is that here in New York?
Speaker 1: That's in New York, in Brooklyn [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay, what else?
Speaker 1: Did I work on? Some schools, like K [kindergarten] - 12 schools for Turner.
Speaker 2: Okay, these were all in New York?
Speaker 1: These were all in New York.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Yeah, I've got a list of them here if I would just bend down and get them (laughter).  I can track you, your--
Speaker 1: Oh, you have it on the resume?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I know there're a lot of them.
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know if those schools are on there because those were in the early years.
Speaker 2: Oh, we don't have the names of all the schools, but just the idea, you know.
Story_ID: 261290
Speaker 1: So you worked for, was that Metropolitan Transit, MTA [Metropolitan Transit Authority]?
Speaker 2: Okay, the MTA.  Let's see, in 1990 is when I went back and joined the family firm [McKissack & McKissack].  And I commuted from New York [New York] to Nashville [Tennessee] every week.  I'd fly out Monday morning, and I'd fly back Thursday night.
Speaker 1: Now, what made you, what drew you back to the family firm?
Speaker 2: My mother [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] had won three major dormitories at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And she said she really needed my help.  So she called my boss and said my daughter is quitting today (laughter).  Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: She just told your boss?
Speaker 2: She just told my boss.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, it worked, I guess?
Speaker 2: It worked.  And that next Monday, I was down in Nashville.  But I missed New York tremendously.  And so after a year of commuting, I asked my mother if I could open a branch in New York.  She said, no, absolutely not.  I said, okay, I gotta go do it.  And so that's what I did.  I opened up the New York office in 1991, called The McKissack Group.  Because I wasn't working, I worked as a consultant for another woman-owned business called The Nettleship Group [Inc.].  And that's when I got my MTA experience.  And what I did for her was perform operational audits on several MTA projects, huge projects.  I would go in.  I'd review all the material, and I'd say where the problems were.
Story_ID: 261291
Speaker 1: Well, this may be a good time to point this out that a lot of the projects you worked on are huge projects.
Speaker 2: Huge projects.
Speaker 1: I was reading the literature about you, and you've never worked for a huge firm, but you always work on these huge projects--
Speaker 2: Huge projects.
Speaker 1: --like the stadium in Nashville [Tennessee] for the Tennessee Titans [Adelphia Coliseum; Nissan Stadium, Nashville, Tennessee] and, you know, these huge projects.
Speaker 2: The [Philadelphia] Eagles Stadium [Lincoln Financial Field, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] here.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What's the difference in working on a huge project and a smaller one?  I mean, well, scope is one, but what does that mean as a, on your level of organizing?
Speaker 2: Well, it takes organizational skills, and that's what I liked.  I mean you do the same amount of work for a small project as you would a large project, so why not just do the large projects.  And I mean I always was geared towards business, and selling (laughter).  So I would always go after the large projects.
Story_ID: 261292
Speaker 1: Your mother [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] did an interesting thing.  She, I don't know what year this was, but she took over the business [McKissack & McKissack] at a certain point when your father [William McKissack] passed, right?
Speaker 2: She took over the business when he had his massive stroke which was 1983, right before we graduated from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] from undergrad, my [twin] sister [Deryl McKissack] and I.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he has a massive stroke in 1980--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 1: --eighty-three [1983].  And your mother took over and from what I've read, your mother had really no formal training in this kind of work though she had been around it a lot?
Speaker 2: Right.  She had been a housewife for probably seventeen years.  She has a master's degree in psychology, and frankly, I think that's all she needed (laughter).  It was kind of good, and it insults architects, but I think it was very good to have a person that wasn't an architect running an architectural business because the architects that I know that I have come across tend to be on the creative side and very much operating inside of the business than working on the business.
Speaker 1: I see.  Now, you hear stories about, you know, Frank Lloyd Wright's Chicago [Illinois], you know, was so big in Chicago.  And they tell stories all the time about him, you know, going creatively overboard and the cost skyrocketing for, you know, things that don't work.  And he'll just shovel 'em out and then put something else in, you know.  So is this what we're talking about, in the creative side, going, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the creative side goes too far.  I own an architectural business now.  I have architectural partners.  And, you know, I respect architects because what they do is absolutely amazing to me to actually live in three dimensions before it manifests in the physical.  But that's what they have the capability to see and to the capability to put on two-dimensional paper.  And I have great respect for that.  But there is a business side to it.  And that's what I bring to my partners, and that's what my mother brought to her staff because you have to, at the end of the day, make a profit.
Speaker 1: So your mother, apparently, was very good at this?
Speaker 2: She was extremely good.  Like any other business, if you can't sell business, you won't get business.  Somebody has to bring in the work.
Speaker 1: Now, was it difficult, I don't--I know there aren't very many women involved in this kind of work, you know, hardly any.  So was it difficult, I mean what difficulties, I guess I'll ask it like this:  what difficulties did your mother encounter in being the CEO of a construction business?
Speaker 2: I think she encountered more difficulties from the fact that she was not trained in the profession.  And so I believe people tried to use that against her.  But she is a terrific businesswoman and she always was able to work around that.  She hired qualified people to do the work.
Speaker 1: Okay, the bottom line are the results, I guess.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  She took our business to a whole nother level and where my father was, you know, doing [$]30 million in construction costs, she took it to a hundred [million].  So she could fill business.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she brought you in to help, and you just kind of got right in step?
Speaker 2: Right.  And she went to Howard University.  She met with [HistoryMaker] Jim Cheek, and she was awarded three dormitories from Nashville, Tennessee.  And no, she was not an architect.
Speaker 1: Well, Jim Cheek certainly knows what he's doing most of the time so, about money, so it wasn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So you rejoin the group in 1991, and you formed the McKissack--
Speaker 2: In 1990.
Speaker 1: Ninety [1990], okay.  And you formed The McKissack Group Incorporated--
Speaker 2: In '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: In '91 [1991], in New York City [New York, New York], basically, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's a full-service construction management--
Speaker 2: We started off just in architecture, and then we added the construction management probably about '93 [1993].  So we started off leveraging the architecture business that was in Nashville.
Story_ID: 261293
Speaker 1: Newark [Liberty] International Airport [Newark, New Jersey], you worked on that, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, did you do that for Turner [Construction, New York, New York], when you worked for Turner?
Speaker 2: No, that was when I was working for The Nettleship Group [Inc.] as a consultant.  And again, that was like an operational audit, where you go in and you just write a report on what the issues are, how's the schedule?  How's the budget?  The design reviews, things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you kind of come in and kind of set the framework by what they've done, basically?
Speaker 2: Right, and then just kind of check it and make sure that things aren't out of whack.  Or if I see that there's gonna be a problem coming, try to prevent it or prepare for it.  And that's construction.
Speaker 1: It's time and money and (unclear) are, yeah--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) time.
Speaker 1: Can't waste it.  So, you worked on Philadelphia International Airport [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Right, probably about 1994, we opened the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] office.  And in Philadelphia, we've just had really great success.  And so we constructed the international terminal, the new one that's out there right now, the commuter terminal.  We're currently on-call architects for the airport.  The school district, Germantown High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], 1995, a $9 million project, first project ever awarded to an African American firm in Philadelphia by the school district in 1995 (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's the first one.
Speaker 2: The first one.
Speaker 1: Now, that's amazing with Philadelphia's long history of black folks involved in almost everything.  Nineteen ninety-five [1995] was your first--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, at the school district of Philadelphia.  And now we're providing program management for their $1.7 billion program, which is all the schools, renovating existing schools, building twenty new schools, a very large project.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, was it difficult to--what is the hardest thing you've had to do in terms of (unclear), what's the most difficult task?  What was the hardest (unclear)
Speaker 2: Technically, or you mean in business?
Speaker 1: In business, I guess.
Speaker 2: The hardest thing for me in business is to change my own thinking.  And I needed to believe that I was infinitely powerful and not to fear anything and ask for everything.  And I do that now.  And I'm surprised myself at the answers I get.  And most of them are just like that, okay.
Story_ID: 260720
Speaker 1: I wanna give just a little history before I give the example on how businesses and small businesses and minority-owned and women-owned businesses, what the mindset has been because it's been about twenty years that we've had set-aside programs, that we've had minority and women-owned business, designated-type firms.  And while I don't have a problem with that, I think it's needed as an entry into business, it also comes with a stigma.  But it's unfortunate.  The stigma can be on someone else's side, but it's unfortunate that it gets on our too.  We think of ourselves as, we can only do ten percent of this project as an MBE [minority business enterprise].  We can only do twenty percent of this project as an MWBE [minority and women-owned business enterprise].  And I think what was important for me was to make the transition that, I don't wanna be a sub-consultant.  I wanna be the prime.  And I wanna be in control of my destiny.  I don't want to be the second-tier.  And so making that transition created a whole nother mindset, a whole nother aura, a whole nother spirit when I sit down and talk to people.  My recent example is Forest City Ratner [Companies], a large developer in New York [New York], recently bought the Brooklyn Nets.  And they are moving the Brooklyn, I mean they're the Nets who were playing in New Jersey to Brooklyn.  And so they have to--
Speaker 2: He bought the New Jersey, the current New Jersey team (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The current New Jersey Nets, and he's gonna--
Speaker 2: Jason Kidd.
Speaker 1: Jason Kidd who's a member of my church [Christian Cultural Center, New York, New York].  And they are gonna move the Nets to Brooklyn [New York, New York] so they'll be the Brooklyn Nets.  And they have to build an arena, and they're gonna do this in the center of downtown Brooklyn.  Now, for them to build it, they're building it over rail yards, so they need to move rail yards that are currently operational and create a foundation.  Along with it, they're also building office buildings and housing, residential, commercial.  It's a whole new city really, and it's about $2.5 billion.  And I was determined.  I wanted to be on that project.  I wanted to be a part of that project.  And it's just the whole notion of, you can attract what you think on.  And I spent time thinking on creating venues to make that happen.  And then I got before the Nets, the people who were handling the project.  And initially was offered the ten, twenty percent role and we said, no.  We want to go in as a prime.  They said, fine, move the railroad tracks.  Now, I don't know if they thought we could do it or not.  And I said, great.  I can actually do that (laughter).
Story_ID: 260721
Speaker 1: We, on Thursday, we started that project.  We are moving the railroad tracks for the Forest City Ratner [Companies, New York, New York], for the [Brooklyn] Nets arena.  Going into the meeting, there was a big discussion about all of the sites that will work and retaining walls--moving the tracks is $100 million.  The site and civil work is another $100 million that another firm was handling.  Right in the middle of the meeting, in front of everybody and the consultants who were handling it, I asked the owner for that work.  And he looked at me (laughter) like, she's really something else.  She just, no hidden agenda.  I asked, and he said, I think it's a good idea.  Okay.  Right in front of Turner Construction [New York, New York] who had been handling it.  They had to transition their work over to us.  And we're the prime contractor now, construction manager on it.  But I had to make the transition because there was a day I would have never asked for that.  I would have been happy with the ten [percent].  I would have thought that what they've done and where they are in life has accumulated or means much more than where I am in life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it entitles them to do--
Speaker 1: And it entitles them to do more.  But when I first met them and they told me about their company, and my husband [Fred Felder] was in the meeting.  He said, well, that's interesting.  [HistoryMaker] Cheryl [McKissack Felder], tell them about your company [The McKissack Group].  It's a hundred years old.  And when he said that, it just clicked.  It's like we've been here a hundred years.  So what they're saying, yes, it's more dollars.  But they haven't been doing it as long.  We have the staying power.  We have the stability.  We have the credibility.  So it's interesting when, you know, we were honored last year here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  The previous honorees were very wealthy people.  And a report came up to me, and they said, you know, Ralph [J.] Roberts who owns Comcast [Corporation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was honored before you.  Carole Haas Gravagno, Rohm and Haas, you know these are very wealthy people.  How do you fit in?  And my response to her is, their wealth may be in the bank, but my wealth is in my heart.  And so, it's just all in how you see it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so it's a shift in the paradigm.
Story_ID: 260722
Speaker 1: Now, in these days when black politicians and mayors like Harold Washington in Chicago [Illinois], Maynard Jackson in Atlanta [Georgia], back in the days when they were mayors in major cities, I mean [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry and others, passed legislation in these major cities.  And I think, [HistoryMaker David N.] Dinkins did the same thing in New York [New York].  I don't know (unclear) to make sure that there are a certain number of contracts that go to minority contractors.  And there's also been like, since that time, there's been some subversion of that process where you have basically a white firm who would put a black person at the top of it or something or come--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, like a front.
Speaker 1: --as a front when, you know, the real black companies weren't getting as much work as some of these so-called black companies were getting.  So have you ever had trouble with that sort of thing with people trying to front for someone else and--
Speaker 2: It happens all the time.  I have seen it all the time.  It's usually women-owned businesses that are fronted for their husbands.  And I mean that's just the fact of life.  I was in New York when Dinkins was there.  It was, he had a very difficult time making the playing field equal.  I'm sure he would have liked to have done more, but it didn't result in a whole lot.  I've now been in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] since Mayor [John F.] Street started his term.  And Mayor Street, again, is a holistic thinker.  He's not just thinking about African Americans.  He thinks about all Philadelphians.  And, but he requires quality.  You have to qualify yourselves to do the work.  And he's been criticized for not doing enough for African American firms.  But I disagree with that.  I think he's done everything he possibly could do for African American firms that qualified themselves.  But, to me, it doesn't matter if the mayor is white, black, Chinese, female, what have you.  It doesn't matter.  I have an excellent relationship with Governor [George] Pataki 'cause that's where the work is (laughter).  It really doesn't matter who the person is 'cause I don't see it that way.  I see people as people.  And I try and understand what their needs are when I'm trying to satisfy those needs.
Speaker 1: Do you find on the other side, I don't it necessarily, I think the fear that a lot of black contractors have is that the politicians that have been in charge don't see them as people, rather than they don't see the politicians as people.  But that's the, and the contracts won't be forthcoming or they won't be as big because they are black contractors.
Speaker 2: Black politicians, unfortunately, don't know anything about economic development.  There're very few that I have met that understand how to really empower and how to build businesses, very few.  So if that's the case, how can they help any business?  I think they do the best with what they have to work with, as far as their level of knowledge and their level of exposure.  When I run across a politician that really understands business, I work with them, a black politician that really understands business.  I work with them.  The other ones I support (laughter).  I attend their little dinner or whatever, but it's unfortunate.  I mean if you think about who is a black leader for today, there isn't really one that's really thinking about economics.
Speaker 1: Or maybe even understands it--
Speaker 2: Or even understands it.  I think our, the mayor that we have understands it, but the minute a black mayor really understands it, they're under investigation.  And it's not just this city.  It's other cities.  So then they're shut down.
Story_ID: 260723
Speaker 1: You started another, well, three prior firms.  The first one was [The] McKissack Group, and we talked about that.  Then you started McKissack & Associates in 1999.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that's basically a design firm?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, we've always had architecture as a part of our business [McKissack & McKissack], but because of licensing, which is different, the requirements are different in every state, McKissack & Associates is really the Pennsylvania architectural group.  But we've always had architectural services as a part of our business.  And in that business, I have a partner who is an architect who actually handles the day-to-day operations of that business.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then in 2001, you founded M and M Solutions [LLC].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that's about information technology?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's so much fun.  (Laughter)  I co-chaired the transition team for the mayor [John F. Street], small businesses [transition committee for small business].  And what that allowed me to do was to see the vision and to understand the vision that the mayor had for the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  One thing that was really important to him was to capitalize on the talent at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] from an IT perspective.  And instead of having that talent move out of the city to where IT firms are, which, you know, California, Florida, Midwest, but to maintain 'em here in Philadelphia.  And so understanding that he really was serious about that, I decided to start M and M Solutions.  And M and M Solutions focuses on GIS, geographic information systems.  We write wireless applications, and our first project was the IT strategic plan for the City of Philadelphia.
Story_ID: 260724
Speaker 1: We [Felder's company, M and M Solutions LLC] looked at the needs, the IT [information technology] needs in the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Philadelphia has spent $20 million on getting information in digital form, whether it's tax information.  They were getting ready, (unclear) information, property information, and they were getting ready to spend another five to $6 million on getting water, the water department records into a digital form.  So the question, what do you do with all of this?  How do you use it?  How do you take the legacy system in the city and marry them into new systems, whether it's accounting, whether it's security, police department?  I mean some of the stuff we saw was absolutely incredible.  When we saw how the fire department operated, we couldn't believe it, you know.  It was a big board, and they turned switches.  This is an old city.  So evaluated that with Deloitte and Touche [Deloitte] and then we wrote recommendations and prioritized what the city should do in the way of IT.  We also identified funding sources from the federal government and from the state.  And what it did for us was create just a whole platform of, whole smorgasbord of opportunities that we could just select from.  And so what happened is, from that we ended up doing the uniform land map, which is putting the entire city in digital form.  And then you use a, the geographic system to overlay databases.  So if you, it's all based to a map.  It's all based on a map.  So if you wanna know how many vacant properties are there for a developer close to SEPTA [Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority] station or close to the highway or close to the airport, you could query this system and come up with it, come up with that information.  At the same time, the Mayor [John F. Street] was doing the NTI, which is the Neighborhood Transformation [Initiative].  And so there were sixty-six thousand or more sites identified that needed to be demoed.  So he needed a software package that would allow him to walk in a community, walk up to a site, go onto his telephone and pull down all the tax information on a particular site.  So we wrote that system for him, and we started working for the--Street's department.  And they wanted to compile traffic reports to see where, you know, the largest traffic report--or traffic incidences were in the city so they could begin to correct the roads.  And then that just grew.  And now it's into [U.S. Department of] Homeland Security.
Speaker 2: The Homeland Security director is Tom Ridge.  He just resigned last month, I guess.  He was a senator from Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: He was a governor.
Speaker 2: Governor, right, that's right.  You're right, I'm sorry.  Governor of Pennsylvania.  So what--have you, you know, gained a bit of business in security since--
Speaker 1: The uniform land map will be the basis for security for the City of Philadelphia.  What we found out in our study was, we could write the software, but we didn't have the infrastructure.  So the city said, okay, we're gonna take twelve buildings.  We want to lay fiber optics.  We wanna own our own telephone lines.  And so we're doing that project right now.  We've been working on that for the last eighteen months.  And what that allowed the city to do was reduce their Verizon bill.  They essentially own their own telephone lines.  So once they finish the twelve buildings, they'll do all sixty buildings that the city owns.  That would be the basis, along with the uniform land map, for Homeland Security or for security for the City of Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Now, did you all--
Speaker 1: So it's starting from the ground up.
Speaker 2: I know in the mid-'90s [1990s], the city started to us--well, Chicago [Illinois] started using MapInfo [Corporation], I think to do crime mapping for the police department.  That was one thing they were doing.  And I think MapInfo, do you all use that program?
Speaker 1: No, we use Esri, which is Esri, which is, I guess, has kind of surpassed MapInfo.
Speaker 2: MapInfo was created by insurance companies I think, I remember it was first used by insurance companies to determine who (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --to charge the most money to for (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: It really was a, it was almost like a redlining tool.
Speaker 1: I wanna say it didn't have open architecture or something like that.  Esri is a software where you can interface with Oracle and other software, so it's considered to have an open architecture.
Story_ID: 260725
Speaker 1: You're currently working on, I guess, that stadium in Brooklyn [New York, New York].  That's the biggest project now, I would guess?
Speaker 2: Actually, it's not (laughter).
Speaker 1: There's something bigger?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's amazing.  This is our hundredth year of business.  The first two weeks of this year we won three major jobs.  One was Brooklyn Nets, but the other one was New York City Schools Construction Authority where they're doing $19 billion worth of work.  And we competed for a contract to provide extended staff to the School Construction Authority.  And we competed against all the large firms, Turner [Construction, New York, New York], Bovis [Construction], Skanska, and McKissack [& McKissack] came in number one.  And it would have been nice for us to give--for them to give us the whole contract which was $24 million for just fees and a hundred staff.  But they were kind enough to give us 50 percent so we're not complaining (laughter).  So we'll be placing quite a few people on that project.
Speaker 1: And what's the third project?
Speaker 2: The third project was University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  They're building a new hospital for about $250 million.  And we were awarded the first phase along with Driscoll Construction Company the first week of this year.  And that will be the first phase of the billion dollar program.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So, we are rolling.  We are so excited that it's all coming together.  It's taken us a hundred years to be an overnight success (laughter).
Story_ID: 260726
Speaker 1: And you're in really good spirits about all this which is great because it's a great thing.
Speaker 2: I'm having fun.
Speaker 1: And you're one of the younger people we've interviewed, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we usually have these people that are, whose careers have, are, you know, and they're retired and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: So this is sort of unusual.  We'll have to come back in forty years and ask--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'll be retired (laughter).
Speaker 1: But we always ask, in terms of your own personal goals, do you see yourself as a CEO for a long, long time or what do you think you'd like to do in the future?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's interesting because I'm third generation in the business, but fifth generation as far as we've gone back, but third generation in the business.  I guess because I created, I did not create it.  It was created by my grandparents, I don't have the same thoughts as the entrepreneur who created their business and they want their children to go into the business.  I don't have that same thought for my children.  I want my children to go in areas where they are happy and where they can achieve their own individual potential.  So I see McKissack [& McKissack] as a platform for people that are talented that want to really work for themselves.  So that's why I created the different businesses.  And I have partners in each one of those businesses.  And I guess we're like angel investors, if you ask me, but I have taken individuals who, for whatever reason, were not totally accepted in the mainstream of corporate America, but were extremely talented and given them an opportunity to create their own environment within our environment and to reach their maximum potential within McKissack.  So now, I see the company as not really just mine or McKissack, just--my last name's not even McKissack anymore.  It's Felder, and I always say that.  But I see it as carrying it on, just on the thought that people can come and be their own person and express their God-given abilities.
Story_ID: 260727
Speaker 1: How did you meet your husband [Fred Felder] and when did you meet him?
Speaker 2: Pursuing a construction project.  And we had, he had a friend who restructured the debt for Antigua.  Yes, and it was about $365 million.  And they were in debt to Italy.  And he worked with Wasserstein and Perella [Wasserstien & Co.] out of New York [New York], who is an investment bank, to get this work done.  But it was gonna spin off a lot of construction projects in Antigua.  And so they needed an architect.  My husband was the general contractor at the time.  And our name came up, the McKissack [& McKissack] name came up.  So they contacted my twin sister [Deryl McKissack] who was in Washington [D.C.].  But because they were in New York, she said, you need to call my sister, [HistoryMaker] Cheryl [McKissack Felder], in New York.  And that's how we met.  So I went to meet these group of people, and my husband was one of them.  And we pursue projects together.  Now, he's a developer.  He really doesn't do a lot of construction anymore.  But we work side by side.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when did you get married?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-three [1993].
Speaker 1: Okay, and how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: Two (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, how old are they?
Speaker 2: They are nine and ten.
Speaker 1: Do they seem to have an aptitude for this kind of work or?
Speaker 2: It's hard to tell.  You know, every night I tell them they're my little presidents.  And I tell them, that doesn't mean president of my firm.  It's president of your firm (laughter).
Story_ID: 260728
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That is a very complicated (laughter) question.  My hopes and concerns is that our young people will begin to see their value, begin to identify with who they are.  I think that we've lost a lot of that.  When you grew up probably, and I know when I grew up, we had a real neighborhood.  And our parents were not only our biological parents, but they were our neighbors next door, our teachers, our what have you.  And we don't have that today, and it concerns me.  And so, you know, I would hope that our young people can find themselves.  They don't, the choices they have are not good ones.  I spend a lot of time working and mentoring small businesses in the construction industry.  And I would like for them to grow and compete against me.  And hopefully, some of them will.  My husband [Fred Felder] mentors young men.  I mentor young women.
Speaker 1: You're trying to develop the group behind you to--
Speaker 2: I think it's dangerous to stand alone.
Story_ID: 260567
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done so far, and you still have a lot more to do.  And the projects are getting bigger and bigger, is there anything you would do differently now, when you look back?
Speaker 2: Is there anything that I would do--
Speaker 1: Any major thing?
Speaker 2: Any major thing that I would do differently?  I guess I could, I'd have to say no.  I guess, all the experiences, the good ones, the bad ones and the indifferent ones created where we are today.  So I can't pinpoint anything that I would have done differently.
Story_ID: 260568
Speaker 1: At this juncture, and it's still early for you, but what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: At this point, I can tell you what I would like for (laughter) the legacy to be.  And what that is, is creating opportunities for others.  I'm just excited with the model that we've used here, the environment that we have here and being able to allow other people to use their talents.  The other thing that we're doing is this, since it's our [McKissack & McKissack] hundred years, the way that I've decided to celebrate that is to have a what we call, we're calling a second century celebration.  And in that celebration, we will pay tribute to educational and the arts and the culture in the African American community.  And we will raise money for different venues.  In Nashville, Tennessee, we'll center our second century celebration around Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].  And we'll create an endowment for Fisk, but we will also have a benefit dinner and raise money for the university.  My thought here for Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was to work with the African American Museum [in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and somehow tie my slave ship in that we're gonna talk about.
Story_ID: 260569
Speaker 1: You're designing a monument for the African burial ground in New York [New York], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, we're [McKissack & McKissack] one of the five finalists which required developing a design through schematics and doing a model.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what is your design for the African burial ground?
Speaker 2: We've gone through three different designs.  The first design really dealt with the journey.  Then we decided that we wanted to deal with, also what Africans came to this country, what the experience was like.  And that's when we created more of an interactive building to sit on the site in New York.  However, the community really didn't wanna build anything there.  So then we decided to make it more of a memorial.  But what came out of the second design is the slave ship, is what we call it.  It's a replica of a portion of a slave ship using contemporary architectural elements.  And it really could be a vessel because we all got here by ship (laughter) except for the Native Americans who were already here.  And so it's an experience that not only the African Americans had, but a lot of other people who came to this country.  But we centered our theme around the African American experience.
Speaker 1: Okay. And is there a timetable on this project?  I know there's been, I think it was conceived about ten years ago, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  They are to make a decision by March 31st of this year.  So we should hear about New York.  Now, what's happening in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] is, I have been on, I guess a tour with politicians, and I actually have a meeting with the mayor [John F. Street] on Monday regarding our second century celebration and the slave ship concept because we're thinking that we could use that to help the African American Museum [of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] as another attraction, as an adjunct part of the museum.
Speaker 1: Now, there was another aspect.  I don't know if this is appropriate to mention here, but I guess it, yeah, it is.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'll (unclear) cause I'm selling this now.
Speaker 1: There's another aspect of Philadelphia was the home of James Forten, you know.  You may have heard of him.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He was probably the most prominent black man in terms of business in the United States when he lived, and he was at his, I guess in his height in the mid-1840s.  But he developed a, he started off as a sail maker, in a sail maker's shop.  And he was so good at it, he became the foreman, and then later, he started his own business with the blessing of the white sail maker he worked for, and made the best sails on the East Coast.
Speaker 2: Interesting.
Speaker 1: And he developed a device, you know, for sailing ships and became quite rich.  And he was the father of the, well, he's related to Charlotte Forten [Charlotte Forten Grimke].  She's a descendant of his down the line who wrote diaries and was a teacher in the Freedman's Bureau [Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands] and all that sort of thing.  There are pictures of her in all the books.  James Forten financed a great deal of the abolitionist activity--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --of white people.  Yeah, he financed William Lloyd Garrison, a lot of Garrison's work in The Liberator newspaper.  He gave money for that, and so he was a real--
Speaker 2: And he was here?
Speaker 1: Yes, right, lived here in Philadelphia.  Yeah, James Forten, F-O-R-T-E-N.  So that's the interesting aspect to it when you talk about a ship, you know, it may--I don't know how that can--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, how that ties in.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, that's like a, you know, we have this history of being brought here on slave ships.  We also have a man making sails for ships who financed the abolitionist movement--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --largely.
Speaker 2: Now, that is interesting.
Speaker 1: And funded some of the Negro conventions and that sort of thing, where the freed men would get together and discuss, you know, our fate, what we were gonna do.
Speaker 2: See the programming inside of this slave ship still needs to be done.  What is the story that's really, that's gonna be told?  Still needs to be developed, and that is very interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that--I mean that sounds like an exciting project.
Speaker 2: I am so excited about that.
Story_ID: 260570
Speaker 1: Are there any other arts, well, arts groups.  I know you mentioned, in terms of culture, the museum [African American Museum in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but any of the arts groups, theater groups and dance groups that you all plan to support or work with?
Speaker 2: Well, we're gonna also work with the [National] Liberty Museum [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which isn't African American, but it's on the mall where you have six different museums, and all of them are pretty traditional about the founding fathers and independence and the Liberty Bell.  But this is the Liberty Museum, and it's, it's centered, its message is about fighting against bigotry and celebrating the diversity in people.  So it's a very interesting museum.  So we'd like to tie them into this as well.  In New York [New York], we're looking to work with the Brooklyn Preparatory School which is a fairly new school in Brooklyn [New York, New York].  They have kindergarten, I believe through third grade because each year they're adding another grade.  Last year, this school's students ranked ninety-fourth and ninety-fifth in math and in English in the State of New York.  It's an African American private school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you haven't told us, is that good (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's real good.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, ninety-fifth and ninety-fourth in the State of New York for all schools.  That's real good, and these are all inner-city black kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're gonna assist them too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, in New York.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So those are our three venues for the second century celebration.
Story_ID: 260571
Speaker 1: Now is there anything that you haven't told us that I haven't asked, or perhaps could be lost if you didn't mention it now cause I have one last question on the agenda.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think I've told you quite a bit (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but it's a little bit different, and that's--and you probably haven't thought about this much, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?   Well, you know, the most important thing to me is my family.  So, you know, I would like to be remembered as, you know, a very good mother to my children.  That's very important to me.  My success is measured differently than a lot of people's.  My success is measured when I can get up in the morning, and I can look in my kids' faces and they're happy.  I can look in my husband's [Fred Felder] face, and he's happy, and I can come into my office, and my receptionist greets me and says, "I love you.  How are you today?" (Laughter) And she's happy.  And that is the atmosphere of our entire office.  And that, to me, is success.  We're enjoying what we're doing.  The people that work here, they all have their issues, like I have my issues.  But we work through them.  We mentor marriages.  We counsel marriages.  We counsel father and daughter.  We counsel parent to employees.  And to me, that is, I can't put money on that.
Speaker 1: Well, that's unusual.
Speaker 2: I can't put a dollar value on that.
Speaker 1: That's unusual, and that progressive too.  You know, so many times, you know, people think, I think to make money or to be business-like, you have to be cold and calculated and that sort of thing.  But that's not where you're coming from with this?
Speaker 2: Not at all.  We are family oriented.  We have family gatherings.  My husband and I take out, you know, a couple from our company [McKissack & McKissack] often, very often, especially if they just got married or if they're getting ready to get married.  And then we counsel them about marriage.  We counsel them about having children.  My husband conducts a bible study every Monday morning at 7:00 a.m. in this conference room, and it's full.  So we are different, and we wanna be different.
Story_ID: 260572
Speaker 1: Is church a big part of your life?
Speaker 2: Yes, we actually go to church in Brooklyn, New York [New York].  So we travel to New York every Sunday, and I've been doing it ever since I moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], my husband [Fred Felder] and I.  I told him I would move to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but I cannot leave my church (laughter).  He went to my church, and he agreed, and so--
Speaker 1: What church are you a member of?
Speaker 2: Christian Cultural Center [New York, New York] in New York.  I started going there in 1990.  We probably had twenty-five hundred members.  Now, we have twenty-five thousand members.  We built a facility that seats five thousand people.  Next week, we are presenting to our pastor architectural plans for a whole new housing facility, market-rate housing, three towers in Brooklyn where we already own the land.  It's a hundred million, plus project.  And it's creating a culture.  That's why he calls it the Christian Cultural Center.  There's a culture about it, and, yes, we're Born Again Christian.
Story_ID: 260573
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a article that was written in Black Enterprise centered around fathers and sons and mothers and daughters.  And so, it was about my mother and her involvement in the business, and myself and my two sisters following in her footsteps.
Speaker 2: Who's in the photograph?
Speaker 1: My mother's in the front, [HistoryMaker] Leatrice McKissack.  I am next, and then my twin sister, Daryl McKissack.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That is my wonderful, dynamic mother, Leatrice McKissack.
Speaker 2: When was this photograph taken?
Speaker 1: Probably, I would say between '85 [1985] and '90 [1990].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my favorite architect.  That's my father (laughter), William DeBerry McKissack.
Speaker 2: And this is about what year?
Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is my great uncle, Calvin McKissack, one of the founders of McKissack & McKissack.
Speaker 2: And when was that taken?
Speaker 1: I am not sure.
Speaker 2: Looks like maybe the '40s [1940s] or something.
Speaker 1: You think the '40s [1940s]?  And this is my grandfather, Moses McKissack III, founder of McKissack & McKissack.
Speaker 2: He founded the company in 1905.
Speaker 1: Nineteen o' five [1905].
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: That is Moses McKissack the first, the first descendant that we know of who came to this country as a slave.
Speaker 2: I like that beard.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Who was his wife [Miriam McKissack]?
Speaker 1: My mother could tell you her name.  I don't remember right now.
Speaker 2: And this was [Gabriel] Moses McKissack II, and his wife's name was Dolly Ann Maxwell.
