Story_ID: 27254
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Lafayette Frederick.  And Lafayette is spelled, L-A-F-A-Y-E-T-T-E, and Frederick is spelled F-R-E-D-E-R-I-C-K.
Speaker 1: And is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: Yes there is.  I was named for my mother's brother.  My mother's brother was named Lafayette Johnson, and she stayed with him for a while.  She was staying with him when she met my father and so I came along and I was named for him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he's a good brother.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth was March 19, 1923.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in a little community with a quaint name, Dog Bog, Mississippi, and that's in Coahoma County near Friars Point, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay. What is t-- What is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My occupation is professor, or I'm involved in teaching and research in the aspects of the biological sciences.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're a professor emeritus from at least one school I know, if not more than one, I don't know?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I've been a professor at Southern University in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] and Howard University, and I'm now a visiting senior scientist here at Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December 15, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Where are we at the present time?  We're at Tuskegee on the campus of Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama.
Story_ID: 27255
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask, it's kind of a warm up.  They only require a short answer.  The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food.  My favorite food, I-- fish, fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The spring time.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Hawaiian Islands.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I have no particular phrase or saying.  The--I suppose I have a favorite memory verse that I learned in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember the verse is "A wise old owl sat in an oak, the more he heard, the less he spoke, the less he spoke, the more he heard, why can't we all be like that bird."
Story_ID: 27256
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history; I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But separately, so we can keep those sides straight, and then we'll put them together.  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Mary Ellen,    E-L-L-E-N, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth was in the Vicksburg, Mississippi area, and it was, I think, 1896 or November 26th.  I'm not sure about the year; I've got the year in that document, but just off-hand, I'm trying to remember now, whether it was 1896 or a little earlier.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably 1898--not--probably 1888.
Speaker 1: 88', okay.
Speaker 2: Somewhere--sometimes like that.  But it's in the document, in the questionnaire.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you think she was--about how hold was she when you were born?
Speaker 2: When I was born she would have been, let's see, 1923, she would have been about thirty-five.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back chronologically can you take us in your family and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, her father, my grandfather, was born a slave and worked for his--I'm not sure where he was born, I think someplace in South Carolina, but was brought to Mississippi and worked for a plantation owner there.  They lived on what was called the Tucker Plantation, but he didn't take the name of Tucker.  He kept the name of Johnson that, I think, came from an earlier owner of his family.  This would have been around 1850, sometime like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was his name, your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Robert--Robert Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay. He has the same name as the famous blues musician, Robert Johnson.  Robert Johnson, and he basically did farm work?
Speaker 2: Basically did farm work, but I think he worked on the machinery.  I think he might have been what was called a wheelwright.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was an important position in those days, yeah, the wheelwright, because everybody was using wagon wheels to make their wheels.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 27257
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about your grandfather [Robert Johnson] that were passed down?
Speaker 2: Well, we got to know him--I got to know him after we moved to Louisiana, and we would go up and visit him or take him up to visit with my mother [Mary Ellen Johnson] in southern Missouri.  He was well known around in the town of Vicksburg because he had moved to Vicksburg, Mississippi, during his later years and lived in a little home all by himself until he died at around age of one hundred and four.  But one of the favorite incidents that I recount about Grandfather Johnson was when we were having commencement at Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and we had been up to bring my mother down for commencement and stopped and brought him down for commencement at Southern University.  And so that Sunday when we went to church, where we attended, I had informed the person who would give the announcements and introduce the visitors, I said, "Now look you give the announcements and introduce the visitors and when you introduce him, you sit down," because I knew that he was going to have to have something to say, and surely enough, he did, he was just so thrilled and proud.  And then at the end of the sermon, the sermon on that particular Sunday, that was the Baccalaureate Sunday for Southern University, and the baccalaureate speaker was Dr. Robinson who started the Operation Cross Roads.  After Dr. Robinson finished his sermon, my grandfather jumped again, and he said, "You folk have to excuse the old man," says, "I'm just so thrilled, just so thrilled, here I hear about this person graduating from college and this kind of thing."  He says "When I was their age, we were hiding from the master's whip."  And he said "So I'm just overcome, I'm thrilled."  So that was one of the most interesting scenes or accounts or remembrances of my grandfather, my mother's father.
Speaker 1: That's a great story.  Did he talk about slavery at all to you?
Speaker 2: He didn't talk much about slavery, because I think he was around thirteen years old or something when slavery ended, and then he started farming.  They had land.  I'm not sure how they acquired the land, but he spent most of his--the rest of his life farming.  But he wanted to make sure that his children had an education.  And he and my grandmother, he and his wife had, I think, thirteen children.  And he wanted to see that all of them, if at all possible, had a chance for a college education.  And several of them did.  He took one of his sons over to Alcorn A and M College [now Alcorn State University, Alcorn, Mississippi], or he drove a wagon over there from out in the country where they lived and took with him to Alcorn bushels of sweet potatoes and things of that sort to give to Alcorn as a gift to them for admitting his son to Alcorn.  He had a daughter who finished nurse training school; she became a nurse.  She graduated from Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and was a nurse.  She was an army nurse for a while and then she was about to start a clinic in Detroit [Michigan] when she passed away.
Speaker 1: So he was serious inspiration for the family.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he was very much concerned about education.  One of his daughters was a school teacher; taught school there for many, many years in the little community where she grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--  Tell us something about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: I didn't know my grandmother that well.  I only saw her once.  When I was about four years old or so my mother went to visit them down in Vicksburg, Mississippi, and that was the only time that I met her.  She passed away around 1938, so I never really got to know her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did your grandfather meet her after slavery?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think he met her--yeah, he would have met her after slavery, because I think they got married sometime in the 1860s.
Speaker 1: She was only about twelve or so when slavery was over?
Speaker 2: Well, she might have been about fifteen or sixteen, something like that.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, fifteen, sixteen. Okay.  So they met around the Vicksburg [Mississippi] area?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not sure how they met.  She came from around (Macon?), Georgia, but I'm not sure how they met.
Story_ID: 27258
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters did your mother [Mary Ellen Johnson] have?
Speaker 2: Well, it was about thirteen of them.  And let's see, there were three sisters, yeah, three sisters and the rest were brothers.  So there must have been about--if there were thirteen of them, it must have been about ten brothers and three sisters, because I'm recalling the names of just three aunts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we know that some of them had a chance to go to college and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --become teachers?
Speaker 2: Yes.  All of them didn't go to college.  But the younger ones did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother have a chance to go?
Speaker 2: She didn't go to college; she went to a boarding school, which at that time was called Southern Christian Institute or--at a little town out from Vicksburg called Edwards, Mississippi, SCI.  It was a boarding school sponsored by the Christian Church.  So she went there and she finished what was the equivalent of a high school.
Speaker 1: That's an accomplishment in those days.
Speaker 2: In those days, that's right, that's right, because that was back around 1915-16 [1916].
Speaker 1: She would have been amongst the, in fact, the elite, because many people didn't get a chance to finish grade school.
Speaker 2: Right.  And if you had an equivalent of a high school diploma then that qualified you to teach, most assuredly.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother teach?
Speaker 2: She taught for a while.  She taught until she met my father [James Davis Frederick].
Speaker 1: Now is it true where she was that you couldn't teach if you were married?  There were rules in some towns in America, a lot of small towns you couldn't teach if you were married?
Speaker 2: Not in that part of--not in Mississippi.  I don't think they particularly--they wouldn't have enforced that regulation anyway for the most parts, for blacks, because you see the state wasn't provide--the state or the county was not providing educational support for blacks anyway.  So any education that blacks received was in churches and by persons who would, in a sense, volunteer to teach for whatever the parents of the students had attended the school would pay them or give them.
Speaker 1: It's interesting to think that there's a time within your lifetime when there were no schools provided for black students (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Publicly supported, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean they weren't provided by--I'm sure they were taxed though and everything?
Speaker 2: Well, you had the poll tax, yeah.
Speaker 1: So they had to either form their own school or they wouldn't have one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You see my father was teaching school in a little church school and people would pay him for teaching their kids, and my mother taught with him.  But the reason that we left Mississippi and went to Missouri, when I was just a year old was because my father wanted to go to a state where textbooks were free.  And he knew that in Missouri text books were free and that there was some support for public education for blacks.  So he knew of two states, California and Missouri, that he said where the textbooks were free.  He went to Missouri to start with, with the intentions of going on to California, but he never did.  He stayed in Missouri and taught up until he passed away for the most--for the most part until he passed away there in the state of Missouri.
Story_ID: 27259
Speaker 1: Now let's go to your father.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was James Davis, D-A-V-I-S, and the last name was Frederick.
Speaker 1: And what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His place of birth was--I'll just put Coahoma County near Friars Point, Mississippi.  And he was born July 12, 1880, I think it was 1880.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Friars Point, okay.  Now, that's near Dog Bog?
Speaker 2: Dog Bob is in Coahoma County, that's all a part of it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His folk had land.  They had land.  They're in Coahoma County, so he was born on that farm.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there a story about how they acquired land?  I know it was not easy to do.
Speaker 2: I think immediately after slavery ended, a number of blacks were either--the land was either deeded to them or else they were able to buy the land.  And as a consequence, my father's folk owned land.  I think my father's mother's folk probably were the ones with the large acreage because a substantial part of that acreage is still owned and farmed by a cousin, by a distant cousin in Coahoma County.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There is what's called the Miller Plantation.  And the Miller Plantation is a part of--is made up from land that my father's folk owned and my father's mother's folk owned.
Speaker 1: Okay, is that the land that your cousin farms--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --The Miller Plantation?
Speaker 2: The Miller Plantation.  Yeah, he's a big farmer there in Coahoma County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how far--well, can you take your father's family back any further than the civil war?
Speaker 2: No, I can't.  I think my father's folk came out of South Carolina.  I think--I think his father came out of South Carolina--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --But we aren't sure about those details.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he would have surely been born during slavery, right?
Speaker 2: He would have been born during slavery.  But, and I'm not sure how he got his education because he was a minister; he was a minister in the AME Church, the African Methodist Episcopal Church, he was a minister in the AME Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Oliver, Oliver Frederick.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27260
Speaker 1: So are there any stories passed down about your grandfather [Oliver Frederick] from that time?
Speaker 2: No.  I only met him once when I was about five years old or so, and I went with my father down to visit them on their farm there in Friars Point, in the Friars Point area in Coahoma County.  But I never got to know him, and I don't know any real stories about him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He had a church in the area there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was pastor of a church in an area and became a presiding elder, which in the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] church in that district.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's a serious commitment as an AME minister, you know, I meant that he was on the conference, in the conference.
Speaker 2: Yeah. That's true.  And the thing was that even during that day and time the AME Church attended to require that their ministers have an educational background.  Now where my grandfather got his educational background, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you never heard that he might have been associated with Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm pretty sure he was not associated with Wilberforce.  It might have been with a school in South Carolina.  Now, I don't know that he was ever association with Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina], which is in Columbia, South Carolina, which is an AME school, but there were several smaller schools, church-related schools in South Carolina and the AME Church has been very, very strong in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your grandfather moved--it was your grandmother that had the large hold of the land, right?
Speaker 2: Her family.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She was a Fowler.  Her maiden name was Fowler.
Speaker 1: What's her full name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's full name.  Lucy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Lucy Fowler.
Speaker 2: She was Lucy Fowler.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So they-- she was raised in that area around Vicksburg [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: She was raised, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27261
Speaker 1: Did your father [James Davis Frederick], was he able to finish school or go to school?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father--but there was a--again there was an academy in Clarksdale, Mississippi, called Stringers Academy.  It was kind of like a boarding school and it was not publicly supported, of course, it was privately supported, but Stringers Academy.  So he completed his work at Stringers Academy, which was equivalent of a high school education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so he taught too, you said?
Speaker 2: He taught, yes, he taught.  He taught and farmed.
Speaker 1: So we got both of your parents teaching and your father's farming?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when he went to Missouri and he started teaching in Missouri.  He was teaching in a one-room school and was also a sharecropper.  So during the times when he needed to tend to work in the field, then my mother [Mary Ellen Johnson] would teach the school, would teach the students, would go to the school, the one-room school to teach, she would substitute teach for him while he did whatever was needed to do to prepare for the crops.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was pretty convenient, I guess, to have two teachers in the home.  So he sharecropped, so did he ever own his own land?
Speaker 2: He never owned his own land.  He taught--he was a sharecropper for a while and then he--once he acquired a team of--well a horse and a mule team, then he began to rent land so that instead of sharecropping, he became a renter.  He was a tenant farmer who rented land.  But you see, if you lived on a farm and if you had to depend on the machinery and the livestock to be used in farming, the mules and the horses then you were a sharecropper, but if you managed to have your own team and your own equipment, farming equipment, then you might rent forty acres of land, because you had your own team and equipment in order to take care of the farming needs.  So ultimately, in addition to teaching school, he rented land.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm glad you made that distinction between being a sharecropper, having none of your own equipment--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --And being a--
Speaker 2: A tenant farmer.
Speaker 1: --A tenant farmer.
Speaker 2: Tenant farmer that rented, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27262
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: How they met?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The story that I know of is that my father [James Davis Frederick] was in a sense kind of soliciting membership in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And he came by to visit my uncle, my mother's [Mary Ellen Johnson] brother, and that's where he met her.  He had been married before.  He had been married before and was divorced.  And he had four children by the first marriage, but he was divorced.  So he met my mother who was six to eight years younger than he was.  But they met at my uncle's home and he came by there because he was conducting business or seeking membership--membership support for the NAACP.
Speaker 1: So they met at Uncle Lafayette's?
Speaker 2: Uncle Lafayette [Johnson].  Uncle Lafayette lived in a little town of Friars Point [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All Right.  So, now, your father didn't have the children with him, did he, the four children?
Speaker 2: He had four children when he met her, but he and his wife were separated--were divorced.
Speaker 1: But did, was he keeping the children?
Speaker 2: No.  They were with her.
Speaker 1: With her, okay. All right.
Speaker 2: Two of them later came to live with us.  The two oldest ones passed away, so I never got to know them.  But the two younger ones, they were older sisters, half-sisters, and I got to know them because they came to live with us for a while.
Story_ID: 27263
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their mannerisms, their interests, their hobbies, how they walk, talk, look, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think a little bit of after both of them really.  My father had a strong interest in education and in working with students and in encouraging students to try to do the very best that they could do with their own talents and, of course, he never discouraged a student, he never told a student that you can't do this work.  He would insist that you make every effort to try to do the work.  My mother, very patient, very self-sacrificing and worked very diligently with the community and in the church.  And so, since we grew up working closely with the church then I maintained that kind of an association, that kind of affiliation, that kind of involvement.  So I guess it's a combination of the two.
Story_ID: 27264
Speaker 1: Tell us about your brothers and sisters. Now you said you had like four that your father [James Davis Frederick] had--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Before.  And you knew two of them.
Speaker 2: I knew two of them.  The oldest was name Marie and the other was name Jessie.  They came up from Mississippi and lived with us for about a year and a half or so and attended school because my father was teaching the little one-room school.  So they attended school there.  But then they left and went to live with his sister, my aunt, in St. Louis [Missouri], and they spent the rest of their life in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have brothers and sisters by--
Speaker 2: Now, there were six of us by my mother.  The oldest sister lives in St. Louis right now, and that's Dorothy.  I didn't get to write the names all down on the questionnaire.  So Dorothy is the oldest and I'm next to Dorothy and then my brother Robert, Robert Wesley, or Robert W, who just passed away actually, incidentally, just about two weeks ago--
Speaker 1: --Sorry about that.
Speaker 2: --and then, then a younger brother who passed away about three or four years ago, Herbert--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --His middle name was De.  The reason his name was Herbert was because the year he was born, Herbert Hoover was elected president, and blacks, for the most part, during that day and time were all Republicans, in a sense.  So he named my brother--that brother Herbert was his first name, and his middle name was De Priest, and that was because that same year, Oscar De Priest was, I think, the first black to be elected to congress out of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah, the first one since reconstruction.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So his name was Herbert De Priest.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: And then the next brother was named after my father, he was James Davis, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my sister, my youngest sister, her name is Erma, Erma Lue, L-U-E.  She's really named Lucy for my father's mother, and she lives in Prairie View, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that the whole group?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's all six of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a moderate family in those days, cause--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a moderate family, that's true.
Speaker 1: --In those days you could have lots and lots more.
Speaker 2: Oh, typically, there's family with ten, twelve, more, yeah, that's true.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 27265
Speaker 1: Do, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Now, I think--I think that I remember--maintain that I probably remember this.  When I was about a year old, now I know, in many instances, one would say, you probably don't remember anything when you're a year old, and I don't think I was told this, but it seems to me that I can distinctly remember my mother picking cotton, and at that time, if you had a baby, and you go out into the cotton fields, you would put the baby on the back of the cotton sack, and as you pick the cotton, you would just drag the baby along on the cotton sack.  Now, I maintain that I can clearly remember being dragged along on a cotton sack as my mother [Mary Ellen Johnson] picked cotton, and that would have been way back in 1923, the fall of 1923.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The-- my next memory was that next year, because we had moved to Missouri, and my father [James Davis Frederick] was teaching at a little school in a church house in northern Sikeston, Missouri, a little place called Morley, M-O-R-L-E-Y, Morley, Missouri.  Now I clearly remember those days, because we lived in this old church house, and he taught school in that church house.  There was no school building as such, but he taught in that little church house.  And he taught there for about a year or so then we moved a little south of there to where--to the area, the Hayti [Missouri] area where I grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was a picture of me at that time, and I couldn't find the picture during the past couple of days, it was a picture of me and my sister Dorothy taken in 1924.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're a year old then, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: 1924.
Story_ID: 27266
Speaker 1: Now, Hayti, that's interesting, we were discussing that before the interview.  That's an old spelling of the island of Haiti.  And you were saying you have no idea of how the place--
Speaker 2: Really I have no idea, and I've never investigated that really as to how that town came to be named Hayti because it was not a t-- an area; there were lots of blacks living in that area because they all worked on farms, but I don't know the extent to which Haiti influenced the naming of the place Hayti.
Speaker 1: Was the place majority black?
Speaker 2: Out in the country it was.  In the little town--now keep in mind that Hayti is a town--the population of Hayti was about eleven hundred. So.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's not a lot of people.  So was there a store there or something?
Speaker 2: There were stores.  That was the main shopping area for people for five miles or more around in that area or that was the place to come.  There was a mercantile store there, food store and some other stores like that there in the town, and of course, there were schools and churches, but the schools and churches were for whites.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the core of the little town there was white?
Speaker 2: The core of the town was white, yes.
Speaker 1: White emergence and then black farmers formed the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were lots of black sharecroppers, lots of black sharecroppers within seven or eight miles radius of the town of Hayti.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So and your father [James Davis Frederick], did he teach school in the town or was it out in the country?
Speaker 2: No he taught school, there was a little rural community called Concord, the Concord Community, and that was that particularly--in that particular county, in that particular area, you did have public support for education for blacks, and they had built a little one-room school, so he was hired to be the teacher for that one-room school that we were about four miles north of Hayti, out in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's where he taught for-- up until-- about fifteen years.
Story_ID: 27267
Speaker 1: And you said that your father [James Davis Frederick] had moved the family to Missouri because of the free textbooks.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He took a job first teaching at this little church, church school building in Morley and then when I was, let's see, that next year; I was born 1923, 1924.  Of course, then he sent for us, for my mother and my sister and then myself.  And we went up to live with him then.  But he didn't stay at that school that next year, I guess it was 1925 was when we came back--he came down and started teaching at that little school, little one-room school in Concord [Missouri], that we called--we ended up calling it Dunbar Elementary School.  It had no name at first and then the members, he asked students in the school, "well, we need to name this school, what shall we name it?"  Well a lot of us were familiar with Dunbar's poetry and used to recite it all the time, and so we said we'd like to have this school named for Paul Laurence Dunbar.  So it became Dunbar Elementary School.
Speaker 1: --Okay.  So Dunbar's poetry was widely read in the schools--
Speaker 2: All the time.  We recited Dunbar's poems all the time, yes, yes.  We knew Paul Laurence Dunbar.  And I remember my father had one of Paul Laurence Dunbar's books because you see the school provided--we had hand-me-down textbooks.  We never had new textbooks.  They were always old textbooks from the white school.  The white school would get new textbooks and then they would pass the books over to us.  And there was no library, or such, at the school.  But my father managed to have books at home, and one of the books at home was 'The Works of Paul Laurence Dunbar.'  And he would bring that to school, and then at that time, students would memorize Dunbar's poems and we'd recite them either on programs or just in class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, do you remember any of the Dunbar Poems?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I remember any number of Paul Laurence Dunbar's--one was, "Seen my honey home last night,/ jump back, honey, jump back./ Hel' huh han' an' sque'z it tight,/ jump back, honey, jump back." [from 'A Negro Love Song'] and others like that, yes, yes.  Yeah, we used to know any number of Dunbar's poems just to recite them.
Speaker 1: He had quite a status.  It's so many Dunbar schools--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --Named around the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Dunbars and Booker T. Washington in every town.
Speaker 2: I guess the three most popular names, Dunbar, Washington and Carver.
Speaker 1: Right.  This was interesting.  This was like 1924 or so, Dunbar died in 1906, so his name was still, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When we were at Central States [University, Wilberforce, Ohio], I intended to go by his--it's with the museum there in Dayton [Ohio], and I never did get by there.
Speaker 1: --Yeah, the house is the house where his mother lived.  He lived there the last six years of his life, I think.  It's still preserved by Ohio Historical Society.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's a place to see.
Story_ID: 27268
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, the sights were the cotton fields, the cotton fields and working in the cotton fields, both during the summer, chopping cotton and in the fall, picking cotton, because in that area, we had a split session for schools.  And I didn't realize that in the rest of the country that the sessions weren't split.  We only knew of the split sessions.  So we went to--at the end of the chopping cotton season, which would be around the end of June, we would start the next school term, and that would go until the end of August when the cotton opened and then we would have a vacation up until November to pick cotton and then we would start school again.  So the sights and scenes, the cotton fields.  Yeah, that's extremely vivid in my memory.
Speaker 1: Now-- okay.  Go ahead, I'll ask you some more about cotton a little later, but go ahead, the sights, sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Sounds.  Actually I think--as I think about sounds, it's more of birds like woodpeckers, you'd hear woodpeckers drilling in the trees or outside of the cabin where we lived because there were trees all around it.  I would hear owls.  We called them hoot owls.  You would hear hoot owls at night, especially at night.  Those are sounds that I guess I remember most.  Odors.  Well, we had pig lots all around us.  And the odors from the pig lots were very prominent, very evident.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you said that spring was your favorite time of the year before, and considering the line of work you're in, did you really pay attention as a little kid to the plants around you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you--because you know, the trees would begin to leaf off, you'd notice that.  Many of the trees would be flowering kinds of trees, you would notice that.  Then they'd be working the gardens because everyone planted gardens, so you would be out helping, I'd be out helping my father start the garden.  And it was, it was just around the pretty time of the year.
Story_ID: 27269
Speaker 1: How old were you when you started going to school?
Speaker 2: Well, in light of the fact that my parents were teaching, then I would go--I started going to school when I was about three years old, because I'd just go to school with--if my mother was teaching, well, all of us, we just went to school.  And you'd sit there and read and listen to the other students in the class, because it's a one-room school so all the grades are in the same place.  And you would hear the second or third grade of sixth or seventh grade students do their work and that kind of thing.  So I started really going to school when I was around three.  But I didn't officially enter, let's say become a grade level student until I was about five then that was first grade.  But by the time I was in the first grade, I had been there long enough to have known and mastered the work of the second grade level, so I would skip from the second grade to the third grade.
Speaker 1: So you could read and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Add and subtract.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So you went to skip--
Speaker 2: Spell.
Speaker 1: --So skipped--
Speaker 2: So I skipped a grade.
Speaker 1: --Second grade.  Okay.  And moved on to third, so that would have made you about six years old in the third grade, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I don't have to ask you who your favorite teacher was.  I ask everybody else--
Speaker 2: Well, at the elementary school, of course, it was my father [James Davis Frederick].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was he a good teacher when you look back at it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he--he had an excellent reputation in the whole community as a teacher.  And many, many families who had children that others have said were hard to learn would send their kids from four or five miles around, passed other schools to come to--to be taught by my father.  And I've had a number of students, former students who I knew when we were in elementary school together or in high school, some who didn't go on to do that well and when I go back to Hayti [Missouri] now if Leroy Jones is still living, he'll say, well you know if I had had Professor--they always called him Professor Frederick for my teacher, I would have done a whole lot better.  But a lot of folk would say that he had the knack of being able to teach students that allegedly were hard to learn.
Story_ID: 27270
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did the state provide you all with?  Missouri supported the school on some level?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't the state, it was the local.
Speaker 1: The county, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the county.  There were local school boards for different school districts, and the school districts were the ones that provided the support.  They provided the salary for the teacher and they provided the textbooks and provided the facilities, the building, because they did built this building as a school building, and it had, of course, the school desks in it and everything and it had outside--just outside of the building there was a house called a coal house because the school was heated by a big coal heater in the middle of the school in the classroom.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the state provided coal--
Speaker 2: The school district did.
Speaker 1: --The school district did.
Speaker 2: And each year he would have to meet with members of the school district board in order for them to decide whether or not he'd be rehired the next year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So he taught for fifteen years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he taught from about, let's see, from about 1925 until, in that school until around 1936-37 (1937), yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, why did your dad stopped teaching?
Speaker 2: Well, he moved to another school, a two-room school about three or four miles away.  At that time they were not consolidating schools.  So then he moved over to teach at a two-room school and he taught there--he taught there, I don't know, for about three or four years.  Then he went to St. Louis [Missouri] and lived there for a couple of years or so, but then came back to another town in southeast Missouri and began teaching again.  So he taught at a school called Catron, C-A-T-R-O-N, an elementary school.  He taught at Catron for maybe five or six years and then by that time they had moved into a little town called Lilbourn [Missouri] where they were buying a little home.  And he taught there for another three or four years.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, let's see. Now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I think geography was probably my favorite subject at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you want to travel?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We'd read about countries in the geography textbook and then my father [James Davis Frederick] subscribed to a publication of the National Education Association called 'The Instructor,' a monthly publication, and he would bring that to school, we had it at home.  We'd read about travels in there and then he would oftentimes although he hadn't traveled himself these many places, but he would oftentimes talk to students in the classroom, in the school room about travels and things that take place in other--that would take place in other countries.  So he kind of looked forward to that eventually.
Story_ID: 27271
Speaker 1: Did your parents subscribed to magazines and newspapers?
Speaker 2: We had newspapers.  That's one of the things he always got, either the daily newspaper from Memphis, Tennessee, or one of the daily newspapers from St. Louis [Missouri].  So we had that.  My father [James Davis Frederick] also subscribed to, at that time it was kind of like a 'Time Magazine' type publication, it wasn't 'Time Magazine.'  We didn't know about Time, but that was a magazine, a journal type magazine called 'The Path Finder', I think it was during these days and times, it would be the kind of a publication that Tea Party folk would endorse real highly, 'The Path Finder.'  And the other journal that we read, since he belonged to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], we always read 'Crisis,' he always got the journal 'Crisis,' and we always read 'Crisis.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you all get the 'Chicago Defender' down there?
Speaker 2: That's right, the 'St. Louis Argus.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  The 'St. Louis Argus.'
Speaker 2: We got the 'St. Louis Argus,' that was the daily--that was the weekly newspaper.  We would get the 'Chicago Defender' and we would get the 'Pittsburgh Courier,' yeah.  We'd typically have those.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a radio, growing up?
Speaker 2: We finally got a radio around 1934.  We got a radio and from--he ordered it from Montgomery Ward, and I had to put it together.  And it was the only radio around in the community, really.  So during that day and time, that was when Joe Louis was a hero as a boxer.  And when Joe Louis was going--a fight was scheduled for Joe Louis on the radio, folk would come from three or four miles around over to the house to listen on the radio to the fight.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I heard these kind of stories before.  Would they all come in the house or would some--
Speaker 2: Yes, as many could get in the house would get in the house.  This was an old radio that had a wet battery.  You had to use a battery like a car battery or along with that battery plus several dry cell batteries.  So I'd have to--we'd take that old wet battery and have it charged like you'd have a car battery charged at a service station, but then if the dry batteries began to fade then we'd have to order new dry batteries.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it took a combination of the two to make it work?
Speaker 2: Or it took about a half dozen of the "C" batteries and some "D" batteries and these storage batteries, there was a combination of batteries.  It had to be all hooked up for that radio.  And then you had to have an outside antenna.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you put it together?
Speaker 2: Yes, I put it together.
Speaker 1: Now, you were about eleven?
Speaker 2: Yeah, around ten, eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So were you like the engineer of the house?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I would try to do things like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Are there any stories associated with the Joe Louis fights that you remember?
Speaker 2: Before we got our radio was the first Joe Louis fight with [Max] Schmeling and, of course, you know he lost that fight.  But we didn't have a radio.  But there was a country store out there in the country where we would always go and buy things, and there was a radio there.  So a number of us gathered at that radio in that old country store to listen to the fight.  Well, of course, the store was owned and run by white owners, white plantation owners.  So you--if Joe Louis had won, you wouldn't want to cheer too loudly under those circumstances.  But in that instance Joe Louis lost.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, for the next fight, we had our own radio.
Speaker 1: Now what did the white people do when Joe Louis lost?
Speaker 2: Oh, they were elated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wondered was there any--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were most elated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you had your own radio for the rematch, right?
Speaker 2: For the rematch, that's right.  We had our own radio, yeah.
Speaker 1: I know it's a story there.
Speaker 2: It didn't last very long.
Speaker 1: The fight.  Yeah, it was just a couple of rounds or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: About how many people you think were at your house?
Speaker 2: About ten to fifteen, I imagine.
Story_ID: 27272
Speaker 1: Now you said you built a special little shelf for the radio?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And tell us why.
Speaker 2: Well, of course, I needed to have a place to position the radio.  I needed to have a place to position it because it had to be hooked up to an outside antenna.  So I had to drill a little hole in the wall of the house in order to run the wire into the radio, the antenna wire into the radio.  And then I had to have also a wire that ran from the radio to what was called the lightening arrester, because you had to have this antenna up in the trees or somewhere.  And so, therefore, if lightening was to strike, it might hit the wire and, of course, hit the house.  So you had this lightening arrester that was grounded.  So I had to ground that and then I had to have this other wire to run up into the trees and across in order to get reception.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was necessary.  You couldn't just put it sitting on a table anywhere in the house.  You had to place it in a fixed position.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I built a little shelf right next to the front door and that's where I put the radio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a favorite radio program?
Speaker 2: Yes.  During those days and times you had these serials, 'Tom Mix,' and 'Jack Armstrong,' 'All American boy,' 'Amos and Andy' and 'Little Orphan Annie.'  Those from about six o'clock in the--from about five thirty in the evening until about seven, you had this series.  So you always try to do your chores outside so that you could come in and sit and listen to those serial--all the serial radio programs.  So those are figured programs.  During the summer, of course, the favorite was the baseball games out of St. Louis [Missouri], the St. Louis Cardinals.  The-- many of us--after I'd been in St. Louis for a year, I became interested in baseball.  So then I'd follow that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had the Cardinals.  There was also a team called the St. Louis Browns?
Speaker 2: There were two teams, St. Louis Browns and St. Louis Cardinals, that's right.  I never--I went to games at the St. Louis Cardinals, never did go to a game for the St. Louis Browns.
Speaker 1: In St. Louis, when you went to a ball game in those days, how were black people treated.  Did you have to sit in a special section?
Speaker 2: No you didn't, no you didn't. Not at Sports-- old Sportsman's Park, no you didn't, you didn't have to sit in a special section.  The fact of the matter is I became interested in baseball because when I went to St. Louis for freshman year, ninth grade at Vashon High School.  Then one of the friends who roomed--had a room with his mother and his brother in my aunt's house where we lived, he told me about that in the spring of the year they would make available to kids in high school, under I think about sixteen, fifteen to sixteen, they would make available a ticket called the Knothole Gang ticket.  Out along that field there was a section for the so-called Knothole Gang.  Well, you could get in for free if it weren't a holiday or if it were not a crucial series.  So you could go out there and sit in the Knothole Section and that was completely fully integrated, kids from--white kids from the high school, black kids from Vashon and Sumner, we all went out there and sat in that section.  So Sportsman's Park was not segregated.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  The knothole referring to, I guess, the holes in the wood (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Presumably yes, not holes, you could have a baseball, stake your field and you would have a wall around it, and you would have these little holes, and you could stand outside and look through the holes and follow the baseball game.  So we called it the Knothole gang.
Story_ID: 27273
Speaker 1: Now, when do you think that you first became interested in science as such?  Was it when you were in grade school?
Speaker 2: When I think more on it, when I was in high school.  Because when I was in grade school, we were always encouraged from my father [James Davis Frederick].  Every student in the class encouraged to think about what you want to be, what do you want to become.  And we didn't know people who had gone to college, because there was no one in the community that we had--that we knew who had gone to college.  There were very few who were even graduating from the tenth grade at that Central High [School].  Central High only went to the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: That was the colored high school?
Speaker 2: That's right, there in Hayti [Missouri].  So, out there on the playground, during recess, we used to oftentimes argue with each other as to what we were going to do.  I said, "I'm going to finish the university, I'm going to finish the institute."  We thought one was higher than the other or something like that, or "I'm going to finish college."  We didn't know the difference between an institute or college or the university, but we would argue about which one we were going to finish.  So then when I got to high school--
Speaker 1: Now, there's a story behind that.  You actually go to St. Louis [Missouri] to Vashon [High School]?
Speaker 2: I went to Vashon for one year.  Now I didn't really finish the eighth grade, as such, because at the--one spring the county had started a--giving a comprehensive examination for students in high school.  And if the student passed the comprehensive examination, the student, whether you were in eighth grade or seventh grade, you're supposed to take it when you were in eighth grade.  It was kind of an evaluation test for or assessing your knowledge.  And it wasn't so much of an achievement test as such, but a test in which it would be determined as to whether or not you really qualified, let's say, to go on into high school.  Well, I was in the seventh grade and my mother suggested to my father, said, "Well look, why don't you let him just go ahead and take the test anyway."  So I went ahead and took the test, and my score ended up being the second highest score in the county, so that meant that I was really eligible to go on to start high school.  And so that summer since I told you about the split session, then I started high school down in Hayti at Central High during that split session at the beginning of the 1935-36 [1936] school year.
Story_ID: 27274
Speaker 1: But my father had the idea in mind, he knew that the opportunities for real educational learning were not the best in that area and as a consequence what he wanted to do, as we got older, he would then send us on up to St. Louis to live with my aunt and go to school.  So my sister, Dorothy, left when she was still in the seventh grade, I think, and went to St. Louis.  So she finished her middle school in St. Louis.  Well then so that fall after the cotton picking season was over, this would have been the fall of 1934, after the cotton picking season was over, I was sent on up to St. Louis.  So I didn't start Vashon until November as a ninth grader, and so I stayed there for the rest of the year and then we went back home to southeast Missouri.  But I didn't go back to St. Louis that next year, I then went on down--by that time arrangements had been made for transportation for students to finish the ninth and eighth grade out in our community.  Arrangements had been made for a pickup to transport us to Hayti.  Now our parents had to pay for it.  The school did not provide public transportation.  So what they did, there was a man down in the little town of Hayti who had a ton and half pickup truck that he had converted into a kind of like bus like thing, with seats in it, and he would come to a certain point out there in the country.  It was about a mile, a mile and a half from where we lived, and we'd all gather there, about ten or twelve of us and he'd pick us up, and he would take us down to Hayti and then he'd pick us up and take us back home to that spot.  So when I came back to southeast Missiouri, I entered the tenth grade at Hayti, and therefore I finished the tenth grade there in 1937.
Speaker 2: That's a Central--
Speaker 1: That was just Hayti Central.
Speaker 2: --Hayti Central.
Speaker 1: Hayti Central Colored High School.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then that--so over in Caruthersville [Missouri], which was about twelve miles away from my home, set about five miles away from Hayti, Caruthersville had a four-year high school for blacks called Washington High.  So when those of us who finished the tenth grade at Hayti then we went on over, we were transported over, again, not by bus at that time, but by a private car to attend--to enter the eleventh grade at Washington High in Caruthersville.  Caruthersville was the county seat for that county.  And that's where I finished my senior year.  I did eleventh and twelfth grades at Caruthersville.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now it's named after Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Booker T. Washington, Washington High School, yeah.
Speaker 2: This is an all-black high school, right?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, yes, very much so.  Yeah, when they used to talk about busing and all and complaining about students being bused for distances.  I said now when we finally got a school bus, the county finally provided during my--during my senior year they provided bus transportation for those of us in the county to come to either Hayti or to carry us on over to Caruthersville.  Now that meant that students from as far away as about twenty miles or more caught that bus and come over to Caruthersville.  So I used to say, "I'd say you talk about busing," I said "When I was growing up, we passed by two or three different schools in order to get over let's say to Washington High and nobody was concerned about the distances we travelled in terms of being bused to school, no one was concerned about that."  But I entered Washington High in 1937 and finished in 1939.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 27275
Speaker 1: Now, now at what juncture in high school did you get interested in science?
Speaker 2: In my eleventh and twelfth grades, when I took a course in biology there at Washington High [School, Caruthersville, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was always interested in crops, you know, because my background was agriculture.  I was always interested in crops, but I didn't know much about the science of crops, especially plant science.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was your teacher important in you becoming interested in this?
Speaker 2: Yeah, to some extent.  Now I had a teacher at Hayti [Missouri] who taught general science.  His name was Larsen, Frank Larsen.  And Larsen exposed us--first time I ever heard about magnetism and that sort of thing.  It was interesting.  He exposed us to a number of things in science and that kind of whetted my interest to some extent in science right from in the tenth grade as a result of Frank Larsen.  Then when I went over to Caruthersville, the man who taught mathematics and biology was a man by the name of Dunlap who was a graduate of Lincoln University in Jefferson City [Missouri].  And so in the biology course as we talked about plant, growth and structure and that sort of thing, well I knew about how plants grew to some extent, you know, working gardens, working the fields, but I always remember that at that time we were studying the flower and we were using the textbooks and we had to make a drawing of parts of the flower.  And I remember one morning I was out there working in the garden before going to school and I was looking at a flower on a pea plant, English pea plant.  And then I noticed that the parts that we were drawing, I could recognize these parts.  I could tear the flower apart and here all these part were.  Now it would have been so much better in class if we had used an actual flower, but we never had a flower in class, we had the drawing.  But it was amazing to me.  I said here's what we have been drawing.  That's when I became, I guess, more aware of the science of plant growth and structure and development.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that interesting you described a disconnect between the drawing and the book and the actual world.  It was better to put science together with what's actually around you.
Speaker 2: That's why my classes, over the years, I have tended to always use living stuff rather than pickle stuff or just plain slide, microscope slide.  So the world is much more interesting to see the thing for real.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So this is, this is eleventh grade you take biology?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 27276
Speaker 1: I notice as we sit here in Tuskegee [Alabama] steps away from the George Washington Carver Museum, all the great things he did with plants and botany and that sort of thing, had you heard of George Washington Carver?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes indeed.  He was a hero for us.  From elementary school, before I went to high school, when I was in the fourth and fifth, sixth grade, we learned about George Washington Carver and his experiments.  And my father used to get a publication from Tuskegee called the 'Tuskegee Messenger,' or is the 'Tuskegee News,' it's either 'Tuskegee Messenger' or 'Tuskegee News,' I used to read that all the time.  Yeah.  Sure we knew about George Washington Carver.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So 'Tuskegee Messenger' or 'Tuskegee News'--
Speaker 2: I think it was called the Tuskegee Messenger if I recall correctly because that would have been--that would have been way back in 1930, '31 (1931).
Speaker 1: I know one of the aims of the Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee, Alabama] was to educate black farmers in the south--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a part--that was one of the aims, there's a mural out here.
Speaker 1: --Of all these farmers coming into the center of Tuskegee in buck boards and wagons and stuff--
Speaker 2: Yep, when I was a student here, that's what would happen on Founder's Day, Booker T. Washington, we would celebrate Booker T. Washington's birthday, the campus would be crowded with folk in wagons here to celebrate the founding of Tuskegee and Booker T. Washington's birth day.
Speaker 1: --I think what that mural outside depicts is some kind of a formation of an organization to educate black farmers in new techniques and--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, and then you probably know that the forerunner of the agricultural extension program was really something that, in a sense, started here with was what was called the Jessup Wagon.  You probably heard of the Jessup Wagon where Carver, where they would take and go out in the countryside with this wagon to provide information for the farmers about better farming practice and all.
Speaker 1: --Okay.  So Carver would actually get in this wagon and go out and tour the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Okay.
Speaker 2: So as a consequence, when I graduated from high school, the only place I applied for college work was Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  I had a scholarship to go to Lincoln University in Jefferson City, but I didn't even apply to Lincoln.  I applied to Tuskegee to come to Tuskegee.
Story_ID: 27277
Speaker 1: Did you graduate with honors, or anything, or how were your grades?
Speaker 2: You mean in high school?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was valedictorian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was kind of an interesting thing because you see I came from out in the country. And the kids who grew up in the little town Caruthersville [Missouri], they didn't have a high regard for the capabilities necessary, the academic capabilities of those of us from out in the country. So, but I did well and all.  And when the time came for a decision to be made based academic achievement as to who would be salutatorian, who would be valedictorian, well of course there was the nephew of a local dentist, Howard Gibson.  It was thought that he--probably he would be the top academic person in the class.  But when the principle, Mr. Lunderman, looked at the overall performance and all then he decided that I had the best average.  Well that didn't sit very well with the folk in the town.  And his aunt came to visit the principal, that sort of thing to protest and all.  But now my fellow classmates who were bused in from out in the country, they were just delighted.  They thought this is, "Well now we're sure you deserve it but you won't get it because we're from out in the country.  Howard is going to get this."  And it turned out that it didn't turn out that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well that's a good story.  Yes, so the principal had some character.
Speaker 2: Yep, Lunderman did, he sure did.  Victor Lunderman was our principal.
Speaker 1: Victor--
Speaker 2: C. J. Lunderman.
Speaker 1: Oh, C. J.
Speaker 2: C. J. Lunderman.
Speaker 1: Lunderman.  How do you spell that, L-U--?
Speaker 2: Lunderman, L-U-N-D-E-R-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He came from the Duke of Kentucky.  I don't think he had a--I'm not sure whether he had a bachelor's degree or not because he went to the school in Paducah.  And at that time I think that was a junior college, I think, in Paducah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the one my grandfather went to, Paducah Industrial School [Paducah, Kentucky.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And it's now defunct, of course.  It doesn't exist anymore, but it was Paducah Industrial School, yeah.  It's on the website, you can see it.  It's the only school for black people in Paducah in those days.  Paducah Industrial.  Yeah, I think you got a--I don't know why it's escaping me, but it's a teaching degree.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's right because he was straight in education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Teacher education.
Speaker 1: A normal degree, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, normal.
Story_ID: 27278
Speaker 1: You knew you were going to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: That's right.  I applied and was accepted to come to Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: All right.  So how did you get there?
Speaker 2: Well, it's kind of an interesting story so how I ended up finally getting to Tuskegee because I applied to admission and had applied for a scholarship, and had applied for the work study program.  Tuskegee had a work study program at that time, and so I applied.  I knew that my parents were not going to have any real funds to support me, and that I was going to have to work once I got on campus, once I got to the campus.  So I worked that summer chopping cotton and doing other little jobs that I could find in order to get some money available, wasn't going to cost a lot at that time.  The admission fee was only seventy-five dollars, and I forgot what the other costs were, but they weren't that much.  But it was more than my father and mother had and more than I had earned.  So the man's farm that we first lived on when we came down from Morley, Missouri, and my father started teaching at the little one-room school, a man by the name of Thompson, Horace Thompson, he and my father, although they had had some differences early on because he told my father he wanted him to vote for Al Smith for president instead of Herbert Hoover.  And my father told him that one thing he reserved for himself was his right to decide.  You see we were sharecroppers on the Thompson farm.  He reserved the right to make a decision on his own as to who he would vote for and he wanted him to know "Now I am voting for who I want to vote for, no one's telling me who to vote for," and Mr. Thompson--I can remember that conversation, I was only about four or five years old, but I can remember that conversation very well.  I didn't know what it meant then really.  And so Mr. Thompson said what he had told us, "All the sharecroppers on the farm if you don't vote for Al Smith, you're going to have to move off the farm."  So my father told him that he was going to vote for who he wanted to vote for.  Well we did move that next year.  But then my father and Thompson, they became associated again on the farm, but my father still being a sharecropper on the farm in another place, but also teaches school.  Well then when the time came, I had worked for Mr. Thompson that summer chopping cotton.  And my father had gone to him to ask him for a loan, about one hundred and fifty in order for me to have the money to go to Tuskegee.  And I was all set to leave to go to Tuskegee that first weekend in September, when I was due to be there, and my father came that Saturday afternoon and said I got sad news for you.  Mr. Thompson said he will not let me have the money.  He said I'm trying to do too much for my children.  He said the white folk around here aren't sending their kids off to college, and you're trying to do too much by sending your kids off to college.  I understand you already have a daughter or something up in St. Louis [Missouri] in college.  So he said no he wouldn't let me have the money.  So I couldn't leave.  I couldn't go to Tuskegee; I didn't have the money.  Well, that was the opening of the cotton picking season.  So that Monday morning I got my cotton sack and headed for a cotton field and started picking cotton.  And I picked cotton for about two, two and a half weeks until I had earned enough money to really leave to go to Tuskegee.  So I left.  But when I got down there, I was told, "Where have you been, you're too late, you can't register, school has been in session now for two and a half weeks.  We had the scholarship for you, you didn't show up, we had a work assignment for you, we had to give it to somebody else."  So the dean of men said you have to go back home, and I said "Well, I don't have anything to go back home with.  So somehow or another you're going to need to let me stay here."  So they got together and then they came out and said "Well, okay, we decided we'll let you stay for this term, but you can't--the credit you receive for the courses that you take won't count because you started too late."  I said "Well, I'll accept that condition."  So that's how I got to Tuskegee and started Tuskegee.  At the end of that term I was told well, I tell you if you take special exams in each of these courses at the beginning of the next term and pass them all, you'll get credit for the term.  So that's my story relative to my entrance to Tuskegee.
Story_ID: 27279
Speaker 1: You said a guy said, described how you came to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. Sullins.  Sullins from Little Rock, Arkansas.  He said when he came to Tuskegee, the only thing he had was his birthday suit and an appetite, and Tuskegee accepted him.  As a consequence he became a student at Tuskegee and went on to do quite well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how did you like the classes, were they challenging compared to what happened in high school or were you in step with what everybody else was doing?
Speaker 2: The classes were pretty challenging.  It turned out the information I had learned about the human system, human biology, the information I learned from my father [James Davis Frederick] in grade school as it turned out and later on in high school in the biology class.  When I got to Tuskegee, although I was two and half weeks late on the first exam in biology, I scored quite well.  Now my weakest area at Tuskegee was in mathematics, that was my weakest area.  Because although I had a good background in geometry, I didn't have the kind of background I needed in basic mathematics and in algebra, so that was a weak area for me.  But then as I began--I enrolled in the College of Agriculture and began to take courses in agriculture and ultimately plant science then those courses were a challenge, but they were courses that I enjoyed and did well in.  Actually because I scored well in biology during my freshman year, in the Biology Department at Tuskegee at that time, the two professors in biology gave the lectures and then the laboratories were conducted by students who had shown some proficiency in aptitude and ability in biology so because I had made "As" and "Bs" my first year then the two ladies, the biology professors, asked that I be assigned as a biology laboratory instructor as my work assignment.  Well I didn't want to do that because I felt I was too young.  See, I had just turned sixteen when I went to Tuskegee and so I tried to get out of it because during the summer, I worked on the grounds here, mowing the lawns trimming the hedges.  Then when I went for my work assignment for the sophomore year, the Labor Director said "You been assigned to biology, you're going to be a biology lab instructor."  I said, "No, I want to be a custodian in one of the buildings that's the work assignment I want."  He said, "No, you've been asked for you're going over there, that's your work assignment."  So I ended up having to go over there, and I started as a biology lab instructor.  So what--the way they did it, I was taken into the laboratory class beginning of the session and I was introduced, "This is your laboratory instructor," and the professor was gone.  It was my responsibility to do the labs, conduct the labs, do the exams for the labs, all that sort of thing.  So that's how I got started really in teaching, because I had decided I wasn't going to teach.  My parents were teachers and all, and I said, "I'm not going to teach."  But I started teaching then my sophomore year as a biology laboratory instructor, and that what I did for the next three years.
Speaker 1: Now this, what was it, an easy transition to just start teaching, because I mean you're raised--your father's a teacher, he teaches at home, your mother's [Mary Ellen Johnson] a teacher, you're at home with her.  Was it just something you didn't want to do because--were you kind of just tired of the atmosphere?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  I didn't want to do--I didn't want that work assignment because I didn't think I knew enough.  I thought I figured that most of the students who would be in my lab classes would be older than I was and that I really didn't know--I didn't think that I knew enough to really serve as a biology laboratory instructor.  I learned a lot my first year, my first year of teaching.  And then went on and ended up being a successful biology laboratory instructor, especially my junior and senior years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You probably had, I guess, a natural affinity for it and didn't realize it-
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --or didn't want to do it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 27280
Speaker 1: What's it like being on the campus of Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] in biology, in a place where George Washington Carver taught and lived.  Carver passed away in '41 [1941]?
Speaker 2: '43 [1943].
Speaker 1: '43 [1943].
Speaker 2: My senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a chance to meet him?
Speaker 2: Well, I saw him.  I never really formally met him.  My, my major, the man who came back as head of biology and it was a botanist, asked me to--Dr. Carver asked him--he needed a certain collection of plant specimens and he was no longer able to get up and go out and collect himself.  So he asked Dr. Rohm if he would arrange to provide him with these specimens of plants.  By that time I had become quite familiar with the identification and all of many kinds of plants around on the campus and in the area.  So Dr. Rohm asked me to make this collection for Dr. Carver.  So I didn't take it to Dr. Carver, myself, Dr. Rohm did, but you would see Dr. Carver oftentimes around on the grounds outside of this building.
Speaker 1: So you never-- did he ever speak to the students?
Speaker 2: Once a year during my year here, he was no longer teaching, you see, when I came, but once a year, he was a chapel speaker.  Carver gave a talk once a year.  You see at that time--chapel was compulsory for the Sunday morning worship service, for the Sunday evening vespers and for the Wednesday evening vespers.  And he normally, once a year, he would be the Sunday evening vesper speaker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you heard him speak once a year?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there any stories about Carver, about his personality or characteristics?
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember the first time I ever saw him, I didn't know who he was.  He was wondering out in back of this building, the Carver Museum building right down the hill there.  He was walking around out there looking at some wooden panels, he was inspecting them.  And these panels were painted different colors.  Well, it was an experiment, and he had made paints different from clays and he was studying the effect of these paints as far as weathering on wood as to how persistent they would be, whether they would wrap in the weather and fade or not.  And I was walking along, going up toward White Hall and this man was down there looking at these--walking around looking at these panels with this old gray cap on and sweater and all, and I thought he was somebody--one of the grounds crew.  And the person I was with says, "You know who that is down there?" I says, "No, I don't know who he is."  He says, "That's Dr. Carver."  I said, "That's Dr. Carver?" he said, "Yeah, that's Dr. Carver."  So those are the times--I never really saw him or approached him.
Story_ID: 27281
Speaker 1: Now, my roommate, during my senior year, one of my roommates was sent down to work in Dr. Carver's laboratory and Talvage Martin tells me a wonderful story about that because Dr. Carver's lab, he never threw anything away.  If he would get a package, you know, wrapped in twine, he wouldn't throw the twine away, he would attach it to another piece of twine and he had a great big ball of twine, he never threw anything away.  So his lab looked very junky.  So Talvage says that he went down and he was approaching Dr. Carver to work in his lab and he didn't see him working in the lab.  He said he saw a fellow sitting back in the side room, but he said, "Wonder where is Dr. Carver is, how could he work in a lab like this', he went on to talk about, "this junky lab, says how could he do this?'"  He said, "Well, he's not here so I guess I'll come back tomorrow and see him."  When he came back the person who had been sitting there--he saw sitting in that room was Dr. Carver.  And he said Dr. Carver said, "Well, young man, now if you think that you can straighten up this laboratory, that's fine, proceed, go right ahead and reorganize it."  He said he was so embarrassed.  Of course he had gone on and on about how junky that lab was.
Speaker 2: Now was he a very tall person, Dr. Carver?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was kind of stooped with everything, you know, in getting long with age, he was, I guess, he was around six [feet], a little over six, maybe six, one [inch], something like that.
Speaker 2: All right.  I've heard he had a real high voice.
Speaker 1: Had a very pitched voice.  You see, that's another story.  The first time I heard him, when I was a freshman, and he was to be the chapel speaker, and I was sitting there and I was waiting for Dr. Carver to speak, and he--he wasn't there in person because he was in New York City [New York] and he was going to give his talk to the group by radio.  Well I kept waiting and I heard this person speaking with this very high-pitched voice and I kept listening.  So I asked the fellow who was sitting next to me, I said, "When Dr. Carver going to start speaking?"  He said well that's Dr. Carver speaking now.  He did have a very high-pitched voice.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So he was around campus up until your senior year?
Speaker 1: He died January of my senior year.
Speaker 2: Was he well most of the time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he seemed to have been well most of the time.  He seemed to be up and about.  He wasn't as active anymore, but he seemed to be up and about.  We didn't know--there was no period of prolonging illness as far as we knew.  But then, I guess it's during January, that morning or sometime the word began to circulate on the campus that Dr. Carver had just died.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What did he die from, do you know, was it a stroke or something?
Speaker 1: No.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is in 1940--
Speaker 1: 1943.
Speaker 2: 1943.  Okay.
Story_ID: 27282
Speaker 1: Now, your mentor was a Dr. Rohm, right?
Speaker 2: My mentor here at Tuskegee was Dr. Rohm, that's right, Harry Rohm.
Speaker 1: Tell us something about him?
Speaker 2: Well, Dr. Rohm was a very interesting person.  He was from Texas.  He got his, I think, an undergraduate degree from Prairie View [A and M University], I think.  Prairie View, Texas.  But then he did graduate work in several different places, or did some work in several different place.  But his main work, his main graduate work was at the same school that Dr. Carver did his work.  That was Iowa State [University] in Ames, Iowa.  So, I'm not sure how Dr. Rohm became interested just in botany, but that was his interest, he was a botanist.  So when I came here he was away completing his work for his Ph.D. degree in botany from Iowa State.  My sophomore year, I think it was my sophomore year, no it was my junior year, that summer, leading up to my junior year, he came back.  He had completed his work for his doctorate degree and then he--and he introduced some courses in plant taxonomy, identification of plants.  And I took that course and found that interesting.  Very fascinating. So I began to develop more of an interest in that aspect of plant science, although in agriculture, my major was, what is called technical agriculture with a specialty in landscape design and floriculture.  So that combined with the work with the courses I was taken under Dr. Rohm just enhanced my interest, let's say, in the plant sciences.  Also, when he came back that summer, he and a lady, Miss Deloney, they were going to do a biology manual so that students, instead of having to buy a special biology manual that they would do their own and I was asked to do the drawings for the manual.  It was more a manual of human biology than the just general biology and so that summer I worked all summer long doing drawings and we put the manual together and had that manual available for student distribution in the fall of my junior year.
Speaker 1: Now, were you always, or could you always draw?
Speaker 2: I could draw, yeah, I could draw.  I never considered myself really a first-rate person in terms of drawing.  But, yeah, I could draw things like the systems and things of that sort, yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So more like diagrams?
Speaker 2: Yeah, diagrams, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I could do diagrams okay.
Speaker 1: I know Dr. Carver was an art major at Iowa State.
Speaker 2: He was, he was.
Speaker 1: He wanted to paint.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's what he wanted to do.  He really wanted to be an artist.  He was told, "Well, you know, you'd go much further if you went into botany and plant science," yeah.  He had some famous paintings.  Some of them are still in the museums.  You know, a lot of that was lost in the fire; there was a museum fire.
Speaker 1: Was it, really?
Speaker 2: Yeah, early.  Quite a number of years ago.
Speaker 1: Was it while you were here?
Speaker 2: No, it was after my time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because I know the chapel, at one point, burned.
Speaker 2: The chapel burned.
Speaker 1: Was that during the same fire?
Speaker 2: No. That was a different time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know it's a legend out there by the new chapel, about the old chapel burning.
Story_ID: 27283
Speaker 1: Is there anyone here that--well, since we're at Tuskegee, I'm asking a lot of questions about Carver, but was there anyone in the sciences here that was considered the disciple of Carver or someone that Carver, you know, hand-picked or trained specifically to follow in his footsteps?
Speaker 2: His main assistant was a Dr. Curtis.  And Dr. Curtis took over the laboratory once Dr. Carver passed away.  But Dr. Curtis was his main assistant at that time.  Now there were some others who worked with Dr. Carver.  One of my mentors in chemistry was a Dr. Warren Henry.  Warren Henry was a Tuskegee graduate back in--one of the first persons to get a bachelors degree from Tuskegee.  He went on to get a Ph.D. degree in chemistry and physics and became a world renowned physicist.  Well, he came back during World War II and worked with Dr.--well, he came back during World War II during my junior year, and he did work with Carver in his laboratory.  We persuaded Dr. Henry to offer a course in organic chemistry.  Organic chemistry was not being offered.  And some of us felt that if we were going to go ahead to do advance work in the sciences, we should have some organic chemistry.  So we went to the registrar and asked the registrar "If we can find an instructor to teach organic chemistry, would you schedule it?" And she said "Yes, she would."  Well, Dr. Henry agreed to be that person and taught us organic chemistry.  Much later on we became colleagues at Howard and worked together in a number of programs at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  But that was one, Henry.  Another person who came over and worked with Carver because they were working at that time with okra to see the extent to which okra fibers might be used to some extent in the--in World War II, I forgotten what they were looking for, what they wanted to use okra for, but his name was Henry McBay.  Now, I didn't know McBay at that time, we later became colleagues at Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia].  But Henry McBay has been responsible for a whole host of blacks who became chemists, a whole host of blacks.  Now, McBay worked over here with Carver for a summer or maybe a little be later--a little longer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, Dr. McBay's name resonates throughout all the chemistry industry, they all know something about Dr. McBay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I should say so.
Speaker 1: He was a mentor in so many ways.  Dr. Henry is also [simultaneous]--
Speaker 2: Warren Henry.  Yeah, Warren Henry.
Speaker 1: Yeah, these two people are giants now, yeah.
Story_ID: 27284
Speaker 1: Now, did you participate in [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] campus activities, or did you have to work most of the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I participated in campus activities.  Yeah, I was--part of my junior year and my senior year, I editor of the 'Campus Digest,' the campus newspaper, and was active in other student organizations with Dr. Gomillion because we had a chapter of the Southern Negro Youth Congress here on campus and I was active with that.  We was active with the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] here on campus.
Speaker 1: Now let me stop this a minute on Dr. Gomillion.  This Charles Gomillion--
Speaker 2: Charles Gomillion.
Speaker 1: --Who was the plaintiff in the famous case--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Gomillion versus Lightfoot--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --1960 Supreme Court decision.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Now he was a favorite teacher of mine, Gomillion was, but I knew nothing about the term sociology.  But the rural sociology was a course required of all ag [agricultural] majors and he taught it.  And that's when I first met him.  I maintained contact with Gomillion, in fact, I took the last pictures of Gomillion before he died.  He was here at Tuskegee and I was here for the Centennial--for Booker T. Washington's Atlanta Exposition Address.  And he had broken his leg in the fall and I went by to see him, and he expected to--he said "Well, okay in a couple of weeks the doctor tells me I can get up and get out again." But he never did, two weeks or so later, he passed on.  Yeah I interacted with Gomillion over the years.
Speaker 1: So he would have passed on in '95 [1995], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: That would have been the one hundredth anniversary of the Atlanta Exposition--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --"Cast your buckets where you are" [simultaneous][unclear]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --The Booker T. Washington speech.  I was reading on line last night that there is an oral history of Gomillion that's been lost; they actually did it and they lost the tape or something.  I hope they find it at some point.  But there's, there's a couple of pictures of him online.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were active to some extent at that time, you know, with the voter registration here in the town of Tuskegee, he was promoting that and some student organizations were working with him on that project.
Speaker 1: So would you all actually go out into the areas and register people to vote?
Speaker 2: No, because you couldn't do that.  The way the--in order to register to vote at that time, you had to be endorsed or supported by a person who was already a registered voter, you had to own property, and you had to pay your poll tax and some other provisions and then the Board of Registrars, you can never tell when they were going to meet.  And then when they would meet, if they happen to meet, they would ask you something like interpret the constitution or something of that sort or write it.  If you couldn't do that, you couldn't register to vote.
Speaker 1: So, in other words, they tried to make it as hard as possible--
Speaker 2: They made it extremely difficult.
Speaker 1: --To vote.
Speaker 2: Extremely difficult.
Speaker 1: I think that one of the--Dr. Gomillion's lawsuit was over gerrymandering, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, because you see, once it became clear that they were going to have to relax their restrictions to some extent in order to let blacks vote in this area, then they decided well in order to keep the town in--with majority white that they would then gerrymander most blacks out of the town.  They would redraw the lines, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the map had been a rectangle.  It became like a twenty-three sided monstrosity.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Of course their actions were overturned by the Supreme Court in 1960.  I don't know when the suit was initially filed or how long it took, but it was--
Speaker 2: Well, if you want to read a book that chronicles that whole thing, it's a book called 'Reaping the Whirlwind.'  I've forgotten the name of the author, but it chronicles the Tuskegee story.
Speaker 1: --'Reaping the Whirlwind,' okay.  I'm going to try to get it.
Story_ID: 27285
Speaker 1: Any other favorite teachers here on campus or people that you encountered on Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] Campus?
Speaker 2: The man who taught me floriculture in landscape designing was man by the name of Cooper, his name was Myrle, M-Y-R-L-E, Myrle Cooper.  He taught me--he's the one that, well introduced me to the names, let's say, of ornamental plants, shrugs, which was fascinating to me.  And also I learned how to do landscaping designing with Myrle Cooper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So landscape design is something that a lot of people take for granted, but it enriches everybody's life on some level if they're in a public space.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So how did you become interested in that?
Speaker 2: Well because one of the courses that was required of a botany majors--ag [agricultural] majors who were not going into vocational agriculture but into techno agriculture was a course in landscape designing and floriculture.  So you had to take that, and that's how I became interested in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about your fellow students.  Were there any interesting students here that you remember from those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a number of interesting students.  The roommate that I mentioned who was my roommate during my senior year was in the first platoon of blacks to enter the marine corp.  Because upper classmen were really looked up to, Nathaniel Colley was here and Nathaniel Colley became one of the top officials in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  He became an attorney, lived in Sacramento, California.  Nathaniel Colley.
Speaker 1: C-O--
Speaker 2: C-O-L-L-E-Y.  Nathaniel Colley.
Speaker 1: --Okay.
Speaker 2: And of course the person who became really outstanding in the military who I knew, he was in class ahead of me but who at that time would never have guessed that he would have become who he became and that was [Daniel] Chappie James.  So I remember Chappie James.
Speaker 1: So you say you never would have guessed it, what was he like when he was here?
Speaker 2: Chappie James was in a sense, everybody regarded him as a big bully who really didn't necessarily apply himself to academics as such.  He was a physical ed [education] major and--but he was really not--he was really not a top athlete, but he was out there.  Good friends of mine who were top athlete football players or basketball players, because two of the basketball players who would have made NBA [National Basketball Association] had to been open were here with him.  And in talking with one of them especially who the Globe Trotters tried to get to go with him but he wouldn't go, he would tell me, he was a quarterback, had been the quarterback for the football team, and he said, "Chappie James was no football player, he was out there in the way."  But he became just tremendous.  Another general who I knew a whole lot better who was a class behind me, Hamlet, James Hamlet. I knew James Hamlet very well.  He was the sports editor for the campus newspaper.  So Jim Hamlet, and there were a host of others really who I got to know while I was here who went on to do extremely well.
Story_ID: 27286
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you graduated in 1943?
Speaker 2: 1943I graduated, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the middle of World War II?
Speaker 2: Middle of World War II.
Speaker 1: Did they try to draft you immediately?
Speaker 2: Well, you see the thing was by being younger entering a school at an early--entering college at an early age, I wasn't eligible to be drafted until the end of my junior year, so I didn't register for the draft until the summer of 1942.  In the summer of 1942 a whole group of us spent that summer working in Connecticut on a tobacco farm.  A group of us from Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] went up to work on the tobacco farm, so it was there that I registered to vote, registered for the draft.  Well, I knew that I was at risk of being called up, but I wanted to take my chances so I didn't sign up for any of the programs that allegedly would enable you to complete your work that next year.  So I didn't sign up for any that was the enlisted reserve programs.  I did not go into advance ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], I didn't want to--because I didn't want to--I wasn't interested in the military career and my junior year they started the advance ROTC year, and bunch of my school mates and classmates went into advance ROTC.  So I took my chances.  I was called up--I contacted my local [draft] board in Caruthersville, Missouri, and indicated that I would be graduating in May of 1943 and asked for a reclassification so that I could graduate.  Well, in order for them to do that, they had to send me an induction notice anyway.  That was a part of the process.  So in February I did receive a notice that I was being drafted.  Then when I returned it they extended--they reclassified me until the end of May, and that enabled me to go ahead and graduate without being called up for the service.
Story_ID: 27287
Speaker 1: Now let me-- I didn't ask anything about the Tuskegee Airmen, that's really celebrated these days, but what was--did you know any of the guys in the Tuskegee Airmen when you were--
Speaker 2: Several of them were classmates of mine.  Yeah, in the original group, several of them were classmates of mine.  And others were school mates, yeah, sure, because you see that started during my junior year.
Speaker 1: --Right.  Was it common knowledge when Eleanor Roosevelt came down to fly with the Tuskegee Airmen?  Did people here know?
Speaker 2: She came down at the beginning of my freshman year, and I wasn't here at that time.  I hadn't arrived.  But you see they already had a civilian pilot training program here that Chief Anderson was in charge of, and as a consequence, a number of the students here on campus would go out to Moton Field to take pilot training and to earn a pilot's license.  So when she came down and Chief Anderson took her up in the plane, the movie doesn't show it that way, the movie indicates that a cadet took her up in the plane, that wasn't the case, Chief Anderson took her up in the plan and flew her around, and so then she went back to report.  But yeah, I very clearly remember when they first started the 99th [Squadron] because they lived right here on campus, they lived in Sage Hall to start with, because they didn't have facilities for them.  And they would eat in the dining hall, or they'd come in, march in in the evening to have their meals in the dining hall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Do you remember actually hearing about their exploits in the news?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we followed them, we followed them, because we knew--so many of them we knew.  One of them had been a roommate of mine during the summer.  Because see during the summer we all lived down--all the men lived down in one of the (unclear) and one of them from Birmingham [Alabama] had been--who had became a 99th, member of the 99th, had been my roommate then.
Story_ID: 27288
Speaker 1: So, so when you graduated from Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] in 43' (1943), did you graduate with any special honors?
Speaker 2: Cum laude.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's good.  So what were your plans immediately after your graduation, did you know you wanted to pursue a Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew that I wanted to go to graduate school, to do work in plant science, and it was broadening of plant science for me, I didn't know about specialties in plant science.  So I knew I was--and I had thought of going--my--Dr. Rohm wanted me to go to Iowa State [University, Ames, Iowa], to consider Iowa State, because that was his school and that had been George Washington Carver's school, but I wanted to stay out of the Service as long as I could after graduating.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So what I did I--after working for about six weeks or so as a playground instructor in St. Louis [Missouri], playground supervisor, I went out to the state of Washington to Vancouver, Washington, because I had a number of schoolmates out there working in the ship yards.  But I went out, not to work in the ship yards, but I went out to find a job in agriculture in order to get an agriculture deferment [from the draft].  So when I went out to Clark County, I went to the Labor Office to look for jobs on farms out there, and I got a job on a turkey farm.  So from late July until the first of December, I worked on a turkey farm, there outside of Vancouver, Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so it turned out that the person who owned the farm that I worked for was chairman of the local board.  So he said "You know you can get an ag [agriculture] deferment".  I said, "Well, that's exactly what I want to do."  So he said, "I'll get the papers for you, and we'll have your records transferred out here, and we'll reclassify you and we'll give you an agriculture deferment."  So I was deferred for the time being until the turkey farm work ended.  The turkey farm ended with the holiday season.  So then I was without a job.  Then I went into the shipyards and started working the shipyards.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I knew then I was going to be reclassified and eventually drafted, but I worked in the shipyards.
Speaker 1: Now, at what point you were an electrician's assistant, right?
Speaker 2: Well, when I went into the shipyards, my schoolmates who were there told me, "Says, now one of the jobs that you might ask for is to be an electrician's mate and the electrician's helper."  So I became--I went in and  took a position as an electrician's helper, which I was on a crew that were doing cable layouts for the aircraft carriers that Keiser was building at that time.  But then later on that spring, I saw a notice in the shipyard newspaper that they were looking a person to work as an electrical draftsman.  Well, I knew how to draft; I knew how to use the instruments.  So I went to the office to inquire about that.  Now I didn't know any electricity other than the cable layouts and that sort of thing that I've been doing on the ship and knew the equipment that we were sending the cables to and that kind of the thing.  And the guy who interviewed me said, "Well they were really looking for someone with a background in electricity."  And I said, "Well, I've got a classmate whose major was electricity at Tuskegee and he's working as an electrician here in the shipyards, you might have an interest in him."  That was John Stafford.  So he said "Well okay, if we find we can use you, we'll call you."  Well to my surprise, I heard one day some of the fellows said, "I understand you've been transferred to the drafting room."  I said, "No, I haven't," said "Well yeah, that's the word we've got."  So when I went to report that night for the graveyard shift, the foreman told me, he says, "You're supposed to report to the drafting room, you gonna work as a draftsman in engineering."  Well, of course, you know, there were hardly any blacks who were working in any office or anything of that sort in the shipyards, they were welders and such, steam fitters or sheet metal workers or something like that, electricians, maybe, you know.  So that was a surprise, I went and I was hired as an electrical draftsman to work with one of the engineers doing the drawings for the cable layouts  for certain sections of the ships that were being built.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I couldn't get a deferment that way.  I knew I was going to be called up eventually, so.
Story_ID: 27289
Speaker 1: So eventually they [the Draft] called you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Forty-four 44' (1944), was it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the latter part of 1944, in November, the end of November, I was called up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were drafted in 44' (1944)?
Speaker 2: Now, I had indicated that--I told my roommate that I was going follow him in the marines when I was finally drafted.  But when I got to Seattle [Washington] and went to the marine desk, the marine said, "Well we have a quota for colored here in Washington State.  We only accept about two a month, and we filled our quota, so you gonna have to go over to a Navy desk and let them accept you into the Navy."  That's how I got into the Navy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was 1944, and--
Speaker 2: 1944, the end of 1944.
Speaker 1: --Now, did they train you in the [United] States or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  If you were in the Navy and if you were in general service, you were sent to boot camp at Great Lakes [Illinois], if you were black.  You were sent to boot camp at Great Lakes.
Speaker 1: --Okay, so is that where you went?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, I went to Great Lakes.  If you signed up for special services, you went to Bainbridge, Maryland, because you knew you were going to go to stewards mates branch, and a number of guys were not aware of that.  I read that story in the 'Pittsburgh Courier,' saying, "Look, they have opened up the Navy for general service for blacks. " They opened it up about '42 (1942), I think it was.  And they said "Now, don't be fools, special services looks as if it's special, that's not the case, if you want to be in the Navy and not in the stewards mates branch, sign up for general services, don't sign up for special services."  And so I signed up for the general services--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --And went to boot camp at Great Lakes.
Speaker 1: Now, what they tell--well a lot of veterans tell us that in the Navy they try to make all the black people cooks.  Is that the special services?
Speaker 2: That's special services.  Well, you see that's all you could be up until about 1942.  If you went into the Navy at all, the only branches that they would assign you to was special services.
Speaker 1: So the Navy they say was rougher than the other branches in that regard because of the way they pigeon-holed everybody.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  But when they opened up the general services branch--so when I was in boot camp, you could take exams and might be assigned to radar school or signalman school, or some sort of service school.  So I ended up after boot camp, I was assigned to Hampton [University, Virginia], I went to Hampton in service school.  And because I had served as an electrical draftsman, they sent me to electrician mates school at Hampton.
Speaker 1: So you had a chance to go to Hampton and be trained, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Hampton University.  Okay.  Were there any stories about Great Lakes.  I know that we've interviewed a lot of people that remembered the band at Great Lakes.  They had a black band there that was outstanding (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think they had an outstanding football team, you know, Great Lakes had an outstanding football team with a lot of blacks, some of the blacks who had been outstanding football players at some of the northern schools were on that team.
Speaker 1: --Any names of people that you remember?
Speaker 2: Marion Motley, who was a big running back for the Cleveland Browns.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Marion Motley was there, yeah.  He was not in my company, but I remember him being there.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: One of the interesting stories that I--an incident that I was involved in at Great Lakes.  I apparently had scored reasonably well as a potential foreign language person--assignment and so I, along with another fellow, Herbert Johnson, the two of us got noticed one day to report to the mainside to an office to talk about going to foreign language school.  So we went over and when we got there they wanted to know why are you here, we says "Well, we received notice to come over to talk to some people about the prospect of going to a foreign language school."  And the person who received us said "Well, that must have been a mistake."  We said, "Well, now these are our orders to come over to talk."  He said, "Well, it must have been a mistake, you folks wait in a room over here for a while, I'll check these things out."  After a while he came back and said "Yeah, that was a mistake, so you go on back over to your company."  They were not going to assign us to a foreign language school.  We would have gone to the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado] to foreign language school, but no, because we were black, they did not assign us to a foreign language school.  If that had happened then I would not have gone to electrician base-school at Hampton.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you accidentally become an electrician's mate sort of?
Speaker 2: I became an electrician anyway, but I never practiced that on a base.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were trained as an electrician--
Speaker 2: I was trained as an electrician at Hampton, went to service school there.
Story_ID: 27290
Speaker 1: I know you went to Hawaii--
Speaker 2: After the fact.
Speaker 1: --Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I went to an outgoing unit from California, and we ended up in the Hawaiian Islands.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you ended up stationed in Pearl Harbor, right?
Speaker 2: I wasn't stationed at Pearl Harbor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course we went to Pearl Harbor, but then at the time that--by the time we landed--see most of my company from boot camp who didn't go to service school, they had already been sent out into the Pacific, because we were getting ready to invade Japan.  And we figured that all of us were going to be out there somewhere or other in the invasion of Japan.  But the first atomic bomb was dropped when were still between California and Hawaii.  And by the time we got to Hawaii, the second atomic bomb had dropped.  And we knew that the war was ending, so then I didn't go any further out.  I was then assigned to a naval air station on Oahu [Hawaii].  And so that's where I began my tour of duty at a naval air station.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were your thoughts about the bomb being dropped?
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't know much about it, didn't understand what it was all about.  But a little later on after I read an article in 'Time Magazine' about the certain aspects of it being developed at Hanford, Washington, then I remembered when I was working at Vancouver, a number of the fellows who were working at the shipyards had decided to go over to eastern Washington to work on some project over there.  They were building something over there, some base, and we didn't know what it was, they didn't seem to know what it was.  It turned out that was the plutonium plant that they were building at Hampton.  So, of course as you can imagine, we knew that if that--if we had to invade Japan, it would have been a tremendous loss of life.  So in a sense, we were, we were pleased that the war ended.  Not necessarily pleased that so many were destroyed by the atomic bomb, but pleased the war ended.
Story_ID: 27291
Speaker 1: Now after getting on the base at Kaneohe [Hawaii], and after having worked with the newspaper on campus, then I had developed an interest in journalism and wanted to be a reporter, although I had this electrician's mates background now.  But when I was assigned to the Kaneohe Naval Air Base then over there, except for some of the blacks who worked down in the motor mechanics pool down near the air mat, the landing mat, all the other blacks worked in garbage detail and in bringing supplies in to the mess hall.  So that was my assignment initially to bring supplies in to the dining hall--
Speaker 2: Like being a mess sergeant, but I guess, different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Yeah, we'd go to a warehouse bring in the boxes of can food and that sort of thing.  So then I saw in the Naval Air Station paper that they were looking for some persons to serve as reporters on the base paper.  So I went over to talk with him and applied for that, to be a reporter.  And I hadn't heard from them, but then I went by just to check and see what had happened.  And this old-- "Aren't you a draftsman," I said, "Well, yeah, I was a draftsman."  Said, "Well you've been assigned to the engineering room, we understand you've been assigned there."  Well I hadn't received that report that I was assigned to engineering.  So surely enough about a day later, I got word that I was to report to the engineering room in public works.  Well, you see down in public works, blacks were only, as I mentioned, in garbage detail and all.  And they were not in any of the shops, so when I went down to report, it was during the--just before the noon hour, and the officer was not in that I was to report to, and they told me to go across the street to the master at arms building and I went over to see him and he said, he says, "You supposed to go over to--report over to the garbage detail shack."  I said "Well, no, my orders don't say," he says "No, that's where you supposed to be, you just go on over there."  So I always remember I said, "Well now this is not what I understand.  I said so I'll come back after lunch to clarify this."  He didn't know what clarify meant.  He said, "You got to come back and do what?"  So I followed orders, I caught the truck, went on over to the detail shack, and I said, "Well, now, I'm sure my orders are not that I'm to be assigned here," said, "But I was told to come over here by the master at arms, so I've done this, but after lunch, I'll go and see the lieutenant I'm supposed to report to."  But surely enough after lunch I went reported to a lieutenant and that's--he took me across the hall to the big engineering room where they had all these drafting tables and all. And so it was interesting because when they opened the door and I walked in, all the work stopped, everybody stopped because they could not believe that a person that looked like me was being considered to join the engineering room staff as a draftsman.  Well, the civilian in charge, they guy name Wise, had an architecture degree from [University of] Minnesota [St. Paul, Minnesota], he asked me, he said, "Well, can you do lettering?" I said yeah.  He said, "Well, show me some sample of your lettering."  Well, I said, "Fine, I build lettering as an electrical draftsman."  So he looked and said, "Hey, that's good, that's fine."  Well you see by that time I knew the drafting equipment, because I had had to use it in the shipyards.  So he said, "Well, we don't have a table open right at this moment, but have you done blueprint work?"  I said no, he said "Well, our blueprint machine is across the street, and we have a couple of fellows over there working, so what we're going to do, we're going to have you go over and learn blueprinting with them until a table opens up then we'll bring you back over here."  So I went over and started working to learn how to do the plans, blueprints, working with a couple of fellows, very good-- one guy from Maine, a guy from (unclear) Connecticut, a another guy from Iowa, we all worked together, had a very good relationship.
Story_ID: 27292
Speaker 1: And then a table opened up, and it was the very first table in the room, great big desk table and that's where I was assigned.  But there I was to do architectural drafting.  My first assignment was to do plans for the CVs [aircraft carriers] and there was a CV sitting right behind me, to construct a building down on the landing mat.  Well, I knew what a rafter was and I knew some other things like because I had had to learn some of that kind of thing in a course in agriculture called Farm Shop, so I knew something about that kind of thing.  But I didn't much else in architecture, but I wasn't going to let them know, so I would--I took 'Architectural Drafting Standard' which is a bible book for that, there was a copy there.  And I studied that and I studied other prints there in the office and I went ahead and did the plans for the CVs and for them to build that building down there.  But the--the old guy over at the master of arm shack, "Well, you see, you mustered at seven o'clock in the morning and then you were supposed to--you'd also be assigned guard duty at nights," let's say from six to twelve or twelve to six, something of that sort.  Well, the lieutenant in charge of the drafting room said that no, because I had to work during the day on drafting that I needed to be relieved of guard duty.  So he told him that, not to assign me guard duty.  Well, he didn't like that at all that I didn't have to do guard duty, but so, what I had to do from seven to eight each morning, I had to police the grounds, which meant I had to go out and pick up all cigarette butts and all that sort of thing all over the grounds, since he couldn't assign me guard duty, but that's how it was.
Speaker 2: So you were in Hawaii through the end of the war?
Speaker 1: I was in Hawaii when the war ended, that's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right, and so this was in 1945, so when the war ended, did you still have time to serve in the military?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't have the points to be discharged at that time so I still had to serve, so I didn't get enough points to be discharged until the summer of 1946.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I know the 'Pittsburgh Courier,' Robert Vann launched an effort in the paper called the Double V, can you explain what the Double V is, do you remember that, Double V?
Speaker 1: Double V.  I heard of it but I don't remember what that was in connection with.
Speaker 2: It was a victory abroad and victory at home for black people.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, I see.  That was supposed to, as a result of the war effort and that kind of thing, and you returned home, things were supposed to have change, and they didn't they had not changed.  Well, they didn't change that much. But I didn't, you see-- After serving as a draftsman, most of the fellows who were in the drafting room were eligible for discharge.  So gradually I was about the only one left who could do the drafting in the drafting room.  So they asked  me if I would agree--if I would agree to an extension until they could get a civilian position approved, and then I could take that civilian position doing the same thing and stay in Hawaii, take my discharge out there.  So I agreed to do that and that's where--my discharge was at Pearl Harbor, and I went back the next day as a civilian doing the same thing.
Speaker 2: Okay, but being paid for it, better, I guess, I would hope? Right?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 27293
Speaker 1: So 1945 you're working as a civilian draftsman with the Navy in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, right?
Speaker 2: Well, in Kaneohe.  It was a Naval Air Station, it's now a Marine station.  Kaneohe Naval Air Station--
Speaker 1: How do you spell Kaneohe?
Speaker 2: K-A-N-E-O-H-E, K-A-N-E-O-H-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's now a Marine--big Marine station there on Oahu.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, Hawaii is filled with plants, yes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I was fascinated by the kinds of plants that were there in Hawaii and had about decided at that time that what I wanted to do is to go ahead and do graduate work in a semester in botany.  I had to make a decision.  I liked the architecture, I liked architecture, but I figured just now, I don't have the kind of background in architecture so that I can do rendering and designing of structures--structural design, that sort of thing, and that it would take me another three or four years to go back to get that kind of training.  But that it would take me about the same length of time to get the doctorate degree in botany.  So I decided that well, let me go over to the University of Hawaii [Manoa, Hawaii] and see about enrolling in some courses part time over there in botany, in the Botany Department, so in order to learn Hawaiian Botany, because I was interested more in what's called plant taxonomy, the naming and describing of plants.  So I went over and met the Chairman of the Department, Harold St. John, and enrolled in an evening--one of his courses in botany, and was invited to participate in field trips.  He would take his graduate students and members of the faculty and their families who wanted to about every third Sunday they would go up into the mountains, up a trail to collect native Hawaiian plants, not a lot of introduced plants or the ornamentals that you see in the streets, but native Hawaiian plants.  So I began to go on those trips and made a collection then, began to make a collection of native Hawaiian plants.  And the plant that you saw that had my name as a specific name was a plant that I collected one Sunday in a valley, a gulley in the Waianae Mountains in Hawaii.  And at that same time, I also collected some specimens of a small Hawaiian tree in that same area that it turned out, he said "Well, this is a different species that hadn't been described."  So my first paper was a paper co-authored with Harold St. John naming a new species of Hawaiian tree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The plant was plant was 'Cyrtandra Frederickii'?
Speaker 2: The little shrub that he named for me was, that's a different plant.  The other was--
Speaker 1: 'Cyrtandra Frederickii'--
Speaker 2: 'Cyrtandra Frederickii.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That particular group of plant was one that he had specialized in and it was quite variable, and he thought that this specimen that I brought to him that I collected that Sunday was different from other species that he had named and described, and therefore he named--that's how that turned out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the tree, now did that--what was the tree named, the one that you--
Speaker 2: That's 'Alectryon.'  I've got a copy of the paper that you may have, if you want, of that particular, or describing and naming that particular--the genus was 'Alectryon.'  It's called 'Alectryon mahoe.'  There were other species of 'Alectryon' found on some of the other islands, but this was found deep in the gulch there in one of the mountain ranges of Hawaii and it's turned out to be different.  Harold St. John was very liberal in his approach towards taxonomy.  But this particular species seems to be a very distinct species, not some variation. 'Cyrtandra Frederickii' might be really a variation of some of the other species.
Story_ID: 27294
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the University of Hawaii [Manoa, Hawaii] and--
Speaker 2: I was a part time graduate student.
Speaker 1: --Part time grad student.
Speaker 2: I was a part time graduate student there for two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Until 1948.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what happened in 48' (1948)?
Speaker 2: In 48' (1948) I left.  I applied for admission to graduate study at two or three different places and was accepted especially at the University of Rhode Island [Kingston, Rhode Island].  It's called Rhode Island State College at that time.  So I left Hawaii August of 1948 and became a full time graduate student in the Department of Botany at Rhode Island State College.
Speaker 1: Now, I just had to point this out that here's someone who, you know, spent most of their life in Missouri, early life, and didn't really go very far until you went to Tuskegee.  And now you're everywhere.  In the years following graduating from Tuskegee, you seemed to be everywhere, Hawaii, Chicago [Illinois], Great Lakes [Illinois], you're all over the place, now you're at the University of Rhode Island.  Okay, so how did you like that?
Speaker 2: I liked the university.  You see, one of the reasons I applied to the University of Rhode Island was because that summer experience in Connecticut, I liked the atmosphere and the people and that sort of thing.  That was New England.  So I thought that going to Rhode Island would be similar and as a consequence that's one of the reasons I applied and was admitted to the University of Rhode Island, or Rhode Island State College at that time.
Speaker 1: Was there an advisor for your thesis?
Speaker 2: Yep.  I really had two advisors.  One was the dean of the graduate school and head of botany, his name was Cheadle, Vernon Cheadle, and that's C-H-E-A-D-L-E.  And over the years I have patterned much of my approach to teaching really after Vernon Cheadle.  Now he was a plant anatomist.  His history was the structure of plants.  I knew a little about plant anatomy, I didn't know that the field was as interesting as it was.  I had committed myself to go into my college in plant diseases, but so much of my whole approach, exam style and all that sort of thing based on Vernon Cheadle's and also certain work ethic.  He was very particular in demanding that your work be done exceedingly well and so I've patterned that attitude towards evaluating academic performances after Vernon Cheadle.  He eventually became Chancellor of the University of California, Santa Barbara.  The other person who I did--who was actually my main research advisor was Dr. Frank Howard, and that's how I got started on the Dutch Elm disease.  Because when I talked with him--he was interesting.  My first discussion with him, he told me he said well now, based on the recommendation that I had from a former associate of his in graduate school, Donald Rogers, Donald Rogers was the one that interested me in mycology in Hawaii, and he left Hawaii to become head of what's called cryptogamic botany at New York Botanical Garden [New York, New York].  And he's recommended me to Frank Howard at Rhode Island, and that's one of the reasons I was accepted because he knew Don Rogers.  So when I first met Frank Howard he said "Well now I want to be quite frank about this," he said, "I may have trouble placing you once you get your degree."  Now at that time Rhode Island only offered the Master's Degree.  But he said, "However, I oftentimes have a harder time placing persons with Jewish background than maybe, you know, of your background."  So that was my introduction to Frank Howard.  But he was very good, hard worker, he didn't get along that well with a whole lot of folk.  A lot of folk didn't like Frank Howard, but he was really very, very good, and over the years, we had an outstanding relationship up until the time he passed away a few years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the two people at Rhode Island, Frank Howard and Vernon Cheadle, those are two of the people that made the greatest impact really, on let's say in my professional career.
Story_ID: 27295
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your research into Dutch elm Disease.  Now, you worked with Dr. Howard on this, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well at the time I entered Rhode Island, a lot of elm trees were dying in citizen towns in New England and in parts of the Midwest.  And they were dying because of a fungus that would be brought to those trees by a beetle.  And the fungus would then invade the conducting tissues of the plant--the tree, causes leaves and branches to wilt and die and the whole tree would die.  So many towns that had had tree line--elm tree-lined streets, elm trees are wiped out.
Speaker 1: Elm Street is like a name that people use to describe a home town street, elm street all over the city, but you (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the American elm has for a long time been America's favorite shade tree.  It's not used that much commercially, but it's a handsome tree, an excellent shade tree.
Speaker 1: --What are the leaves like on elm trees, I don't know if I can recognize them?
Speaker 2: The leaves are about so big (indicating), typically on an American elm, and they are toothed all around the edges, and have a network of veins, a single vein down the middle and a network of veins, branching out from it.
Speaker 1: Are the leaves rough on top?
Speaker 2: The leaves, that's right, the American leaves, if you rub it with your finger, they aren't that smooth because you got a lot of little hairs on the surface of the leaf.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But so many streets now in Ohio, for instance and New York State and Pennsylvania and all, many of those little towns, if they have any trees on the streets, they were once tree-lined, not any more.  The elms have been killed.  Well, of course, the problem was how did the fungus do it?
Speaker 1: Well, the other thing is, are these beetles that are native to America?
Speaker 2: There's a native American bark beetle and there's a European beetle.  Those two transmit the fungus from tree to tree.
Speaker 1: How do they do that?
Speaker 2: Well, they do it because let's say a tree that may be diseased, they will lay the eggs in the bark of that tree, and then when the eggs hatch and the larvae developed between the inner layer of the bark and the wood, then they--as they move about and feed, they leave a series of tunnels, little tunnels, configuration tunnels.  And then you see if--then within those little tunnels, the wood, the fungus grows and then when they pupate and the adult emerges then the adult is oftentimes coated with a tiny little sticky spores of the fungus then it flies away to another tree and feeds on the twigs of the tree and that introduces or inoculates that tree, and that's how it spreads from tree to tree.  That's the main way. The other way if you have an elm tree growing here that's diseased and another growing close by, their roots may intertwine and graft and you can get a transmission through root grafts by another tree.  That's why sometimes if a tree here in the street it becomes diseased and then gradually you see the whole line of trees in the street die and it's not so much because of the beetle activity, it's because of root connection through grafts.
Speaker 1: I know they taught us about grafting in grade school on some level, but I did not realize that the roots can graft on a line of trees.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's right underground roots of same species may make connections and graft onto each other, and then substance can be moved to the graft from one tree to the other.
Speaker 1: The health of one is really linked to the health of the rest of them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 27296
Speaker 1: My interest for the Master's degree was to determine--the idea had developed that the wilting is due to substances produced by the fungus [that causes Dutch elm disease] as it grows in the wooded tissues of the tree, and that these substances which we now call pathotoxins that these substances and the presence of the fungus somehow or other clogs up the conducting tissues and the leaves wilt and the whole plant dies.  So my initial work was to look at different isolates of the fungus and to determine whether or not some isolates, some strains well, let's say more potent, produce a more potent toxin and will therefore more highly pathogenic than other strains.  So I was doing a comparative study of strains as to the extent of their pathogenicity.  That's how I got started.  Then of course I later on I became interested in how the fungus does this, because I wasn't satisfied that the speculation to the theory that the fungus causes the wilting, because as it grows in the conducting elements, it clogs them up and that prevents the water from moving.  Well, my notion has been that wilting is due to the breakdown and the sense the clogging of the conducting elements but it's at the point where the leaf is attached to the stem, and that's the angle I've been working on, where the leaf is attached to the stem, because there you have fewer elements to which water passes and my students, I've had students to do work on this at the Master's and the Ph.D. level to show that at that particular point, at those particular critical anatomical points you don't have to have the fungus here.  If you grow the fungus in culture, in liquid culture, sterilize that culture and then put the twigs in that filtrate, the fungus isn't there, but the leaves wilt so that it's a substance is produced by the fungus that causes the wilting and its effect, its greatest effect is at the point where the leaf is attached to the stem.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Because it really clogs up the--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --Okay.
Speaker 1: So I still got to try to do a definitive paper on that.
Story_ID: 27297
Speaker 1: So you've been working on this [Dutch elm disease] a long time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Well, you see, part of the problem was this.  After leaving [University of] Rhode Island [Kingston, Rhode Island], I had decided I had gone to my first science meetings, botany meetings and mycologist society meetings in New York, and had heard a paper by a fellow who was a mycologist out in Washington State [University] in Pullman, Washington.  So then after having lived in Washington State, I had an interest in perhaps going back, so I decided that after getting the Master's degree then I would apply to Washington State for the Ph.D. program, if I could get a graduate appointment.  Well, I applied two places, I applied to Michigan State [University, Lansing, Michigan] and applied to Washington State and I heard from Michigan State first and they offered me a graduate appointment, but I wanted to go to Washington State instead.  So I held off.  I wouldn't respond.  So then I got a notice in April, but Michigan State said look, we've offered you a graduate assistantship, we haven't heard from you.  Unless we hear within the next forty-eight hours, we're going to cancel it.  Well it turned out within that forty-eight hours, I got a telegram from Washington State offering me an appointment out there.  So I turned the Michigan State down and went out to Washington State to Pullman.  But you see out there, I couldn't work on Dutch elm Disease because the offer that the person who, the professor who had expressed and special interest in me was working on really a fascinating plant disease problem that was cancer related and it's called the crown-gall problem, where a bacterial may enter the tissues of a plant and causes a tumor to form.  And of course there were questions as to how does a bacterial do this.  So the graduate appointment, research appointment I was offered out there was to work on the crown-gall problem.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us, the crown--
Speaker 2: C-R-O-W-N, G-A-L-L.
Speaker 1: The crown gall--
Speaker 2: The crown-gall problem.
Speaker 1: --This was in 1950, right?
Speaker 2: This was in 1950.
Speaker 1: And you were working on your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: I started working on a Ph.D. [at University of Washington] at Pullman.  I went out to Pullman in September of 1952 to start the work on a Ph.D. program--1950 to start work on a Ph.D. program.  So therefore I was doing tissue culture work, plant tissue culture work.  Well, I hadn't done that before, but I figured I could learn.  So I started working on plant tissue culture work using crown-gall tissue.  Now my particular role there was to determine--to see if I could make a distinction between what's called normal tissue and crown-gall tissue in terms of the effect certain chemical growth or hormones would have on the growth of crown gall tissue.  Because one notion was that growth hormones had no effect on crown gall tissue.  But the big question was how does a cell that's a normal cell become transformed into a cancerous type cell?  So that's what I worked on at--and here again a fascinating problem one that has yielded a lot of information on what we call autonomous cell growth or how cells become tumor cells.  And then now much of what you hear about genetically modified plants, these plants are commonly modified by genomic bodies that the crown gall bacteria has and they take those genomic bodies and insert into them a particular gene, a genome and then put that in a tobacco plant or a tomato plant or corn plant or something of that sort.
Story_ID: 27298
Speaker 1: After getting the doctorate degree, I had no facilities to continue that work in Louisiana and there was no Dutch elm disease down there, so I couldn't do the work with Dutch elm disease in Louisiana.
Speaker 2: So there were no Dutch elm disease, meaning no Dutch elm trees in Louisiana?
Speaker 1: There were not trees with--affected with Dutch elm disease.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So you didn't want to start to working on a project on Dutch elm disease, because if you got other trees sick, well you see, you brought Dutch elm disease to the state.  So I couldn't do that, and it took facilities that I did not have to do the work on crown gall.  I had some interesting ideas.  I was going to take single cells that have been transformed and work with them, but I couldn't do that down there in Louisiana.  They started--I had figured out a way in which I might do it, but I couldn't.  They did begin to do that kind of work in Wisconsin in the labs of Wisconsin, the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Madison, Wisconsin].
Speaker 2: Okay, now who is your advisor at Washington State [University, Pullman, Washington]?
Speaker 1: His name was Zest Locke, Zest Locke, L-O-C-K-E.  He was a University of Wisconsin graduate.  He was a very fine person, but really not a strong mentor.  He wasn't a strong mentor.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you still maintain that you're, that the mentors at [University of] Rhode Island [Kingston, Rhode Island] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Pardon?
Speaker 2: --Those two professors at Rhode Island--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, he didn't compare with the people from Rhode Island, no, no.
Speaker 2: --Okay, all right. So you went on to teach.  You got a job almost immediately at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], right?
Speaker 1: Well, here, again is where Harry Rohm enters the picture, because Harry Rohm had, by that time, he had left Tuskegee, and after having two or three years at Princess Anne Maryland, Maryland Eastern Shores, he went to Southern University in Baton Rouge.  Well I had a tendency to maintain contact with several of my professors over the years, and I do the same thing with my students now, I maintain contact with them.  So he knew that I was finishing up my work at Washington State [University, Pullman, Washington], and they were looking for a person, another person in botany at Southern, so he had recommended me and asked me if I were interested to write a letter and apply, I did, and it was approved.  So in August of 1952, my wife and I and eight-month old son left Pullman and drove down to Louisiana.
Story_ID: 27299
Speaker 1: Tell us about meeting your wife.  Now we haven't talked about that yet, have we?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was a student at Rhode Island, University at Rhode Island State [University of Rhode Island, Kingston, Rhode Island], my second year there, the--one of the young ladies who had been in the class with me, white girl, Jeanie Burke, she was running for queen of what was called the Aggie Ball.  The College of Agriculture had this dance during Columbus Day, and it was called the Aggie Ball, and she was running for queen of the Aggie Ball, and she wanted to know if I would vote for her and would come to the dance.  I said "Well, I don't know anybody to take to the dance."  She said, "Well, look, I know a very fine young lady, the daughter of the people who are my beauticians down in Wakefield," that's a little town four miles away from Kingston.  She said, "And I'm pretty sure that she'd be interested in coming to the ball, you know, with you."  I said, "Well, okay, I said, if you find out."  So she talked to her and said, "Oh, yeah, yeah, yes, said give her a call, she'd be happy to come."  So gave her a call and went down and met the family, you know, and she went to the dance.  As I say, the rest is history.
Speaker 1: All right, the dance led to romance.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's a native Rhode Islander.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's her name, what's your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Her full name is Antoinette, A-N-T-O-I-N-E-T-T-E, Antoinette, and her maiden name was Reed, R-E-E-D.  Her folk were beauticians there in the little town of Wakefield.  And interesting about that in Rhode Island was that to be a beautician in Rhode Island at that time, you either had a license to be a beautician for whites or to be a barber for whites, or you had to have a license to be a beautician for blacks or barber for blacks, and you couldn't mix.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you could not mix.
Speaker 1: I've heard of those kinds of laws before.
Speaker 2: Those were the state laws in Rhode Island.
Story_ID: 27300
Speaker 1: Southern University 1952, Baton Rouge [Louisiana], what was Southern like?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew that I was going to really try to cast my lot, although I was interested in research and that sort of thing, and when the chairman of the department at plant pathology in Washington State [University, Pullman Washington], wrote a letter to the people at Southern, they said, "Well now, unless you provide opportunities for research for him, he's not likely to stay."  Well, I knew that our schools at that time, that the research opportunities were not going to be very good, but I, as Dr. Howard told me up until the last time I saw him before he died, he said, "You know, you're a man true to your words because when I talked with you, you told me, you said well I'm going to get prepared and I am going to go back and I'm going to work in a predominately black school."  So I ended up refusing any offers to go elsewhere, so even after getting to Southern.  But conditions for teaching and research were primitive in a since, but the chairman of the department, J. Warren Lee, had a degree from University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa], and he was interested in getting some research done, and he was interested in bringing young people in who had an interest in research, and he would do all he could in order to try to help you get some sort of research started there.  But after I got there, he asked me, he said, "Well now, I want to start a botany major curriculum within the biology department, and I want you to plan that."  And the two of us head that up.  So that was what I started working on.  I started teaching various courses in botany and started a botany curriculum and ended up with my first three majors in that curriculum were really top students.  Each one of them went on to get advanced degrees.  The fact of the matter is one of those students became an internationally renowned mycologist and chair of the Department of Botany at [University of California at] Berkeley [Berkeley, California] and not just a graduate professor, but a dean, associate dean of a graduate program at Berkeley, California.  He came from a little place, Plaisance, Louisiana, first in his family, big family to go to college, but he was outstanding.  He was one of the first of the three botany majors that I had at Southern.
Speaker 1: And what is his name?
Speaker 2: Collins.  O'Neil Ray Collins. O'-N-E-I-L-L, O'Neil Ray Collins.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he became a dean at--
Speaker 2: He became chairman of the botany at Berkeley, and associate, assistant dean to the graduate school.
Speaker 1: Now, is he still around?
Speaker 2: He passed untimely.  He had Lou Gehrig's disease, or something like that back in the middle '80s (1980s) or early '80s (1980s), he passed away, but he had become internationally renowned for his work with a group of organisms that we call myxomycetes, the slime molds, genetics of that group.
Speaker 1: You had two other outstanding students, you said?
Speaker 2: Well, those are the first three.  I had several others after that.  Practically all of them got doctorate degrees, either from [University of] Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma] or [University of] New Hampshire [Durham, New Hampshire] or a couple other places.
Story_ID: 27301
Speaker 1: The way it's scheduled, your schedule [at Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], I guess, on a daily basis would be heavy on teaching, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, it was very heavy on teaching.  And I was beginning to do a little bit of research, but as conditions--we got a new building, the new laboratories, and conditions improved and--
Speaker 1: When did you get your new building, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --The new building is called the Ag Science building, and that was opened up in about, let's see, about 1955.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the new building in '55 (1955), now--
Speaker 2: Yeah, with some new and improved facilities for both teaching and research.
Speaker 1: --Okay, so were you able to attract any research grants?
Speaker 2: I did get a small grant to get a microscope from, I've forgotten the agency now, what agency was it at? It was not a national, it was a private agency, but I did get a small grant to get a research microscope.  What was the name of that company--group, I don't remember the name of the group now.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you didn't get a project funded to do research or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't get any special project funded at that time, no. The-- I started to serve--I brought to Southern the National Science Foundation [NSF] Institutes, summer institutes and in-service institutes for high school teachers.  I started those programs at Southern.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So these were high school teacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in-service as well as summer institutes for high school teachers of science.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I attended an institute for the summer sponsored by the National Institute of Science at Cornell, so I was at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] for a summer.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, now, well--
Speaker 2: Now the-- in a sense, sort of our part of the research project that I started during Louisiana, I was going to work on fungi that occur on leaves of plants in Louisiana.  So I had begun to collect what we call leaf spots, and I was going to do--I started a project on fungi that occur on leaves on Louisiana plants.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in order to tangentially work on a project that would have significance in better understanding the Dutch elm disease problem, I had an undergraduate student start to do anatomical work on sweet potato vines, because I wanted to know what the structure was of what we call the conducting tissue where the leaf joins the stem, and I was getting at the Dutch elm disease from that kind of an angle.  Now this young lady went on and got her master's degree at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and taught at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for a while, got a Ph.D. at Catholic University [of America, Washington, D.C.], became chair of the Department of Botany at the University of New Hampshire [Durham, New Hampshire] and is now married again to a Norwegian, lives in Norway; she was from Dallas, Texas.  Oh, she's an outstanding student.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was, her first name was May, M-A-Y, and Kathryn, that's K-A-T-H-R-Y-N, and her married name now is Haugstad, H-A-U-G-S-T-A-D.
Story_ID: 27302
Speaker 1: So you were at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  You went from Southern to Atlanta U [Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Went from Southern to Atlanta.
Speaker 1: And what year did you go to Atlanta?
Speaker 2: I went to Atlanta in 1962.
Speaker 1: You were at Southern for ten years?
Speaker 2: I was at Southern for ten years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how did you make the decision to go to Atlanta U?
Speaker 2: Well, this was the height of the student demonstrations.  And my wife and I had been sponsors of a church youth group at the local Presbyterian Church and several of these students were leaders in the student demonstrations.  And the administration didn't take too kindly to that whereas we were hoping that they would have supported the student effort, but that was not the case nor the climate nor the disposition necessarily of the administration at Southern to do that.  So at one of the big student demonstrations in January of 1962, the president closed the school and had all students leave campus and then he met with the faculty and just berated the faculty and talked about how some faculty members, you know, were supportive of student demonstrations.  Now the student demonstrations were wholesome things, really wholesome things.  It was no destruction, no nothing by the students.  And then so after he had talked back and walked back and forth and talked with the faculty, then he said--he challenged the faculty, said, "Now, if there's anyone here that disagrees with what I've said, you know, stand up."  Well I knew I didn't agree with all the things he said, so, and there was no point in my sitting there being hypocritical and sitting and not letting him know that I didn't agree.  So one of my colleagues was sitting beside me, he saw me starting to get up, he says, "No, Fred don't get up, don't get up."  I got up and I told him, "Mr. Clark," he's the president, I said "I fully understand what the consequences may be of my standing up here and differing with you," I said, "but I have to let you know that I do differ with you in terms of the way you've characterized the students and that sort of thing," and so on. I went on and made some other comments, and he looked at me, he said, "Well, Dr. Frederick, we'll dealing with vicious students, the faculty is dismissed." Well, I suspected that that meant my tenure was probably in jeopardy at Southern.  This was in January.  But I said, well, I need to begin to look around because the chances are that there was no such thing as tenure at that time, you got a contract from year to year.  In August of each year, you probably got a contract, sometimes you didn't get it until September, but it was a year-to-year contract.  There was no such thing as tenure at that time.  So I figured that come August, I'm likely not to receive a contract for the next year.  Then a colleague of mine who was a Morehouse [College, Atlanta Georgia] graduate who was there at Southern, Lee Stevens, had been contacted from the people at Atlanta University.  Well, they were looking for a person in botany to come and join their biology department.  So he told me about that in February.  So I contacted them and was invited to come over, to come through and talk with them, and so then I was offered the position, and I took that position.  So I left Southern the end of July.  Now as it turned out President Clark claimed that he had nothing against me, that he had a contract there on his desk for me to sign and that sort of thing, but I don't know about all of that.  So that's how, that's how I left Southern.
Story_ID: 27303
Speaker 1: Now this is a, yeah, this is a milestone moment in black colleges.  And this story is almost Shakespearean, Felton, Dr. Felton G. Clark-
Speaker 2: Yeah, Felton G. Clark.
Speaker 1: I think he actually expelled the students [who participated in demonstrations].
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: The whole student body or something.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, you see, that was a part of it, because the interesting thing, after he closed the school and then students were supposed to sign a statement saying that they would  not demonstrate anymore if they came back.  Then some members of the faculty decided that well, why don't we register disapproval of this move.  So, some of the guys in political science and English and others and history Ernie Thorpe and some others, they got together and prepared a little statement suggesting that they differ somewhat and would encourage the administration to reconsider or something of that sort.  It was a mild statement, an innocuous statement.  So they wanted to get signatures for it, so they brought it to me and said, "Would you sign this?"  I said, "Well, it doesn't say anything really."  I said, "Sure, I'll sign it."  I would expect it to have a stronger statement.  So they circulated that around over the campus for about two or three days or so.  The thing is that well, they ended up finally getting enough signatures.  Some say, well, now, if you don't get one hundred signatures or seventy signatures, don't keep my name on the list.  So we ended up one Sunday evening gathered over at one of the faculty member's homes who had been involved into getting this together, I guess, it was either Cobb or Ernest Thorpe or somebody like that.  But then they ended up with about one hundred signatures, and then they wanted to know, "Well, what shall we do with these?"  We said, "Well, we thought you were going to send it to the press."  "Well, suppose we mail it?"  I said "Look, the paper comes out tomorrow morning.  The thing to do is to take the information down to the city editor's desk now and present it."  Well, nobody wanted to take it down there.  So two of us, my old great friend who just passed away, Ed [Edward] Johnson, in psychology, in psychology, we said "Okay, we'll take it down."  So we took it down to the city editor's desk.  And he wanted to know, "Well who authorizes this, I have to know the name of somebody who authorizes this document."  So we called back and asked, "Well now, whose name shall we put on here to show as to who authorized it."  No one wanted their names down there.  So we said, "Well, now, look you don't have to have a single name because you have all these names who have endorsed this.  This is a statement endorsed by a group of faculty members."  Well he finally relented because we then said, "If you just have to have a name, put our names down there."  So he finally relented and then ran the story.  And the 'Baton Rouge Advocate' was sold out all across the area that Monday morning, because on the front page was this article and the names of all these faculty members who had signed it.
Story_ID: 27304
Speaker 1: Well, later on, then when the students got back, we understood that the president wanted to--the students were going to have a meeting, but the president wanted a group of faculty members to meet with students in order to talk with them about the problem and that sort of thing and as to what might be done about it.  So then I was asked to be a member of that faculty committee and Ed Johnson was also to be a member of that faculty meeting because we knew that other things were brewing and three of us from the church that Sunday night went up to the president's house to offer our assistance in meeting with the students to help mediate things.
Speaker 2: From what church did you all come from?
Speaker 1: It was Presbyterian Church, small Presbyterian Church.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: The fact of the matter is it was a church whose uncle; it was founded by Condolezza Rice's uncle actually, there in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  I think it was her uncle or grandfather.  At any rate a special meeting was called with several faculty members and students.  And then we were supposed to talk with the students [who demonstrated].  Well, the way they had it set up it was almost like an inquisition where they had the tape recorder and students sitting in the middle of the table.  We asked, "Well, who authorized this kind of thing?"  Well, nobody seemed to know.  So we put the table away, we put the tape recorder away and then a question was asked, "Well, now, how shall we have the students come in."  Said, well, the suggestion was, let the students decide who will come in first and that sort of thing and that's how it was done.  We sat there talking with students from about one thirty until five o'clock, and then there was still some students that had not--who had not had a chance to come in to talk with us.  Well then, as it turned out every student that we interviewed was expelled, and it turned out that it was a kind of a ruse to meet the requirement that in order for a student to be expelled that they have to have a hearing, and we were part of the hearing.  We didn't realize that at first until after I began to look at the list, and I went to the guy who, one of the fellows who's on the committee that was in the School of Law, Vernon McClure.  I said "Now look, do you realize what has happened, that we were the hearing committee so that they could justify expelling these students."  And so that's, that's the way it turned out.
Story_ID: 27305
Speaker 1: This story is--we have all different angles on this story, Felton G. Clark.  Some say he was under so much pressure from the State of Louisiana that he had to expel some students and other people see him as somebody who was just too highhanded.  How do you see this?
Speaker 2: Well, he could have made a big name for himself in the Civil Rights Movement by resisting the pressures from the State [of Louisiana].  Now, what's his name, Ed Gramling, see he didn't have that problem because he went right along with whatever the state said you do, that's what he did.  But Felton Clark was kind of sophisticated with the way he handled the state, you know, the people.  If a state official was going to come on campus, he had someone out at the entrance, beginning at the road leading down to the campus out there to meet the person to bring them in, to open the car doors for them and all that sort of thing.  What's his name, Ed Gramling, Gramling met the person himself.  He would meet the person, he would take out his hankerchief and wipe the handles of the car doors.  Now Gramling, he didn't have a problem up there with the state officials you see.  Now Felton didn't go to that extent, he was much more sophisticated with the way he handled them.  But Jones, oh, what was his name?  His name will come to me, but he was very unsophisticated with the way he handled them.
Speaker 1: He was cruder.
Speaker 2: He was crude.  You see Felton didn't handle it well in the first demonstrations.  When the first and the second big demonstrations came along in '61 [1961], '62 [1962], we thought here's a chance for him to redeem himself, but he didn't.
Story_ID: 27306
Speaker 1: These were demonstrations where the students [of Southern University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], just to kind of sum it up, they were going into Baton Rouge and trying to desegregate the public facilities--
Speaker 2: The lunch counters, lunch counters.
Speaker 1: --In Baton Rouge?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They walked all the way downtown to Baton Rouge to the five and dime lunch counter, couple other places, yeah, that was it.  Lunch counter demonstrations.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some the student leader's names?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Rudolph Harris and his wife.  His wife was put out of school.  She finally ended up, they awarded her degree at Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  What's her first name, I've forgotten, Marvin Robinson, Major Johns, oh some of the other names just--if I reflect on it, it will come to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wanted you to name some of them.  I know one we interviewed was D'Army Bailey.
Speaker 2: D'Army Bailey, that's right, D'Army Bailey, yeah, D'Army Bailey, I remember, yeah, sure, D'Army Bailey, judge in Memphis [Tenessee].
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, D'Army Bailey.  That's right, he was in that particular group.  That's quite right.
Speaker 1: A lot of them have gone on to be successful.
Speaker 2: Yeah, indeed they did.  And they brought them back year before last; brought the whole group back year before last to Southern to recognize them and I guess kind of give them honorary degrees or something.
Speaker 1: What seems sad is that Felton Clark, whose father had been the president, seems like a hero, a lot of jobs associated with the school and can walk away with that ended up, you know, I think he ended up losing his job and he's dead within a year, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  Well, you know, Felton Clark was a very able and well trained person.  When I first got to Southern, I heard him speak, I said, you know, now here is a person who is equal to--he's like [President Barak] Obama, you know equal to any other administrator, very knowledgeable, very articulate, just a superb speaker, superb person.  But he would not really abide by principles in which his authority was threatened.  If his authority was threatened then he would resist that.  Because when our schools were being considered for full membership in the Southern Association of Colleges and Universities for accreditation, and in the first group that was finally admitted to the great chagrin and dismay of Felton Clark, in particular, Southern did not make the first group, and he really shed some tears over that.  He couldn't understand how Florida A and M [University, Tallahassee, Florida] could make the first group, how Tugaloo College [Jackson, Mississippi] could make the first group and some of the others.  So he invited a committee to get together to begin to look at that and invite the people down in order for Southern to make the group.  One of the persons who headed up that committee was Lionel Newsome, who at one point was president of Central State.
Speaker 1: Central State, right.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Lionel Newsome, we were very close friends, he and his family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this was like one of the biggest stories in black colleges, the whole drama around Felton Clark and the students.  I think after they saw that, nobody did the same, expelled their students for being involved in demonstrations.
Speaker 2: He had called a meeting of the students and faculty that day and we thought he was going to name some new deans, and he got up without any preliminaries and said, "The university cannot exist in a state of anarchy, I am closing the school now.  All students must be off the campus by five o'clock.  I am closing the school.  I'll meet with the faculty over in the academic building right after this."  That was it.  Everybody was stunned, absolutely stunned, students stunned.
Speaker 1: Now, sir, tell me this, did the faculty get paid after this closing of the school, how was that handled?
Speaker 2: They were paid, they were paid.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wondered what had happened.
Speaker 2: No faculty member lost a salary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A lot of the faculty members did leave after that next year.  That summer I left, Leonard Spearman left, what's his name left and went to--who had been at Reed College in English, she left, Lea Stevens left, oh, a whole bunch left.
Story_ID: 27307
Speaker 1: So Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia].  This is 19--
Speaker 2: '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: '62 [1962], okay.  So what was Atlanta U like, were they better equipped for research?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were, they were.  You see, as you know, I'm sure, Atlanta University was entirely a graduate school.  There were the undergraduate schools in the A U Center, but the agreement was that all graduate programs would be housed at Atlanta University.  They had just built a one-story new science building there at Atlanta University when I went in, and so facilities had improved a great deal.  And in light of the fact that it was a graduate school then it meant that students had to do research in order to get a Master's degree.  And one of the students who was there, and had just begun to do his work for the Master's degree, was the person who is provost here, who was just named executive vice president, Luther Williams.  He had just come from Miles College in Birmingham [Alabama] and he was a graduate student.  I took Luther to his first science meeting ever and coached him on the first paper he ever presented.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  We interviewed him a couple of years ago.
Speaker 2: Oh, you did?
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  So he was there as a student?
Speaker 2: He was there as a student.  He had come from Miles College, was there as a student.  He got his Master's degree that next year and stayed on for a year because he had met Connie, who had come as a part of the academic year institute program.  She was from New Orleans [Louisiana], he had met her and they had married.  So he stayed on a year for her to complete her work with a Master's degree.  She did her Master's.  She actually did her research with me.  And then he, after going to his first science meeting, and meeting the graduate students from University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida] and [University of] Georgia [Athens, Georgia] and Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] then he decided that what he wanted to do is to go ahead and go out to Emory and get a Ph.D. degree at Emory.  But I got this request from Purdue asking if I could recommend a student to come to Purdue [West Lafayette, Indiana] to do his graduate work, and I talked to him and said, "Look, let me have you, let me encourage you to go ahead and apply to Purdue."  I didn't think too much of Purdue because I knew it was not minority friendly, but he went up there and he just became their outstanding, one of the outstanding graduates at Purdue.  High regard for Luther Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's a good story.  His wife got a Master's degree from you?
Speaker 2: His wife got a Master's degree with me; she went with him and became a very accomplished electron-microscopist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right. Okay, so, now were you able to-- So who else? Who are some of the other great students that you've trained?
Speaker 2: F. C. Richardson did his work directly with me.  Not in mycology. He did his work in plant anatomy, and he went on to the University of California, Santa Barbara [Santa Barbara, California].  And F. C. has been chancellor of Buffalo State [College, Buffalo, New York], chancellor of the University of Indiana [Southeast] at New Albany [Indiana], he retired from there.  He's had an outstanding career as an academician and administrator, F. C. Richardson.  Thomas Gator did his work in my college [unclear].  He went on to spend his whole professional career as a Professor of Biology at Slippery Rock [University of Pennsylvania] in Pennsylvania, Willamina Austin, she did her work directly with me; she was my first Ph.D. student.  She became a medical mycologist and is doing outstanding work in medical mycology there at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] after doing a post-doctorate in Medical College of Virginia [Richmond, Virginia].  Oh, my goodness, and Rena Jones, who did a Master's with me and went on to get here Ph.D. degree at Wayne State [University, Detroit, Michigan], became head of the Department of Biology at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] until she retired.  Patricia Anheard got her Master's and Ph.D. degree with me and became the electron microscopist at the Firm Bank Science Center in Atlanta until she retired and-- there are several, several others, Grey Sauters at South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], Shakra Bardi at South Carolina State.
Speaker 1: So there are lots of them [simultaneous]--
Speaker 2: There's a list.
Speaker 1: --There's plenty.
Speaker 2: I think I have a list there, maybe with that document I gave of students who did--Arthur Jones, went to Purdue and got a Ph.D. degree, did biology for a while at Jackson State [Jackson, Mississippi] up until he retired.
Story_ID: 27308
Speaker 1: Now you were at Atlanta U [Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] from 62' [1962] until--
Speaker 2: Until 76' [1976].
Speaker 1: Until 1976.  Now did you have a chance to work on the elm--
Speaker 2: Yes, because it turned out after I got there, two or three years after I got there, we lived on the campus, in a home on the campus.  And one afternoon, as I turned into the yard, there was a small elm tree in the back of the area, and here was a branch that had all the symptoms of Dutch elm disease.  And there had been one report of Dutch elm disease, treatment of Dutch elm disease in the City of Atlanta [Georgia].  So I began to work on Dutch elm disease again, and that's why some of the students, Walter Salters, not Walter Salters but Leon Salters worked on Dutch elm disease with me, Pat Heard worked on Dutch elm disease with me, Gilda Knowles worked on Dutch elm disease with me and several others.
Speaker 1: --Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yep, I was to resume work on Dutch elm disease.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  And were you able to track any funding for that kind of research?
Speaker 2: Yeah, from the U.S. Forestry Commission.  But some of the funding that I got from USDA [United States Department of Agriculture] though, was in connection with a study of soil fungi.  I had a project for four or five years on soil fungi.  They collect soil samples from east Pakistan, west Pakistan, and with the soil samples would come USDA in Beltsville [Maryland] and they would send them on down to me, and I had students work on that, on the east soil samples.  One of the first papers in connection with that was a description, there is a reprint of that.  Description of a new species 'Neurospora' from west Pakistan, and 'Neurospora' is extremely well known from the genetic work has been done using 'Neurospora' as a model.
Speaker 1: What was significant about these Pakistani fungi?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time USDA had several projects.  I've forgotten the title of the projects where they were looking at soil fungi in different places in the world, and they had this contract with west Pakistan to look at the kinds of fungi in the soil of west Pakistan.  And actually they had approached me about leaving Atlanta University to come and work at USDA, but I didn't want to leave Atlanta University to go to USDA.  I had had enough of civil service working for--when I work for the, at the Kaneohe Naval Air Station [Kaneohe, Hawaii] as an architectural draftsman.  So that's how that unfolded.  And then of course we--the National Institute of Health, some of the people there had begun to be concerned about bringing more minorities in biomedical research.  And so Geraldine Woods, who at that time was chairman of the board of trustees at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], brought some of the people around to the black schools to introduce him to find the members into the capabilities and that ended up with out of the Division of Research Resources with him starting of what was called a Minority Biomedical Research Program, that was funded by special funds out of the Division of Research Resources.  So I served on the committee that developed the guidelines, the initial guidelines for that particular program.
Story_ID: 27309
Speaker 1: Now you eventually moved over to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in 76' [1976]?
Speaker 2: After staying at Atlanta [University, Atlanta, Georgia] until 1976 then I was invited to become Chairman of the Department of Botany at Howard, and I decided that since I worked in the biology departments and have had to have the responsibility of providing opportunities for training in different aspects of botany for students interested in botany, that if I went to Howard it wasowarHHH a botany department, and I wouldn't have to be responsible for teaching all the courses.  I wouldn't have to do plant anatomy, there would be somebody to do plant anatomy there, I wouldn't have to do certain other aspects of botany, taxonomy and so on.  So it was chance to work in the Department of Botany and that's why I left Atlanta University and went to Howard.
Speaker 1: All right, so you became the Chair of the--
Speaker 2: The Chair of the Department of Botany.
Speaker 1: --The Department of Botany.
Speaker 2: Department of Botany.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a combination Department of Botany and Microbiology at Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Microbiology, okay.
Speaker 2: One of the other students that went with Luther Williams the first meeting was Benjamin Shepard, and Benjamin Shepard got his doctorate degree at [University of] Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] and went to Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois] and became provost there and remained provost up until he retired.  And the main reason he retired was because the president was leaving and he should have been made the next president and he wasn't, so he decided to retire.  Ben Shepard spent, I don't know how many years at Southern Illinois University in Carbondale. And he--he and F. C. Richardson and Luther Williams were three that I took to their first science meetings at University of Florida in Gainesville [Florida].
Speaker 1: Now, you've done a lot of that kind of thing.  I read once that once you drove a car load of students--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --From Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] to Alberta, Saskatchewan [Canada].
Speaker 2: Well, from Atlanta [Georgia] to--the student government, Leena Austin and Sylvester Pendergrass who became one of the leading botanist in the forest service and Shelton Fitzpatrick who became botany biology at [University of] Arkansas [at] Pine Bluff [Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and Patricia Heard, electron microscopist, and Lena Austin, we drove from Atlanta to Edminton, Alberta, for the meetings, yep.  Yeah we did.  You know, one of the problems with many of our students is that they don't have the exposure, and that's critical.  Now they would not have known about [O'Neil] Ray Collins, I took him to his first meeting.  He and Harrison, William Harrison, Triple-A-S [American Academy of Sciences] was meeting in Atlanta in 1955 and they hadn't met in the South since 1935, and they decided that Atlanta seemed to be a place that was making progress, and they decided that the annual meetings, which was always held at Christmas at the time, now they hold it in February, could be held in Atlanta.  So it meant that at those meetings, the Micrological Society was having its meeting, the Botanical Society was having its meeting and the Plant Pathology Society was having its meeting all in conjunction with Triple-A-S.  So we were at Southern and so I said, okay, I'm going to go to the Triple-A-S meetings and I can take two, Collins and Harrison with the rest of the family.  So we drove from Baton Rouge stopped over night at Tuskegee [Alabama] and then went on to Atlanta.  Well to attend the meetings, I had to make lodging arrangements at Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia], because we couldn't make other lodging arrangements.  And then we could attend the sessions out at the Biltmore Hotel on Peachtree Street, but you couldn't other kinds of things out there.  And the annual lecture and awards presentations, that was held on Spellman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] Campus, because you could have any integrator there.  So the president of Triple-A-S gave his talk and they gave the awards at Spellman.  But you see if I hadn't introduced Collins to the folk in botany and plant pathology and mycology and Harrison then it wouldn't have been as easy to get them into Ph.D. programs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my wife and I have done this over the years.
Story_ID: 27310
Speaker 1: I got a note here that you, basically you integrated the Southeastern--
Speaker 2: Oh, Association of Southeastern Biologists [ASB]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  When I went to Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], I talked with Dr. Lee who chaired the department, and I was interested in trying to get a chapter of Phi Sigma, which is the main National Biology Honor Society.  I organized a biology honor society, a local biology honor society on campus at Southern, because that was going to be the forerunner of a chapter of Phi Sigma, but if you have a chapter of Phi sigma, you have to have graduate work.  And we didn't have graduate work.  But Dr. Lee knew of the other biology honor society which was primarily undergraduate and that's Beta Beta Beta [TriBeta].  So, we applied for chapter status in Beta Beta Beta.  Well we sent our materials in, we were visited and they voted to award chapter status for us a chapter of Beta Beta Beta at Southern.  Then when the president of Beta came to install the chapter then he said "Well look, the district that you're in, the TriBeta district that you're in always meets--has its annual meeting with the Association of Southeastern Biologists and that group is meeting at Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida] this spring, and we would encourage you to come to that meeting and bring your students."  So we decided well, fine, we'll do that and this young lady who I mentioned, May Kathryn, she was May Kathryn Hill then, Haugstad in Norway, she was working on an anatomical problem with me with the sweet potato.  And so I said, "Well, okay, she can give a paper there at the meetings," and the other student, Florence, I forgot Florence's name, she was working on another kind of a project also.  So I took three students, Johnny [John] Jackson, who went on and got a Ph.D. in plant physiology from [University of] Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma].  I took three students and two faculty members, we all drove down to Florida to Tallahassee. Well, I had to arrange private homes.  I called somebody, (unclear), who's in political science down there at Florida A and M [University, Tallahassee, Florida] and said, "Look can you arrange for housing for these young ladies."  So he arranged for housing in some private homes and then, the men, we stayed in the dormitory there on the campus.  Well, since we were there and registered, then the annual banquet that ASB would have had was cancelled.  So they didn't have the annual banquet and so the president had to give his address and had to make their awards in an auditorium.  He gave his speech in the auditorium.  When we were there for that, so we integrated ASB there and that was 1958.  You know almost every year since that time there has been a delegation at the annual ASB meetings from Southern.  After I left Gertrude Wilson kind of took that over and has been bring students there.  So at the fiftieth anniversary of ASB, it started at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia].  So at the fiftieth anniversary I had been president of the Association of Southeastern Biologists and I was to give the fiftieth anniversary presidential address.  So I did and I pointed out, I said, "Now you know fifty years ago, it would have been unimaginable that anyone would have thought that a person like me would be the president of ASB and giving the fiftieth anniversary address."  So that's how we got started with ASB.  First time I ever heard of ASB was through Dr. Rohm.  ASB was meeting at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and Jimmy [James] Henderson from here, Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama], came over to give a paper.  This was about 1953 or 54' [1954], and they wouldn't let them register because if they registered, that's presumably would entitle him to come to the banquet, and that couldn't be.  So they wouldn't let them register and Dr. Rohm said "I'll have nothing else to do with ASB from now on."  Jimmy Henderson separately himself completely from ASB.  Well I had never heard of ASB.  I didn't know anything about Association of Southeastern Biologists.  So I didn't begin to hear anything else about it until this particular incident when we had this chapter status at TriBeta.
Story_ID: 27311
Speaker 1: At Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], so you're continually taking students to professional meetings?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You see that it's essential in terms of [simultaneous]--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it's essential, it's essential.  You see them turned on, they begin to meet people that they've read about or used their textbooks and find out what kind of things go on in other places, how their research relates to what's going on in other places, so it's an essential thing.  One of the times when I participated in a symposium on graduate programs for blacks at [University of California at] Berkeley [Berkeley, California], I pointed this out, that one of the important thing is take your students to meetings, not just send them, but take them to the meetings and introduce them to leading people in the field.
Speaker 1: --Okay.
Speaker 2: And have them give papers at the meetings.
Speaker 1: All right, now, you were at Howard from 76' [1976] until--
Speaker 2: Until I reached retirement age, which was in 93' [1993].  That was mandatory retirement then, it's not any longer.  But then I stayed on, I stayed on at Howard and have taught courses there either without compensation or with compensation since that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you say with or without compensations?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Some years I just taught a course without any compensation.  But you see I could have a full run of the facilities; I maintain a research lab so I say well, if I do that then, even though I'm not teaching a course for them, but if I taught a course without compensation, then I feel justified in maintaining my research space.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they have been very cooperative in that regard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you're here at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] now--you were also like a visiting professor at Central State University [Wilberforce, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: At Central State, I was a visiting professor and research at University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] for a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was NIH [National Institute of Health] sponsored, NIH sponsored project.  And I spent a year at University of Illinois, Champaign, Urbana [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois], as an NSF [National Science Foundation] Faculty Fellow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  University of Illinois, okay.  So these are all these positions.  Now are there any stories about these positions?
Speaker 2: Well, the position I guess at the University of Georgia was--was interesting because although they had had, I was in the Department of Microbiology, and although they had had blacks there before, Russell Brown, who for a long time headed up, was a microbiologist here at Tuskegee, spent some time in the Department of Microbiology at University of Georgia and, oh, they tried to get Luther Williams there at the University of Georgia when he was with us at Atlanta [University, Atlanta, Georgia], but he didn't leave, he wasn't interested in going over there.  He went back to Purdue [West Lafayette, Indiana] instead.  So I had good rapport with the people in microbiology and had full run of the facilities and that sort of thing there.  So it was a good year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Once again somebody couldn't imagine like back when you started
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: You know, schools were still segregated.
Story_ID: 27312
Speaker 1: Tell us how you came back to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Well, this was a surprise, really, because I had not--I didn't have any notions of coming back to Tuskegee, that a position might be offered for me at this stage of my life, but then while we were down here to attend the inauguration of the new president, Gilbert Rochon, I was talking to Luther Williams, and he said "Look, would you be interested in coming down to Tuskegee as a visiting scientist?"  And I said, "Well, yeah, sure, I'd be interested in coming."  So he said, "Okay, we're going to look into that, we're going to see if we could get you down here."  And that's how I--he recommended that, I had had some interaction with Dr. Walter Hill also anyway in connection with some George Washington Carver business.  In the new special edition of the biography of George Washington Carver that was put out by the Eastern Press, it's a press that puts out a fancy series of books, and one series was on great lives, I think of scientists or something of the sort, and George Washington Carver, his biography was going to be included in that particular set and they wrote to me to ask me if I would do the forward for that book and after some reluctance, I had finally decided, "Okay, I'll go ahead and do that."  So I did the forward for that book, and as a result, Dr. Hill was interested in perhaps my doing some additional things on Carver, well, although he had in mind a book or something of the sort, it never materialized at that time under [Tuskegee University President Dr. Benjamin F.] Payton.  So I had had this particular contact with Dr. Hill and having known about and been here with activities about Carver and I was asked to serve in that particular capacity.  So that's how I happened to be back.
Story_ID: 27313
Speaker 1: And how has it been to be back at Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's been fine, wonderful.  Yeah, I've got some research projects going, hopefully, that some of these research projects that are underway may lead to a patent or two or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any patents?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is it difficult to patent discoveries in botany?
Speaker 2: Not really.  It depends on the nature of the project.  This particular one in one of my classes up at Howard, a student was looking and isolating special project fungi from air vent on this plate he had several fungal colonist and in one instance there was a colony and there was this clear zone around it, a zone of inhibition.  And I said, "Well you know, we ought to look into that."  So we isolated it. It is the bacterium of course, a bacterium that seems to be different from other bacteria and it has strong antifungal capabilities so that's what we're working on now and in addition to that not only does it have strong antifungal capabilities, but it is capable of becoming a natural, what you call it, endophyte. If I coat the seeds with the bacterium and plant the seeds then somehow or other the bacterium gets into the plant.  Now if that bacterium gets into the plant, it produces the same substance in the plant as antifungal, then it can be possible a pretty good--its got potentially bio-controlled mechanism.  So if you do that and demonstrate that you could get a patent on the bacteria.
Speaker 1: Are you looking to do something like that with Dutch elm disease too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true, I have with, with-- the problem is it takes a longer time because it's a woody plant.  The plants I'm targeting right now are cotton, peanuts and soybeans.
Speaker 1: They grow fast over a season and then they're-Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We've already demonstrated.  The young lady who came down from Howard [University, Washington, D.C. and spent the summer with me has worked on part of that project and we've already demonstrated that we can immerse cotton seeds in a suspension with the bacteria and plant them and then the cotton plants grow up, then we can take sections of the cotton plant and can recover the bacterium form within the growing cotton plants.  Now, I haven't done that for peanuts yet or soybeans.  I've got to--I'm going to start some of that work over the Christmas holidays.
Speaker 1: Well, you're one of the few scientists I've interviewed who's excited about research and still doing research.  And so I guess you plan to keep going as long as you can?
Speaker 2: I oftentimes say, well now, if you got ideas and if been being bothered with this and if you have access to the facilities, what's the point of just sitting down doing nothing, playing golf or something of that sort.
Story_ID: 27314
Speaker 1: Now, sir, when, when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: I can't think of any major thing that I would do differently if I were to go back to change things.  I'm pretty satisfied with the way things turned out, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And likewise, when you look back at everything, what today would you consider to be your major accomplishments or your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think probably the work with students in helping them develop their talents and helping them to go ahead to become successful professionals in various areas of the sciences, either plant sciences or microbiological sciences, those areas.  I think that's probably to me the greatest legacy.  Oh, I'm proud of some of the research that I've been able to do and continue to do, to answer some critical research problems that I think could be answered.  But I think by and large the work with students has been a legacy for me.
Story_ID: 27315
Speaker 1: Now, tell us something about your family?  Now, you're married and you have some children, and you were telling us earlier how you met your wife [Antoinette Reed] and I assume you have children?
Speaker 2: Yes, we have children, we have three children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Our oldest son was born in Plumber, Washington, when we were working out--when I was working on the Ph.D. degree, and he did his undergraduate work at Earlham College in [Richmond] Indiana and then went to live and work in Portland, Oregon, and he has been a news reporter for the NBC station, television station in Portland, he has been Director of Public Relations for the public school system in Portland, and he's now a state legislator for his district in Oregon, so he's a legislator now from his district in Portland.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: His first name is Lewis, L-E-W-I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lewis R. for Reed actually, R-E-E-D, Frederick.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's known out more now as Lew Frederick, L-E-W, so Lew Frederick.  So he and his wife have two children, the daughter who lives there in Portland and a son and his wife who live in Japan right now where he and his wife are teaching English for Japanese students.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Then we have--our daughter is next.  She was born when we lived in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], although she was actually born in Providence, Rhode Island, but that was during our time at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  She went to Muskingum College in [New Concord] Ohio.  And she and her husband who works for HHH in enforcement of guidelines in education, they live in Bedford, Ohio, which is outside of Cleveland [Ohio].  And they are the parents of eight children.  And their oldest son graduated from Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and he is now, and he-- and his wife is completing her medical degree at Harvard University Medical School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and he did a Master's in social work at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and is now doing a variety of different things there in Boston, because he and his wife are tutors for one of the halls on Harvard's campus.  The second son of our daughter did his undergraduate work here at Tuskegee and he married a young lady who was a biology major also here at Tuskegee, and he works for Merck and Company in Rahway, New Jersey.  The oldest daughter just finished law school.  She went to Wheaton College in [Wheaton] Illinois.  She just finished law school and is now awaiting to complete--pass the board exams.  Then the next daughter got her degree from, not Cleveland State, Case Western, I think its Case Western [Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio].  She got her degree in philosophy.  She's working, she wants to go on to do additional work in graduate school, but she hasn't made up her mind yet to what she's going to do.  The next son, Walter Howard, he hadn't completed his work at Howard, because he's interested more in graphic art and that kind of thing, so he's doing that.  The next son is at Howard, in his senior year and is president of the College of Arts and Sciences Student Government Association, and plans to run next year for what's called the Howard University Student Association as president.  The next daughter is a student here at Tuskegee, freshman, and then there's the younger daughter, the last one is a sophomore, I think sophomore in high school.  Then our son, the youngest son, completed his work at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], and he's going to do graduate work in neurophysiology, but right now he's doing more computer-type work, internet work, in Rhode Island, he lives in Rhode Island.  He and his wife do not have children.  So that's what our family's like.
Story_ID: 27316
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, major concern is to stimulate and encourage young men, especially, to utilize their talents for worthwhile endeavors, to go to school, prepare to do--prepare useful careers, and to not be swayed by deleterious things that take place in their environment, to have a much better and brighter outlook for things that they can do with their talents.  When we were living in Virginia and the church that we attended there, there was a group of men who would spend about a couple hours or so each Thursday evening in the Alexandria City [Virginia] jail, and I was a part of that. And here I would go and find, I might have twenty fine looking young fellows, talking to them, it's obvious they have brilliant, outstanding capacities and here they are sitting up in jail for drugs or something of the sort.  And would say, "You know, with the talents you've got, you could really do something useful with that talent."  So to me it's a great concern to try to motivate in some way, the majority or large majority of young black fellows, in particular, to utilize their talents in a very useful way, in a very meaningful way.
Story_ID: 27317
Speaker 1: Is the anything I have not asked you about that we need to cover before I ask my last question.
Speaker 2: No, I've think we've pretty generally covered the field, the things that I've been involved in and having had the privilege of doing. We've been to any number and made presentations at any number of international meetings and in addition to that, we've had students go along when the International Micrological Congress or one of the congresses met in Tokyo [Japan], well three students went with us to those meetings in Tokyo, and, of course, gave presentations way back in 1935 when the International Botanical Congress met in Leningrad which is now called St. Petersburg [Russia], we had about three students, three or four students, all Ph.D. level students to go to those meetings in the old Soviet Union.  So we've had a chance to try to expose students not to just people, let's say, on a domestic level, but an international level and that's--it seems to have meant a lot to these students, to have that kind of experience.  So we have had a chance to interact with people to a considerable extent in any number of ways on an international level at different meetings.  So I suppose, in part, if you say we have a hobby or pastime, maybe it's attending science meetings in different parts of the world.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's interesting, there's a Wikipedia entry for your son Lew, and it says he's the son of internationally recognized botanist, Lafayette Frederick.
Speaker 2: Oh, is that so.  I haven't seen that.
Story_ID: 27318
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well as a person who tried hard and to motivate young minds to fully expand their minds, to realize the full potential of their academic worth.  I think that's--that would be the thing that would be most important to me, as for people to remember, that in the sense that as the old saying, that along the way, I try to help somebody and to take the talents and the blessings that I receive to share that with others and to help them develop their talents.
Story_ID: 27319
Speaker 1: Ferom left to right, that's Lewis, our Lew Frederick, that's Ann [Antoinette Reed], my wife, I'm standing behind her.  That's our daughter Carla and that's our youngest son David and this was taken about 1971.  That's a picture, we're swinging a schoolmate of ours.  This was taken at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] in 1942.  There I have students on a field trip, and I'm explaining the nature of the branching of that particular scrub.  And there I am at a science meeting.  And there I am receiving the Meritorious Teaching Award from the Association of Southeastern Biologist.  And this is a group of Tuskegee's schoolmates who all worked in the shipyards at Vancouver, Washington, and that was taken in 1944.  That's a picture of me with Ann, my wife, and I don't know what meeting that is.  There's a picture of me with colleague, Roy Hunter, Jr., and this was on the occasion of my being the recipient of the lamplight award for teaching from the Beta Kappa Chi Scientific Society.
Speaker 2: [Off-Camera Discussion]
Speaker 1: There I am giving a talk at Tugaloo College [Jackson, Mississippi] on minorities in biomedical sciences.  That's a picture of me when I was a draftsman for the Keiser Shipyard Company in Vancouver, Washington, back in 1944.  And there is a picture where I am recipient of the recipient of the doctorate degree, of the honorary doctorate degree from the University of Hawaii [Manoa, Hawaii], and the person on the right, not the far right, but the person just to my right is an old navy friend of mine, George Gibbs, who was with Admiral Bird at the South Pole back in 1939.  There's a picture of, as you can see, four generations, on the left is Ann my wife, I'm behind her, standing right down there as a little fellow is Lew Frederick and then in my arms, I have my daughter Carla and the gentleman with the beard is my mother's father, my grandfather and then that's my mother, and that was taken at Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], oh, I don't remember the year.
Speaker 2: Is that the commencement?
Speaker 1: That was commencement, that was commencement, yeah.
Speaker 2: He's a hundred--
Speaker 1: A hundred and four, yeah.  I don't remember who all those people are but there I am receiving an award, and that's a distinction, not award from Washington State University [Pullman, Washington].  That the dean presenting the award to me, the dean of the College of Agriculture, Engineering, and (unclear) Sciences, Washington State University.  And there I'm receiving the distinguish alumni award from Willy [William] Burnett here at Tuskegee.  And here, this is when I received the Centennial Award, I think that's the Centennial Award from the Botanical Society, and I know that one of the persons, the person in the blue coat is Peter Raven from the Missouri Botanical Garden, I forgot who the other person is.  Now this is a family picture.  This is family members, my daughter and her husband and all of their children and some of their foster children and in the lower right-hand corner, in the back you see our son David with my sister Dorothy.  And that's my high school graduating class, Washington High [School] back in 1939 and I was the valedictorian of that particular class.
Speaker 2: That's (unclear)
Speaker 1: That's Caruthersville, Missouri.  And there is the National Science Foundation Summer Institute at Florida A and M [University, Tallahassee, Florida], and I'm in the process of identifying some specimen.  The person on the left is one of the participants, a high school teacher in the class, my wife is there and then another lady who is a high school teacher, I don't know where she's from in that class, and the next person is Judy Metcalf who was the director of that program, and I'm standing there.  And that is the presentation of the Triple-A-S [American Academy of Sciences] teaching award, that's the first Triple-A-S mentor award, and I'm the recipient of that mentor award.  And that picture shows the president of Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] awarding the trustees excellence in teaching award from Atlanta University, and that would have been 1964.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay.  That's about it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that would be about it.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us about it now.
Speaker 2: Well, that's a picture of my standing with some other friends on the summit of Mauna Kea, on the big island of Hawaii and that was taken in April of 1948.
Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much.
