Story_ID: 54051
Speaker 1: Good afternoon, Sir.  My name is Samuel Adams, with The HistoryMakers.  Behind me is the videographer, Scott Stearns.  And our project founder and observer is Julieanna Richardson.  I would like to begin by you giving us your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: My name is Ulysses Grant Ford, III.  That's U-L-Y-S-S-E-S, G-R-A-N-T, F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: Would you like to give us your date of birth?
Speaker 2: September 28, 1943.
Speaker 1: Our location today, where the interview is?
Speaker 2: You are in Macon, Georgia.  The address here is 188 Gleneagles Circle.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm self-employed.  I own a consulting firm named SDC Consulting.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 18, 2002.
Story_ID: 54052
Speaker 1: Now, just let me begin.  We just have a few questions for you, to break the ice and kind of get to know you a little better.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is probably green.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation or destination spot?
Speaker 2: Oh, there are several.  But I really like the big island of Hawaii and Alaska.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Probably spring and fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Probably, "Do the things you fear, and the death of fear is certain."
Speaker 1: And there's another one. (Off Camera Discussion)
Speaker 2: Favorite food?
Speaker 1: Oh boy, that's hard to narrow down.  But I guess I love greens, especially turnip greens and collard greens.  I can eat them as long as you put them there.  And put me a bowl of pinto beans on the side with some onions, and fry me some pork chops, and we'll be there awhile.  (Laughter).  And my wife is the best, she can do it... the girl can do it.
Story_ID: 54053
Speaker 1: We're going to start with your childhood, specifically your mother, beginning with your mother.  Her name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Roberta, maiden name Tate, Ford.
Speaker 1: Can you spell her name for us?
Speaker 2: R-O-B-E-R-T-A, maiden name Tate, T-A-T-E, Ford, F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know your mother's parents, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I knew her father, my grandfather.  His name was Fred Tate, F-R-E-D, T-A-T-E.
Speaker 1: And tell us what type of man he was, and what type of person he was.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, he ended up being the father in my life.  My natural father left my two siblings and me when I was about six or seven years old.  And my grandfather, my mother's father, really filled in that role.  To me, he was--oh, he was the man.  He raised us... a lot of what... a lot of the values I have... especially about work, about women, about giving back and helping other people--those kinds of things are... remembering that I'm no better than anybody else.  A lot of those values, I got from my grandfather.
Speaker 1: What specific stories can you tell us about him?
Speaker 2: Oh. (Laughter).  My grandfather was a roofer, and was a supervisor at this roofing company where he worked.  And he managed all the crews.  And what used to fascinate me about him, although he always claimed he could never read and write, he would pay--in those days those roofers got paid weekly in cash.  And now, on Friday he would pay each of those individuals in cash.  And sometimes we would have 15, 20 people in a crew.  And he could remember that one of those individuals didn't come on the roof for four hours.  And I can remember, I remember Mr. Gilbert.  I can see him standing there now saying, "Fred, didn't you short me something?"  My granddaddy said, "Well, remember, you didn't come up Wednesday until 11 o'clock."  "Oh, yeah, yeah, Fred, you're right."  That used to fascinate me about him.  It used to also fascinate me, because we had white carpenters.  A lot of times, in those days the deck on roofing was wood.  And sometimes when we were replacing a roof, you'd have to replace that decking, and we had white carpenters.  And I remember we were over at Cannon Mills in Kannapolis, North Carolina.  And my grandfather was giving orders to, and direction, to the white carpenters.  And I remember the manager of those mills coming down off the roof and going to call the company, to say that if we didn't get somebody over there white to be running that job, that he could get off the job, because he saw this black man--and that wasn't the word he used--ordering white people around, and they just weren't going to have that.  I remember my granddaddy having money for speeding tickets, because we had to take big trucks and stuff.  And the company guy would give him money for speeding tickets that were non-existent that he would get.  That's more of when I was a teenager kind of thing.  Growing up, as I mentioned, I'm the oldest of three boys.  And we were all boys, and my mother had her hands full raising us.  And I can remember there was a stretch there for a couple of years that we got a whooping every day.  (Laughter).  That's, we would do something.  And this is back in the day when parents, and even neighbors, would whoop kids.  And my mother would whip us, and if we did something real bad, she'd say, "Now, go up to Daddy's house and tell him to whoop you."  And we'd have to walk up to my granddaddy's house and tell him, "Granddad, Mama said whoop us."  He'd hit us about two or three times, and then us money to buy Nehi grape and some ginger snap cookies.  But, he would do his duty, he would give us a couple of licks.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 54054
Speaker 1: Now, sounds like your grandfather [Fred Tate] had a well-known job and a, almost an entrepreneurial like business going there.
Speaker 2: Not really, he worked for someone.  He worked for companies, big roofing companies there in Charlotte [North Carolina].  But he was, it was--he had started doing that when he was a kid.  He actually, he was from Gaffney, South Carolina.  And he came to Charlotte, which might be an interesting story, too.  There was a company from Charlotte building a church in Gaffney.  And my granddad was a young lad.  I forget how old he told me he was now, maybe early teens.  And they had pre-cut the brick to do the arch window, and they had numbered them.  And my granddad was the one, as he said, who knew his numbers.  And so, he could hand the brick in the right order to the bricklayers.  And so when they finished that church, that--whoever it was--foreman or owner of that company--asked my grandfather if he wanted to come to Charlotte and work for him.  And he did.  He left home at a very, very early age, moved to Charlotte, and he very early got into roofing, working for roofing companies.  He never owned his own company, he always worked for somebody.
Story_ID: 54055
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandfather's [Fred Tate] parents?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  Well, I knew my great-grandfather.  I didn't know my granddaddy's mother, she had passed.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Ed Tate.
Speaker 1: And what type of, how many stories do you have about--
Speaker 2: I don't have many, I was a young kid.  All I remember is they had a huge farm.  But my great-granddad had a store built on the front of his house.  And it was like added on, and it was a little neighborhood store.  And everybody... it was a dusty road, dirt roads back then, and I can remember the people coming up to the store.  But he passed when I was like six or seven or eight, something like that.  I do remember his funeral, because in those days, you kept the body in the house for about a week.  And they put nickels or dimes or pennies in your eyes.  And I remember my great-granddaddy had buffalo nickels in his eyes.  And in those days, too, they would hold the kids up for you to kiss the person in the casket.  I remember--(Laughter)--
Speaker 1: Why did they put the--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know what that was.  But I can remember other people that passed during that time that I knew--family members and non-family members, and the body was always kept in the house for about a week.  That's where the wake was, you know, whereas today you normally hold the wake at a funeral home or somewhere.  In those days, you held it in the house.  I don't know--and you know, now that you mentioned it, I never thought (Laughter) about this.  Now I don't know if that was just a black tradition, or what.  But that's the way it was done, at least in Charlotte, North Carolina and in Gaffney, South Carolina when I was a kid.
Speaker 1: Now were those... the coins that were on... did they get buried with him, or did they--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 54056
Speaker 1: Now, your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father is Ulysses Grant Ford, Jr.  As I mentioned, he left when I was like six.  I didn't see him anymore for 21 years.  I was like 27 years old the next time I saw him.  He left, really deserted.  We found out that he eventually moved to Cleveland [Ohio], re-married... started another family.  As a matter of fact, I met my half-brother [Gregory M. Ford], and he and I have hit it off.  We're good friends and visit each other and see each other.  As a matter of fact, I talked with him a couple of days ago.  But I don't have a lot of good feelings or memories about my father.  He passed in, I think it was '90' [1990].  And I know it's wrong, but I didn't even attend the funeral.  I still have some open issues with that, and I just haven't, haven't dealt with that.
Speaker 1: How about his family?
Speaker 2: Yes, now I knew his mother [Geraldine Kizer Ford Brown], my grandmother.  She was real sweet and dear.  As a matter of fact, she lived to be about 104, 105, somewhere along in there.  And I knew my great-grandparents, my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: And his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Kizer.  I'm trying to remember his first name, it'll come to me in a minute.  But his last name was Kizer.  That was my grandmother's maiden name.
Speaker 1: What type of lady was your paternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: She was a homemaker.  She divorced my grandfather [Ulysses Ford] on my father's side, and re-married.  So, although I knew my grandfather, he was estranged from my grandmother.  And, but her husband, I guess he'd be my step-granddad, huh?  (Laughter).  He didn't like children that much.  (Laughter.)  But my grandmother was a dear lady.  I used to, I can remember spending summers at their home there in Charlotte [North Carolina].  The thing I remember most is they had fruit trees in the backyard, along with vegetables and stuff like that.  But they had a peach tree and a plum tree, and those were...  And I tell you, today peaches are not as sweet as they used to be.  (Laughter).  Plums are not as sweet as they used to be.  I don't know what the deal is, but I've never had peaches and plums better than those.
Story_ID: 54057
Speaker 1: Can you give us the names and ages of your other siblings?
Speaker 2: My middle brother is Frederick Douglas Ford.  He is 56, and he lives in Saginaw, Michigan.  He is the executive director of the OIC there, doing very well--head of the Housing Authority, formerly head of the school board, very well-known and respected in that community, great guy.  My baby brother is Dehavalan Eugene Ford, "Dee Dee," as we called him.  Dee passed four years ago, massive heart attack, wasn't but 50 years old.  We knew he had high blood pressure, but did not realize how bad it was.  And it was sudden, and it was a tremendous loss.
Story_ID: 54058
Speaker 1: What type of relationship did you have with your mom [Roberta Ford]?
Speaker 2: My mom, I think we have a great relationship.  She's, my mom is still alive.  She's in Charlotte, North Carolina.  We talk a couple of times a week at least.  If not, she'll call me and say, "Where in the ham sandwich you been?"  (Laughter).  I visit her as often as I can.  My youngest son was there last weekend, as a matter of fact, took his three kids.  I will be going there again within a couple of weeks, a couple or three weeks.  I'm planning a trip there, so...  You know, my mom I think is real special, never re-married--raised my two brothers and me.  In those days, I guess you would say she raised us with a stern... and did the best she could.  I mean we were, we were trying real hard to be thugs, but she would snatch us back.  Of course, she had a lot of help in those days.  And that old adage, I think they say it's an African proverb, about a village raising children.  You really felt that in those days.  The neighborhood I grew up in, which was public housing, the projects as we called it... also in school, and in church, which was our life.  That was the, that was our globe in those days.  You went to church, and school, and the neighborhood where you lived.  And in all of those venues, there were people--for example, my elementary school principal taught my mother; my junior high principal was in the same class as my mother; my senior high school principal taught my mother; I had teachers that were in the class with my mother.  And it wasn't just me, other kids were the same way.  And, like, my grandfather founded that church, was one of the founders of the church that we went to.  And everybody there knew me from the day that I was born, you know.  So, and the same thing was true in the neighborhood.  I mean, I came from the hospital when I was born to 1817 Edmond Street, Apartment 124, and I lived there until I graduated from college 21 years later.  So, people in the neighborhood knew me.  And I mean, so you got, you had--my mother had other people that had, that were her eyes and ears.  And as much as they would say, "We see you.  I see what you're doing, and I'm going to tell Roberta."  As much as they said that, they also said, "Boy, you special, you got something going for you.  You gonna be good, you gonna be this.  And watch out for yourself, and take care of yourself.  And listen to your mama, listen to your granddaddy, go to school and get your books.  You real smart."  So you had that kind of feedback, as well as "Come here, boy, I'm going to give you a whoopping, and you go home and tell your mama."  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 54059
Speaker 1: As the oldest, were you aware of the difficulties that your mother [Roberta Ford] was facing now that your father [Ulysses Ford] had gone, and that she was here to raise...?
Speaker 2: You know, in retrospect, I think I was very selfish.  I don't know that at the time I was thinking about what my mother was going through so much as the, at that time, the embarrassment and hurt I felt.  I would hear other kids talking about their father--you know, my friends.  You know, we'd play ball, and we... like in Boy Scouts and like that... and in church and other... and especially times when it was time to be honored for something, and they would ask for the father of this young man to come forth.  And I always had to have somebody standing in for me--a coach or a Sunday school teacher, or somebody like that.  And rather than at that time thinking about what this was doing to my mother, I think I was very selfish in what I felt, and how hurt I felt, and how disappointed I was at that.  And as I mentioned earlier, I've never closed that wound with... even today at 58.  I really have some bad feelings about my father.
Speaker 1: Now as a child, how did that--you said the selfishness and things...  In retrospect, how did those behaviors manifest themselves when you were a child?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I acted out anything on it.  Oh, one thing I did.  I can remember as an early child, lying about where my father was.  You know, when people would say--you know, I knew he had left and wasn't coming back.  But I would tell stories that he was working out of town or he was--you know, something like that, to hide the fact that he had left the family, deserted the family.  I think that was about the only way that it manifested itself.  I don't think that...  Oh, and if any of my other behaviors demonstrated that, I'm really not, really not aware of them.  And I hadn't, and I really hadn't thought that through.  That's a good, that's a good thought.  Maybe I need to think on that.
Story_ID: 54060
Speaker 1: How was your mother [Roberta Ford], post your father, living with... around the house and working?  Did she--now having to be father and mother, how did that--
Speaker 2: Well, she didn't really put that role on us.  Now we all were, had responsibilities in the home.  My mother worked, she was a domestic.  And there are some stories behind that, too.  Because we were also on welfare...
Speaker 1: Well, share.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But my mother worked, but each of us had responsibilities.  Like, I had to clean up.  My little brother [Frederick Ford] did the kitchen.  My baby brother [DeHavillane Ford] did the dusting and took out the trash.  And when my mama came home, we had to pass inspection on all those things.  But as a result, all of us can cook, wash... iron.  My middle brother can bake breads and cakes from scratch.  Now, I wasn't the best cook in the world, but I can put a meal together that people can eat.  But my specialty was washing and ironing.  And I mean that was in, back in the day, when I had to mix my own starch.  And we washed in this washing machine that you hooked up at the sink, you know, and had the rollers to wring them out.  And as I mentioned, my mother was a domestic.  And I had to starch and iron her uniform, apron, and the little thing that went in her hair.  And I mean it couldn't have any cat faces in it, and it couldn't have any scorches in it.  I mean, I can iron.  (Laughter).  So, she didn't really say, "Now, you got to be the father."  I don't ever remember my mother saying that. It was more of a thing that all of us would come together and do what it would take for us to survive as a family.  I remember my mama... and I was again, after you get a little older you recognize... I remember my mama working sometimes three different domestic jobs so that we would, we would have...  And I can tell you as a kid, you know, I guess by somebody's standards, we might have been considered poor.  But I always remember having everything I needed.  I never was hungry, I never was naked.  I never didn't have a place to stay.  I always had everything I needed.  And the result of my mama and her sister, my aunt, my granddaddy [Fred Tate], my grandmamma [Geraldine Kizer Ford Brown]... we had a whole lot of what we wanted, too.
Story_ID: 54061
Speaker 1: What type of woman was your mother [Roberta Ford], if you had to describe what type of person was she?  Just, specifically at that time when you were a child, what type of woman was she?
Speaker 2: I guess hard-working.  You know, I've never thought about this, what kind of woman was my mother.  Very churchgoing, we used to have a good time, though.  We'd party a lot.  She was totally dedicated to her kids, as I saw a lot of women in those days.  I mean, my mother wasn't the only one raising kids by herself there in the Fairview Homes, in the projects.  That was more the situation than not.  There were very few two-parent family situations in the projects when I was growing up.  But what I mainly remember about my mother is her life being centered around us--raising us, making sure with what she had to offer that our lives would be better than hers.
Story_ID: 54062
Speaker 1: As I was saying, I just really remember my mother [Roberta Ford], what appeared to me, was living her life for us.  She did have some outlets for herself.  I remember she and a group of her friends had a social club, and they rotated the meetings.  So, every once in a while, the meeting would be at our house, and that was always a lot of fun, you know.  She also was in a missionary, I think it was, at church or something like that.  And of course, those meetings rotated.  A funny story my mother likes to tell on the three of us [Ulysses and his brothers, Frederick Ford and DeHavillane Ford]...  And that was, as kids, I mean we were skinny as rails, my brothers and me.  But we could eat.  And we evidently went somewhere, to one of the missionary meetings, and embarrassed my mother.  Because they came around fixing the little plates, and I think I was the one that said, "Hey, come back here.  My mama gives me more food than that."  (Laughter).  And so, from then on, I don't care...  Anytime we were going out somewhere... I don't care if it was with family, my mother would feed us before we left (Laughter), so that when we got there...  We could eat when we got there, but she said, "Now, whatever they give you, that's it."  So, I remember that.  I can remember hard times, you know, like my mama crying.  I can remember--
Speaker 2: Crying over what?
Speaker 1: You know, not having things, and not being able to do things for us.  One of the most vivid memories I have... is my mother has always been a little heavy.  And she would come home and have to stand in the tub in hot water before we could take her shoes off.  Her feet would swell up so bad.  So, we'd stand there.  We'd stand there and sing and joke and laugh, and then we'd get her shoes off.  But, so I think she's quite a lady.
Story_ID: 54063
Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest?
Speaker 1: Your earliest childhood memory.
Speaker 2: I guess I can remember a couple of times in kindergarten with Miss Melton.  I must have been, what is that?  Four and five?  No, five and six...  Four and five, I guess.  And so, I can remember the building where it was, where we had class.  I remember Miss Melton, I can remember Edwina Lewis; that was my first love.  I can remember Thelma and Vivian.  I can remember the graham crackers and milk.  (Laughter).  So I can remember, I guess kindergarten would be my earliest memory.
Story_ID: 54064
Speaker 1: Now, it really sounds like your extended family in the community in Charlotte [North Carolina], the black community in Charlotte, was really close knit.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever have interaction with the white part of Charlotte?
Speaker 2: Not really, not at all.  The only white people I really knew, and had any contact with were the people my mother worked for.  She worked for Southern Radio Company there; she was the maid out at their facility.  And she only worked there half a day, and then she would go to different people's homes.  Like, one of them was one of the bigwigs out there.  She would also go to his home and cook and iron and stuff like, and clean.  And so, I met them.  Other than that, the only white people that I would come in contact with was an insurance man that would come by to collect the premium.  If I went downtown to shop, which wasn't frequent... I mean we went downtown to shop.  It wasn't... that was the only contact I had with white people.  But nothing, no serious involvement.  I wasn't seriously involved with white people until after I graduated from college.
Story_ID: 54065
Speaker 1: So, what type of child would you say you were?
Speaker 2: Child?  How I was?
Speaker 1: Mischievous?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Intelligent?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Precocious?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was probably--well, I heard that I was all of those things.  I was, I was more than a decent student.  I was 13 out of 233 in my graduating class, Honor Society and all that stuff.  But as I mentioned, I was trying real hard to be a thug.  I really used to do kind of mischievous things.  For example, back in those... I was a paperboy.  It seems like every kid I know was a paperboy growing up.  I did the morning papers.  And back in those days the bakeries would deliver to the stores, cakes and breads for the day, okay.  Well, when we'd go up and get our papers, we'd go by the store and get us a couple of those breads and a couple of cakes and take home. (Laughter).  We used to, growing up we had a little game we used to play, called knocking on people's doors and running.  Oh, one thing we used to do: as I mentioned, we lived in the projects.  And everybody hung their mop on the line, and hung their clothes out.  And we would go down and exchange those.  (Laughter).  You know, if you had a raggedy mop, we'd give you a good one.  If you had a good mop, we'd give you a raggedy one.  If you had sheets and pillowcases on your line, we'd come and hang somebody's work clothes...  (Laughter).  Another thing we did, we caused a fight this time.  You had to take a garbage can out to the end, you know, out to the street for it to be collected.  So, we'd sit there and wait for people to take their garbage can out, and then we'd come back and hang it up down at the house.  (Laughter).  And I'll never forget, we were sitting out there one day.  We had a big streetlight that we'd all... and sing... you know, doo wop songs and stuff.  And we did that...  And their last name was Gray, I can't remember the first name now.  But Miss Gray came out and said, "I thought I told you to take that trash can out."  He said, "I did."  And he came out and looked, and he took it back down there.  Well, we took it back.  (Laughter).  We did that about three times.  And she'd come out and there, and she'd say, "I thought you said you took that garbage..."  And then the next thing you know, they started fussing and cussing at each other and really went to fisticuffs, so we left that alone.  People that had fruit trees, we'd climb their fence or go in their yard and get fruit, and stuff like that.  I never, you know, I didn't go downtown and steal.  I had some friends that did that; that was considered bad.  Taking those cakes and bread wasn't considered bad.  I know that was wrong, don't get me wrong. (Laughter).  I knew they weren't mine and I didn't pay for them, okay.
Speaker 1: But you knew the limits.
Speaker 2: And nobody gave me permission to go get it.  So I mean I could have, especially in those days, I could have done, gotten 20 years, you know, for that, as much as a guy going downtown and shoplift something.  And like I said, we'd knock on people's doors and run.  But when I was coming up, you did not disrespect the elderly.  You could not...  Everybody had to be "Yes, Sir," "No, Ma'am."  Any... I mean you couldn't even look hard at...  You know, "Get that look off your face."  So, and I never did anything like that.  I did run with a group of guys.  We'd go across town and, you know, fight with the other guys over there.  You know, everybody had their block, their corner, and you had to defend your territory and stuff.  I was supposed to be the little leader.  Everybody said we had a gang.  We didn't think it was a gang, it was just a group of guys that hung out together, you know.  And basically, those are the guys I played ball with. (Laughter).  I guess a ball team is a gang, you know.  But I never did anything violent... never, you know... other than fist-fighting and stuff like that... never hurt anybody.  Never shot or cut any... never done anything like that, but I was mischievous.  And in school, you know, the principal would call me and say, "If you didn't do it, I know you know who did."  (Laughter).  That's a true story.  But I was also the Principal of the Day on Student Teacher Day.  You know, I was the principal.  So--
Story_ID: 54066
Speaker 1: What sights, sounds, and smells remind you of your childhood in Charlotte, South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Anytime I see public housing, I have flashbacks.  And my remembrances of life in the projects was positive.  I didn't, I didn't know I lived in the slums until somebody told me when I was grown.  I had a very, very good childhood I feel.  Sports arenas... I've always been...  Don't let me see a pickup baseball game or basketball game, or something like that... I tend to reflect back.  When I see groups of kids hanging together and laughing and joking, walking home from school, that takes me back.
Speaker 1: Any smells?
Speaker 2: Smells.  Collard greens cooking and pinto beans cooking.  That'll do it every time. (Laughter).
Story_ID: 54067
Speaker 1: Now, what were the other strong entities in your community?  I know you told me your family and the household was very strong.  How about your church?
Speaker 2: Church and school.  Those were the two--outside of community, family and community.  And I would put the two of them, all four or five of those things, on the same par.  I don't know that--I mean, you know what your family was, and it had its place.  But everything else was right there, too.  My church was real special.  There were, there were individuals there that I remember to this day, and that were very supportive of me--as well--as I mean other kids too.  But I mean, it was a very supportive place.  My wife [Beverly Ford] uses a term about her church life here--that it was the place that gave them roots and wings.  It gave you something, a value system, to stand in, and it gave you the strength and courage to be able to soar, to go away.  And I feel that way about my church.  Mr. C.D. Rippy, Coleman [Dupont] Rippy, gave all... every year, every graduating senior, he would give a Bible.  I still have my Bible with me.  Mr. Durham was my scout master there.  Miss Morrison was my Sunday School teacher for years and years and years.  And the ministers there, especially Reverend Michaels, Reverend Michaels was the minister when, I want to say, from junior high until I graduated from high school.  And one of his daughters--and we called her, her nickname was Preach.  Her name was Margaret, just as sweet as she could be, was one of my classmates, and just...  And Reverend Michaels I thought was a good, good man.  I don't know if you ever heard of [Bishop] George Leake.  He had made a national reputation for himself, politically and otherwise there in Charlotte [North Carolina].  He's dead now, too.  He was the minister after Reverend Michaels.  But that was a very, very positive experience.  I remember, you know, you used to build your church.  Every time you'd go to Sunday School, you'd get another piece.  You had a picture of this church, and then you'd have a piece to tape into the book.  I don't know if you ever went through that.  You had the stained glass windows, you had the roof and shingles, you had the door... you had the shrubs out in the front.  And I mean you'd go to church every Sunday and get that piece to put it in that book, I remember that.  And the Easter programs, where you had your little speech to get up there and say... and everybody clapping at you.  And you know, I imagine that was my first experience of speaking in public, if you think back on it.  You know, it's getting up in front of that church on that stage by yourself, saying your little speech.  And everybody--even those of us that would forget, or those of us that would cry--everybody would clap, "Yay, yay," you know, just positive kind of stuff.  And our church, I felt, was just real, real good for us.  I've got some very fond memories there.  I was on the usher board.  Believe it or not, I was pastor of the junior church, which I thought I was a joke. (Laughter).  But, because the other thing you went to church for was to see the girls, you know.  And remember, at least when I was growing up, if you didn't go to church, you couldn't go anywhere else the rest of that week.  So, we went to church.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Little Rock A.M.E. Zion Church, African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church.
Speaker 1: So, were you there every time the doors opened?
Speaker 2: Every time, every Sunday.  And sometimes I was there like two or three times during the week, because I'd have to go to Scout meeting there, and junior church.
Story_ID: 54068
Speaker 1: Now Boy Scouts and athletics seemed to be a major part of your--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Speak about that, please.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I think scouting just played a tremendous part in my life, and I think as much as anything else, helped keep me out of trouble... helped keep me out of jail.  I got involved in scouting very, very early.  My mother [Roberta Ford] was a den mother for Cub Scouts.  So, I can remember at six and seven going to Cub Scout meetings, although I wasn't old enough to be a Cub Scout.  I remember going, and I remember loving those little blue uniforms trimmed in the yellow and the gold.  And so, I got involved in scouts, and went all the way through the Cub Scouting, scouting, and exploring.  I was also fortunate enough to become an Eagle Scout.  And in those days, you were required to get 21 merit badges to reach Eagle.  And then for every five merit badges after that, you could win another award for your parents.  So, I ended up with 31 merit badges, because I remember I gave my mother two of those.  I think they called them God and Country awards, or something like that.  As a matter of fact, I still have my Eagle Award, my merit badge, sash, and my Den Chief Award, because I was a Den Chief also.  I was a counselor at Boy Scout Camp.  The first couple of years of course I went to Boy Scout camp, but it was just as an attendee, I was a camper.  But very early on... because I mean I took to scouting.  I mean, I could hike with the best of them, I could build a fire with the best of them.  I didn't mind eating pine needles and dirt in my food, you know.  (Laughter).  Sleeping on the ground, I loved it, I absolutely loved it.  We swam and boated in a big, muddy creek, you know.  And I... there snakes swimming between your legs and stuff... and I just flat out loved it; I took to it.  One experience I had early on, Camp Oak was the black camp.  And I grew up in a totally segregated situation--schooling, neighborhood, everything, including scouting, until I became a counselor.  And so I must have been 14 or 15, somewhere along in there.  I didn't realize that the white camp was a few miles away from us, in the same set of woods, okay.  I also didn't realize that at the beginning of our camp, we would have to hike over to the white camp and get one boat--one rowboat, and one canoe.  And remember I told you, we swam in a muddy lake.  They had this gorgeous swimming pool.  They had canoes lined up for what to me seemed like forever.  Or, maybe it was ten or fifteen of them, you know.  (Laughter).  And boats... the same way.  They had huts, we had tents.  They had showers, we had this thing hanging together.  Watch MASH on TV... we had this thing hanging up there like that.  It was just... and I can remember that just being tremendous... you know.
Speaker 1: Were you angry?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, I remember being...  And we would bring the canoe and the boat, you know, we'd hike back with it.  And then at the end of... and camp was three weeks, I think, two or three weeks.  And at the end, we'd have to hike it back over there, you know.  And you'd see all of this stuff, man.  It would just tear you up.  And the same thing happened to me about schools.
Story_ID: 54069
Speaker 1: I went to a segregated school.  I went to West Charlotte High School, which is the largest black high school in North Carolina--nationally acclaimed academically, tremendous athletics--all the positive things you wanted to know about a school.  However, as I mentioned, my grandfather [Fred Tate] was a roofer.  And every summer from the time I was 15 on, I roofed with him.  My mother and grandfather never would let any of us work during the school year.  Even when I threw papers that was in the summer.  (Laughter).  Our job was to go to school, you know.  And they were all very high on education.  But I remember Myers Park was the white high school; that was the "it" in the state.  Myers Park was the affluent white community in Charlotte.  And its school was the...  One summer we had to put a roof on one of those buildings over there.  They had an indoor swimming pool.  They had paved tennis courts, you know.  They had a practice field and a football field.  Our football field was our practice field, you know.  (Laughter).  They had a practice baseball diamond and a game diamond, you know.  But that school, I'll never forget.  We were--and the building we were covering was like their art, the shop building.  And we had, at our school we had like one little band saw, one little saw.  They had rows of that stuff around there, you know.  And you could just tell the difference, in at least the physical kind of things that they had.  And I don't know what was going on inside those walls, but I know what was going on inside the walls where I was in school.  And let me tell you--that was great.  I don't think they could beat that.  But I do remember seeing those kind of differences in my teenage years.  I don't remember...  While growing up, I knew that there were places I could go and couldn't go.  I mean, I remember the white and colored signs, "White Only," "Colored Only" signs.  But I don't know that I thought that much about it, and really recognized some of what was going on, until I was a teenager.  I think my parents and my mother [Roberta Ford] and grandfather [Fred Tate]--and I call them my parents--and others in the neighborhood kind of shielded us from that.  And my, like I said, my world was school, home, church and home.  I mean we didn't, we didn't roam today, like going to the mall.  There were no malls then.  I remember when the first mall was built in Charlotte.  So, but those were our venues.  We didn't, we weren't that mobile back then.  Like, my kids were, my kids were very, very, mobile.  But I wasn't when I was growing up.  So, that was my world.  And I really didn't have that consciousness, racial consciousness, until I got to college.  But I guess we'll talk about that later.
Story_ID: 54070
Speaker 1: Back at the [Boy] Scouts--
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: You were excelling with the Scouts.  How did that make you feel?  When did you realize I can excel at this, and I'm going to be... and then further along, the more success you received.
Speaker 2: You know, and I don't know at the time you're really thinking about you can excel.  All I know is that was something I really loved, something I did well.  I mean, and there were others... we were all there together.  And up through Star, you know, you go Second Class--well, Tenderfoot, Second Class, First Class, Star, Life, and Eagle.  Up through Star, seems as though most of us kind of hung together.  And at Star we began to separate, and then Life, we separated.  And because I remember a guy, William Spivey and I, got Life at the same time... presented there at church.  I was the only one to get Eagle at that time.  And it's not to say there weren't more people getting Eagle.  But out of our troop and there in church, I'm the only one.  But through Star, everybody was getting merit badges.  I mean because you got, like you had to begin to get merit badges to go to the next rank after First Class.  Tenderfoot, Second Class, and First Class was just memorizing stuff, and coming to meetings, you know, and that kind of stuff.  But then to get Star, you had to earn merit badges.  And then to get Life, more merit badges and so forth.  And but, so I don't really remember anything but saying this was something I like.  And a bunch of my other friends--different from the guys I played ball with, now I notice, now that I remember.  I remember one guy, we went to opposite high schools, but we were in scouting together--Freddy Goodman, I remember him.  There were our our arch rival.  And that was the only athlete that I remember, you know, that I played ball with.  But, but a different group of guys... but guys I just had a great time with, and then doing what we were doing.
Story_ID: 54071
Speaker 1: So, when that Eagle Scout badge was given to you, tell me how you were feeling.  I mean the pride in the community and everything?
Speaker 2: You know, I got a lot of congratulations from people.  As a matter of fact, I do remember somebody white from the Scout office coming down (Laughter), now that you mentioned it.  I remember them sitting on the front row at church and wondering, how did they get...?  That was their first time there, how did they get to sit on the front row?  (Laughter).  But I know that I felt a lot of pride.  That was in 1959 when I got my Eagle.  And I know that I was excited and pleased, and enjoyed it.  And I got an awful lot of thank-you's from people, and had a lot of people to thank.  I mentioned Mr. Durham.  There was another Scoutmaster, Mr. Harshaw.  Because there was also a Scout troop in my neighborhood.  And I spent a lot of time between those two.  And Mr. Harshaw was the Scoutmaster there in the neighborhood for the early part of my scouting career.  And then Mr. Jefferson was my Scoutmaster on up through the time that I got Eagle.  Mr. Jefferson was an ex-Navy guy.  And the thing I remember about him, he would let us tie his hands behind his back.  And at that dirty lake I told you about, he could swim all the way across that lake underwater (Laughter) with his hands tied behind his back.  But he also taught us tap dancing, and boxing, and that kind of thing; he was a great guy.  And those other gentlemen were a lot older.  He was a lot younger, and I think had a lot more energy where he could get down in the dirt with us, you know what I mean.  But, but I owed an awful lot to them.  There was a gentleman, Mr. Warren.  Fred Warren was the black Scout commissioner of the day.  And he was the one that ran the camp that we went to, and was over all the black troops.  And you know, he was, I can remember him being encouraging, and really supporting me when I came to camp.  Because by the time I became a counselor and all, see, that would pay for my camping.  So, my mother [Roberta Ford] didn't have to pay.  So, then my brothers [Frederick Ford and DeHavillane Ford] could come.  So that was real helpful, so...  And all the projects you had to work on... teachers, people in the community that helped you with those projects and stuff.  So, in addition to a lot of people patting my back, I owed a lot to a lot of people, too.
Story_ID: 54072
Speaker 1: Do you think these... one of the reasons you had such an affinity for the Boy Scouts and these male mentors that you had, was maybe the fact that you didn't have a father, and this was just an opportunity to have men teach you things besides outside of your--?
Speaker 2: Very well may have been.  I hadn't thought about that way, but you might be hitting it right on the head.  And when I, when I think about it, most of my close friends in there--Reginald Shedd (ph.), Turner Sumpter (ph.), Eddie Cantor (ph.)--all of us were from single parent homes, being raised by our mothers.  There may be a lot of truth to that, Sam.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your mother's [Roberta Ford] pride when you received the Eagle Award?
Speaker 2: Oh, heck yeah.  Oh, yeah, my mother was beaming more than anybody, and I remember that.  I remember her getting on me, because evidently I was standing there with my head down while they were reading all the stuff.  And as a matter of fact, the picture, the only picture I've ever seen of that, I'm kind of standing there like this.  And my mother was angry with me because I wasn't standing up straight.  She said I should have been... that was the proudest moment of my life, and I should have been standing there ram rod, and all of that.  But she was extremely, extremely proud of it... my grandfather [Fred Tate], too.  My grandfather was, my grandfather was it.  He was the man.
Speaker 1: What did he say to you?
Speaker 2: The only thing my grandfather would ever say is... anytime you did any... like he would come to my games or so.  "You done good, Bo."
Story_ID: 54073
Speaker 1: He [Ford's grandfather, Fred Tate] called everybody Bo.  "You done good, Bo."  And I remember my friends used to tell me that they didn't like to sit next to him in the stands.  (Laughter).  Because if I hit a ball, if I was doing something... and they said my granddaddy could punch hard.  And he'd just punch... "That's my Bo, that's my Bo."  (Laughter).  So yeah, my granddaddy was very...  He would take us...  Like, I played a lot of baseball.  And in those days, you'd go out into the country, as we said, and play ball.  You know, your team would go out, and there'd be a big fish fry, and hot dogs and soft drinks.  And if you're in uniform, see, you got all yours free, you know.  And we'd go out and play baseball.  My granddaddy would take me to all those things.  And he, he was the one that would take us, and that kind of stuff.  And my gloves, my... like, they would give us uniforms.  The other thing--you know, one thing I remember about that that's different now.  Back in those days, you had a lot of black entrepreneurs, a lot of black businesses.  And those businesses bought our uniforms.  And so, whoever paid for your uniform, you would have their name on the back of your uniform.  And there funeral homes... what is the name... the snack shop, the pool hall, the dry cleaners...  There were two dry cleaners--Platt's Dry Cleaners and Taylor's Dry Cleaners.  And Po' Neal's Shoe Shop, you know, this guy that had his own shoe shop.  And so they would buy... like the funeral home may buy six, and the barbershop may buy three.  And the little snack shop may buy one.  So on your team, you'd have all these different names on the back of your uniforms of these black entrepreneurs that bought your uniforms.  But my granddaddy would buy my socks, my cap, and my glove.  You had to furnish those yourself, and your spikes.
Speaker 2: What athletics were you involved in?
Speaker 1: Well, I tried to play three--football, basketball, and baseball.  Baseball, they say was my best sport.  I was a pitcher, left-handed.  I kind of lost heart in that when I got to be in high school.  Because although I was a pitcher from Little League all the way through American League Legion ball, all the way through junior high--when I wasn't pitching, I played, because I could hit good.  But when I got to high school, everybody could hit good.  So I only, I only got to play in like five or six games a year.  And the only other time I did anything was throw in batting practice.  So, I got kind of bored.  But everybody said that baseball was my best sport.  When I was about 15 years old, a little junior semi-pro team there came and asked my mama to let me pitch for them.  And my mama wouldn't let me go, because she said those men cursed, and she didn't want me to be around them.  So, I went way out in the backyard and cursed, because she wouldn't let me go.  (Laughter).  Anyway, way out in the backyard.  I mean... but anyway, they say baseball was my best sport.  My heart was football, I loved it... I loved it.  I played center and middle linebacker.  That's where I tore my knee up.  I could play basketball all day, but that wasn't my best sport.  And you know, so I mean I played, but that wasn't it.  But football I was a starter, and baseball... like I said.  I mean, I got my "propers" in baseball; it's just I got bored, because I didn't play all the time.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But they were very important in the end.
Speaker 1: They were very, very important.
Story_ID: 54074
Speaker 1: When I came along in the late fifties [1950s] ... very, very early sixties [1960s]... because I graduated from high school in '61' [1961].  In those days, you really looked to the military or sports as your way out of the projects.  And a lot of my classmates, male classmates, either joined the Armed Forces out of high school, or sought athletic scholarships to go to school.  Being the oldest of three boys, I knew that my mother couldn't afford to send me to school.  And it is at that time... there had been about four people that I really point out in my life.  And one of them was Julian Warren Pyles (ph.).  He was my high school math and science teacher.  And Mr. Pyles was the type of teacher that when we got there in the tenth grade--and I don't know if he went to our folders or what.  But somehow or another, those that he viewed with having academic promise, but weren't from the proper side of the tracks, he would gather those students.  Now he had the sons and daughters of the teachers, and preachers, and mailmen, and all of those too, that were bright.  But he came and got the rest of us that he considered bright.  And I can remember people like Fred Bookman, and Eugene Hill, and people like that in my class who came from my side of the track--you know, the projects or the slums, or Greenville, as we would call those people from Greenville.  But Mr. Pyles would take us and nurture us through.  I mean and he was a tremendous, tremendous teacher, as well as role model and everything else.  And Mr. Pyles, my mama told him that she didn't want--I had six athletic scholarships.  And my mama--I got hurt my senior year.  And my mama told him she did not want me playing ball.  He called Miss Echols, who was head of the physics department at Talladega [College in Alabama], who he was in grad school with, okay, at Fisk [University].  And said, "Hey," and I remember sitting right there at his kitchen table.  He said, "You know, I send the cream of the crop to Fisk.  But I've got a few golden nuggets I want to send to Talladega."  Those were, that's almost a direct quote.  And I got a scholarship, and a student defense loan--as it was called in those days--that completely paid for my education, those two things.  So, that's I got to Talladega.  Because at that time, while Talladega had a basketball team, it did not offer scholarships.  And I went out and made the team.  As a matter of fact, I was co-captain.  But they did not have scholarship players until my senior year.
Story_ID: 54075
Speaker 1: So, during your academic career, pre-college, even pre-high school... when did you realize, and did you realize, or other people realize, that you had academic promise?
Speaker 2: Almost from my earliest memory.  From my earliest memory, I can remember being told that I was smart.  And I can remember people saying that I was the teacher's pet.  (Laughter).  I remember that in grade school.
Speaker 1: What types of grades were you receiving?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was, I got straight A's when I got to high school.  I was... I don't know, I guess I got some B's in junior high.  You know, I got a few B's in junior high.  But I was, I was always a good student, and I could get my books.  That part of academia came pretty easy to me.
Speaker 1: Was your mother hard on you with education?  Was she--
Speaker 2: It was, that was a given in my environment.  I mean, I hear kids today, like my boys--you know, the fact that I had to get my education was a given.  I never, it never entered my mind that I would not finish high school.  And once I got to college, I knew I had to finish.  I mean, my mother didn't have to rap me over the head with that every five minutes.  It was just something, I don't know how...  But I'm sure there had to be discussion about it and all of that as I grew up.  But I don't remember it being--you know, nobody had to get out the whip to make me go to school and to make me do well.
Story_ID: 54076
Speaker 1: Now in your...  in the community of Charlotte [North Carolina], especially in that era--forties, fifties, early sixties--were there a lot of blacks before you going off and going to college?  Or were they working in the tobacco fields, or were they--
Speaker 2: No.  Now, Charlotte was a pretty urban area.  There are about six urban areas in North Carolina, and Charlotte is the largest city in North Carolina.  So, they weren't going off to cotton fields and stuff.  There were other kinds of jobs that were pretty much "black jobs" back then... clerking...  Not clerking... but working in stores downtown, pretty much domestic kind of jobs.  When I was coming along the military was big, especially for guys... but a few ladies, too.  I knew of a lot of people that were going to college.  It wasn't necessarily the rule at the time.  I remember my class, there being a statement--and it may have been for several classes in a row... that the largest percentage of college bound students had been out of my class up to that time.  And the next year, it may have been an even larger percentage.  So, more and more--like I mentioned, I graduated in '61' [1961]--were going.  I did know I had a first cousin that went to A and T, and that's where I wanted to go, was A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University].   But my mama [Roberta Ford]... I had a football scholarship, football and baseball scholarship there, but my mama didn't want me to go there; she didn't want me to play ball.  And plus, she would hear stories my cousin would tell when he got home.  So, she told me she didn't want me to go up there, because I'd be with a bunch of thugs.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, you repeated twice that your mother didn't want you to play sports in college.  Why was that the case?
Speaker 2: I think that the only football game my mother came to see was when I really got hurt again.  My leg was already hurt; I'd torn up my knee earlier.  And my mother wanted me...  In those days, like I remember, there were segregated facilities.  But the Catholic hospital in Charlotte would accept blacks.  The doctor she got for me had privileges at Mercy, and she wanted me to have the operation at Mercy.  And so, we kept putting it off, because they didn't have a bed.  So, they finally scheduled it the week before the last game.  And the last game was with our arch rival, Sycamore.  That game used to outdraw college games.
Speaker 1: The name of your high school?
Speaker 2: The name of my high school was West Charlotte Junior High School.  And our arch rival was Sycamore Senior High School.  And the name of the game was the Queen City Classic.  And I mean that is known throughout North Carolina.  That game... and I mean that's where the college pros, big college scouts, would come and everything.
Story_ID: 54077
Speaker 1: I was in high school [West Charlotte High School in North Carolina] playing football, and I'd gotten hurt earlier in the year.  And they had secured a bed for me at the Catholic Hospital [for his knee surgery], which was not the black hospital; the black hospital had a bad reputation.  And it was all in the paper the week before the game [the Queen City Classic between West Charlotte High School and their arch rival Sycamore Senior High School] that I wasn't going to be able to play because of my injury.  The day that I was supposed to go in the hospital, the gentleman whose bed I was supposed to get, ran a temperature, and was not discharged, so I couldn't get the bed.  So, I talked the coach into letting me play.  (Laughter).  And I mean, I played five or six games on it already.  And he did.  The only game my mother [Roberta Ford] came to in my whole football career... she never liked football... never...  And... because it had been in the paper that my leg was hurt.  But the other team knew anyway, and they really worked on it.  And I mean the beginning, the first play of the second half, I had teeth prints, all where they were biting me and everything else.  They wiped me out.  And they tell me my mother came across that wall in Memorial Park (Laughter) where we were playing, and really cursed my coach out.  Because my coach had coached her and my aunt, her sister.  Her sister was supposed to have been one of the best female athletics to come through West Charlotte.  And they graduated in '41' [1941].  And so she came out there and really gave him--and the football doctor who she knew--really gave them "down in the country" for letting me play and getting hurt again, and all that stuff.  And as you can imagine, that was something that I don't think I will ever live down.  Every time something would happen after that, they'd say, "Here come Miss Roberta."  (Laughter).  I mean, my boys never let me live that down.  But, but anyway that's... and she just never wanted me to play football.  But I kind of got the impression my mother didn't want me to play sports, period.  I mean, she would come to my baseball games.  She always... especially the ones in the neighborhood.  I don't think she ever came to a basketball game.
Speaker 2: Why do you think she didn't like sports?
Speaker 1: I think she didn't understand them.  There was never any...  Now, her sister...  But, she didn't live... her sister, my aunt, lived in D.C. [District of Columbia] She didn't live there.  Now, her sister was a tremendous athlete.  But my mother was not athletic, and I don't think sports she just had an interest for.
Story_ID: 54078
Speaker 1: So at this point in your life, at any time had you ever asked your mom or inquired... or any questions about your real father [Ulysses Ford]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I know him.  I mean, I didn't talk about him that much and ask about him that much, no.
Speaker 1: Did he come around?
Speaker 2: No, I told you, he disappeared.  We didn't, I did not see...  He came back to town when I was 27 years old.  I'll never forget, he went to his sister's house, my aunt.  And my brother was down there, Fred [Frederick Ford], the one that's in Michigan now.  And I'll never forget, I was at the club.  My brother called me and said, "Hey, man, come down to Aunt Josie's house.  Your daddy's here."  My brother I and talk about... like, we'll say "Your mama."  But, and I didn't believe him, I thought he was joking.  And sure enough, I went there and there he was.  But I mean, I'd always...  My mother had pictures of him.  My grandmother [Geraldine Kizer Ford Brown] who I spent a lot of time with, which was her son, had pictures of him.  So, I knew what he looked like.  I remembered him.  And so--
Speaker 1: How old were you when he--
Speaker 2: I was like six or seven, eight at the most when he left.  I always say six.  It was somewhere around in there.  And I know I was 27 when he came back.  And but I remember my mother...  Anytime that I, early on, that I ever... even when I was grown... and I said anything negative about my father, my mother would chastise any of us.  She would stop us right in our tracks and say, "No, that's your father."
Speaker 1: Why do you think she did that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think that maybe it, in that day and time, that was the norm.  I mean, my mother never re-married, and consequently she would not let a child be sassy about an adult, even if it was, in my mind, a deserting father.  But she would always say... okay, when I was younger, she'd smack me upside the head.  But even as an adult, she would cut me off and say "No, that is your father, and you will not speak of him that way."
Speaker 1: Did your grandfather [Fred Tate] ever say anything?  Or your grandmother?
Speaker 2: No, my granddaddy never...  My granddaddy didn't seem to harbor any ill will against my father, except for the fact that he didn't take care of us.  And that's where I am now with it.  It's, it wasn't so--I guess I understand that two people cannot make it in a relationship.  I mean, I've seen so much of that, and I can understand and appreciate that.  What I can't see is, even if he left town, I mean, he did not support us one iota.  He never sent my mother one red nickel.  He never...  And what was so surprising when he got back, through my aunt and grandmamma, he had really kept us with us.  He was reciting things that occurred while we were growing up that I had forgotten.  My middle brother [Frederick Ford], I'm real proud of him, proud of both of them.  But my middle brother won the science fair for the whole state of North Carolina, okay, competing against white and black.  He won the science fair in like the late fifties [1950s].  Unheard of.  He was written up in Jet as well as the others.  But see to us, Jet was it, not the white papers and stuff. (Laughter).  You know, Life, we didn't care about Life and Look--I mean he was in Jet.  And he knew about that.  I mean, quite an accomplishment.  My brother is, my brother is a heavy dude.  And he knew about that.  He knew about my playing ball.  He knew about my scholarships.  He knew about my kids.  He knew about some of the other things that I accomplished, some of the other things that had come my way.  And I said--you know, I listened.  Not one time did he drop a line, did he pick up the phone.  He didn't do anything to offer any help, support, or anything.  And that says a lot of things to me.  None of them were good, okay.  And I know what I'm feel in here, and what I can't seem to get beyond.  But I just, I haven't, don't know that I ever will.
Story_ID: 54079
Speaker 1: So, now we're back to having graduated from high school [West Charlotte High School in North Carolina], and going off to Talladega.
Speaker 2: Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama.
Speaker 1: What did you want to be when you went to college?  Did you have any idea like what you wanted to major in?
Speaker 2: What I was saying at that time was that I wanted to be an electrical engineer.  What had happened in '57' [1957], was that Russia sent up Sputnik, and there was a tremendous push in this country to catch up with Russia.  And so, there was a real hue and cry about majoring in the natural sciences, and going into engineering and physics, and this kind of stuff.  I'd always loved math, and that was always my strongest subject.  And science, physics, chemistry, I did... I never did well in biology; but I always did well in physics and chemistry.  And I cannot tell you where this notion of an electrical engineer came from.  But that was all over the... you know, we need more this, that, and the other.  And for some reason, I picked up on I wanted to be an electrical engineer.  So, I went away to college to major in math, because Talladega did not have an engineering department... to major in math and then go to engineering school.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mentor and teacher, Mr. Pyles, have anything to do with that?  He was your math teacher--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, yeah, absolutely.  He, he supported that notion wholeheartedly.  As long as you're in the natural sciences, he didn't care.  I mean, as long as you were doing great academically, he didn't care.  He was a tremendous individual.  I currently do... he died four years ago now.  And I do a scholarship... I go back each year and do a scholarship in his name for a needy African American student who's going to an historical black college [HBCU] majoring in the natural sciences.  And we have three students in.  We have a junior at South Carolina State [University in Orangeburg, South Carolina], her name is Dreena Marie Howard.  We have a sophomore at Johnson C. Smith, and we have a freshman at Winston-Salem State [University in Winston-Salem, North Carolina].  And this year, hopefully, I'll go back and we'll get another student.  And I do that in his name each year.  And I'd like to get a student, you know, have four at a time and just... just keep that going.  And they're doing extremely well, and I'm really pleased.  But I really... he is one of the individuals that I feel I owe so, so, much to.
Speaker 1: He was like another father?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Not only that.  He, I mean from an academic... I cannot tell you that I was academically inclined.  I mean, things just seemed to come fairly easy to me.  I didn't, I mean I studied, but I didn't really have to bone.  Like, even through college, I didn't... like everybody else, I was busy playing ball and trying to run the young ladies, that kind of thing, you know.  But I was always able to get good grades, and that kind of stuff.  But he made me want to learn.  He, he opened up that whole academic arena to me.  And, and I mean he was a hard taskmaster, but you knew... you never felt like he had an agenda, except that you do well.  And although he did this for hundreds, maybe even thousands of students, you felt like he was doing it just for you.  (Laughter).  You know, even though you knew you were sitting in a room with 25 or 30 other students that were getting the same thing from him that you were getting--I mean Mr. Pyles was yours.  Know what I mean?  I've never had another teacher like him.  I mean I've had other individuals that's powerful in my life. But never in all of my... all the way through undergrad, I never had a teacher as powerful as him.  He made me want to learn and to see a value in that.
Speaker 1: You still carry that on today, huh?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 54080
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned two other instances of inequities... racial inequities... that you saw growing up.  When you were 14 in the Boy Scouts, and you saw the other camp was different.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: When you were 15 and you worked on the roof with your grandfather, and saw their school, and how it was different.  Now, you're a young man at Talladega [College in Talladega, Alabama] in 1961 in the midst of, the beginning of the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: It played a real--
Speaker 1: So, that played a role in your life?
Speaker 2: Quite a factor in my life, yes.  First of all, remember the summer of 1961 was the summer of the Freedom Riders.  There were busses burned in Birmingham [Alabama], and a couple other places.  But there was also one burned in Anniston, Alabama, which was 20 miles from Talladega.  And I'll never forget, initially, my parents [Roberta Ford] were going to send me to Talladega on the train.  The train stopped in Anniston, okay.  And you either had to catch a bus from Anniston to Talladega, or the college would pick you up in the college station wagon or van.  And I can remember in late August seeing that bus burn in Anniston, and telling my mama if they didn't take me, I wasn't going.  (Laughter).  So, I'm seeing all of this.  I guess the first notion... seems like Greensboro [Woolworth's sit-in in Greensboro, North Carolina] was '59' [1959] or '60' [1960], maybe even '58' [1958], I can't remember exactly. But it was a couple years before I went, at least a year, before I went to school.  And SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was raising sand in Nashville [Tennessee].  I mean they were, they were the bomb, as the kids would say today.  And so, I, you know, I was real nervous when I realized that that--while I was going to the train station, it was the same city where a mob had burned that bus.  So, my grandfather [Fred Tate] and my mother took me to college and drove me down.  I remember getting there and almost immediately falling in love.  I thought it was one of the most beautiful campuses I'd ever seen.  I'd been on a few college campuses.  My senior year, we went on our senior trip to A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University in Greensboro, North Carolina], which is where I really wanted to go to school.  Johnson C. Smith University was right there in my hometown [Charlotte, North Carolina], great school, knew a lot of people up there.  I had scholarships there, too.  So, I knew what college campuses looked like and stuff.  But Talladega, there seemed to be something about this.  It was a pretty, pretty campus.  I learned that one of the buildings--and I didn't realize it, but I was really admiring... I've got a picture of it upstairs... it was built by slaves.  They made the brick out of sand and straw, okay.  The campus was built by slaves; there were thirty--the initial three buildings.  As a matter of fact, one of the buildings burned, and they made enough off selling the brick to re-build the building.  That's how valuable that brick was.
Story_ID: 54081
Speaker 1: My freshman year [at Talladega College] [1961] I got to meet and be involved with the next important person in my life.  It was Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.].  For some reason, I was elected president of my freshman class.  I was fortunate enough to be elected president of my class all four years.  But I was elected president my freshman year.  There was a young lady named Dorothy Vails, who had been involved in the movement, Civil Rights Movement, at Southern University [and A&M College in Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and who had been put out of school.  Because one of the things...  They would put pressure on schools to get students to stop, and the school would do that.  And if the student didn't, in some instances they would put the student out.  Well, Dorothy Vails, along with some others, were put out of Southern, and she came to Talladega.  She was a music major, a beautiful voice, beautiful voice.  Dorothy was a senior when I got there, and she was starting up the movement on Talladega's campus.  And I'll never forget.  I was coming from basketball practice one night.  This was the fall of '61' [1961], my freshman year.  And somebody said, "Hey, you've got to go to a meeting."  The girls' dorm had facilities in the basement where we would, where we used to meet.  As a matter of fact, I understand in the early days, that was the girls' basketball gym.  But we would go over there and meet.  So, they said, "Hey, you got a meeting over at Foster."  So, I went over, and there was Dorothy Vails with some other people, talking about the Civil Rights Movement.  And I'll be honest with you.  At first I didn't really grasp what was going on.  Like I said, I knew that there was segregation, you know, and all of that.  But I never thought about civil rights, or doing something against this system that was in America.  But I remember going to that first meeting, and Dorothy talking about this non-violent movement with this organization called SCLC, Southern Christian Leadership Conference, that she wanted to be involved with.  She had been involved with SNCC and she, for some reason, she couldn't do some more with them, evidently.  I don't know the story.  But she said, you know, but we can get involved with this group.  And so, we continued to meet weekly, then it got to be more frequent.  Then we began to have simulation exercises.  And just like football, practice is always tougher than the game.  (Laughter).  But we would actually set up situations.  Like, if we were going to demonstrate at a lunch counter, we'd set up a lunch counter.  We'd have people to play the part of people that worked there.  We'd have people to play the part of the mob.  We've have people to play the part of police, and so forth and so on.  And then we would come in... and we would taught how to dress.  Like, we couldn't wear belts.  In those days, tie pins were popular, and you couldn't wear that.  You couldn't wear anything... you couldn't carry pencils or pens... anything that could be perceived as a weapon.  Because you would get charged with, you know, something, you know--heavy-duty felonies.  We were taught how to protect ourselves when being beaten.  And I mean, like I say, I mean the guys and girls that were playing the mob took it... (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Seriously.
Speaker 1: And don't let one of your friends be on... you know... knowing that you can't... that you aren't supposed to strike back.  And I'm serious, it did, it reminded me of football practice.  And you know, I don't know if you played football, but the game would go by like that.  And you, sometimes you didn't even sweat, you know.  But practice, I mean, you get worn out.  And that's the way this was.  And we did this for months--practice, practice, practice.  During this time also...  Oh, we talked to...  There were a couple of white people that I got relations with.  One was the minister at the school, and the other was Bob Zellner.  Bob Zellner was white, but he was working with... Now, Bob may have been with SNCC.  He might have been with SNCC at the time.  But he was an organizer.  And the thing I remembered about him is he could blow perfect smoke rings.  He smoked a pipe.  (Laughter).  He could blow perfect smoke rings.  That was the first time I ever saw anybody do that.  But Bob came down and he instructed us in the philosophy of non-violence, and he was very good.  Evidently he had been in freedom rides and sit-ins.  He'd worked in Mississippi, which was supposed to be the hell hole in those days.  I think all the South was.  Mississippi was bad, but don't let anybody think that it was any worse than anywhere else.  I mean, people got killed all over the South in those days, and even before those days.  But anyway, Bob Zellner came down and participated in our training.
Story_ID: 54082
Speaker 1: But the momentous occasion in my life was when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came to campus.  And again, as luck would have it, or fate, or whatever you want to call it...  The three rooms that we would have for male guests on campus were in my dorm.  And the one Dr. King was in was on my floor, right across the hall from... our doors faced each other across the hall.  [HM] Jesse Jackson came with him, it was the first time I met Jesse.  And I know if Dr. King were alive, I don't see a reason why he would remember me, as I don't see a reason why Jesse would.  But I did get to meet them.  And I can remember--because Dr. King came back a couple times--that we would sit in his room on his bed and talk till daylight.  He was talking about all kind of things.  He was very knowledgeable about what other things were going on in the world, whether it was sports or politics or whatever.  And I can remember--not just me, I mean there were three or four of us.  It was Tracy, my roommate at that time, and we sat there and talked with Dr. King.  And sure enough, the day finally came, in the spring of '62' [1962], still my freshman year.
Story_ID: 54083
Speaker 1: It was Easter Sunday, as a matter of fact.  No, no, wait, that wasn't the first one.  The first one was before Easter.  We went down to--I was arrested three different times.  The first time was at, not Walgreens.  What was the drug store back in those days?  It'll come to me in a minute.  But we went down there--S and S Kresge [sic, S. S. Kresge]--and we sat in at the lunch counter.  And of course they arrested us and charged us with "trespass after warning," and took us to jail.  And in those days, although--and there was a black farmer there that owned half the county, okay.  And he would put up his land as our bond, okay.  So, we didn't have to stay in jail.  And those are some stories that go untold about the movement.  I know we hear about Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and [Hm] Jesse [Jackson], and [HM] Julian Bond--and they did great things.  Please don't get me wrong, they did.  But there were people--I think this guy's last name was Sykes, S-Y-K-E-S.  And like I said, he was black, and owned they say half the county.  But he would put up his land as our bond.  The first time, there were 54 of us arrested, I'll never forget that.  And none of us were from Alabama.  So, the article in the paper was that the school was a boarding house for out-of-state agitators.  (Laughter).  That Alabama knew how to treat its coloreds, and that these outsiders were coming here just raising a ruckus.  Eventually people from Alabama did get in the movement.  But initially there were none, all of us were from someplace else.  But each time we'd get arrested we'd stay in jail for about a week, to dramatize it, to build it up in the media.  The press would come down and so forth.  I'll also never forget the first time we were arrested.  Oh, one of my classmates...  Oh, I had a couple of other white... Oh, I can't...  My major head, Dr. Carol Bross, was white.  And she had a daughter there named Carol also, who was in my class.  And Carol was arrested with us the first time we were arrested, she was one of the 54.  So Carol, you know, she was the only little white girl with all of these black people.  And so we go down to the, we get to the jail.  They arrest us, we get to the jail.  And so, they're filling out the police report.  And this guy is sitting there hunting and pecking on the typewriter.  And I mean it's a...  And he gets to me, and he's "What's your name?"  I said, "Ulysses."  "Huh?"  "Ulysses."  "Spell that."  Especially in the South, I guess they never wanted to hear Ulysses Grant, you know.  But I just thought about that.  (Laughter).  I guess he didn't want to hear that.  But anyway, I mean he was hunting and pecking.  So Carol said, "Get up, move, move... move."  (Laughter).  And she sat down and typed out our...  Carol was a proficient typist, and she sat down and typed out all our police records, you know.  We stayed in jail a week and then, you know, we enacted the bonds and we got out.  And the next one was at a movie theatre.  And that one was, really got ugly, because someone in the crowd threw some mustard gas.  And I didn't, I was... I'd already taken away, I'd already been arrested.  But I tell you, when they brought in some of my friends... that mustard gas...  Like one, Gerald... and William Woods... I can't remember Gerald's last name.  But they had gotten some of it flush in the face, and their face was swollen.  And evidently this stuff was not only an irritant to your lungs... It was the same stuff they used in World War II, well, World War I.  And not only was it an irritant to your lungs, but evidently was an irritant to your skin if it got on you.  And they were, they were rough.  Oh, and another funny occasion in that very first demonstration...  In addition to those of us that would go down and actually participate, individuals who in the rehearsal couldn't get through the non-violent part, would get other roles.  And one of their roles was observer.  So, as a matter of fact, Eddie Wright, he was from Macon [Georgia].  He lives in Detroit [Michigan] now, plays a mean saxophone.  But Eddie couldn't make it.  I mean, he'd last... then almost at the end, he'd jump up and start fighting, you know, and people were beating him.  (Laughter).  So, he became an observer.  Because we would have--because they said, "Now, everybody's that's participating, you're going to be so--you know, nerved up, that you won't--can't observe what's going on around you,  and who's doing what."  So, we would have observers strategically placed to record what was going on.  So, Eddie's spot was standing out in front of the store, a route that we were supposed to walk and come into the store.  So, we were in and all that.  And we heard that a group of guys, white guys, came by.  I saw Eddie standing there and saying, "That's one of them."  Grabbed Eddie and threw him through this plate glass window of this store.  And they arrested Eddie for disturbing the peace, breaking and entering, and inciting a riot.  (Laughter).  And when we, when we got to jail, here comes Eddie.  And we say, "What are you doing here?"  (Laughter).  Eddie said, "Man, I was just standing there doing what I was supposed to do."  But anyway, so we got through that first time, and got out.  And then we went to the movie theater.
Story_ID: 54084
Speaker 1: And on Easter Sunday--all of this is still that same spring [1962].  That Easter Sunday--Talladega [College in Alabama] is a Congregationalist school.  I'd never heard of that until I got down there.  There's six in the country, black, that they built.  They're all down there in Tuscaloosa [Alabama].  And I don't know if you heard, Talladega is one.  So, we'd decided we'd go to the churches of our natural denominations.  So we wrote them all letters that we were coming.  Like, I'm a Methodist.  So, I wrote the Methodist church and said, "Hey, on Easter Sunday, I'm coming to worship with you."  And we went there, and when we got there, they were waiting.  Two steps of men... some of the biggest men I've ever seen, standing there and blocking our way so we couldn't get in.  And so, we were supposed to kneel our heads and pray.  And I told somebody else, that's why I don't bow my head when I pray anymore.  (Laughter).  We bowed our head, and got shoved around and beat up a little bit.  Well, eventually they left and went on inside the church, so we went in, you know.  They stopped the service and arrested us.  By this time, this is my the third time.  There was a lieutenant on the police force.  His name was Lieutenant Morrison, I'll never forget him.  He was southern, but he did have what I perceived to be a sense of right and wrong, okay.  I mean, he would use "nigger" and that kind of stuff, but he wouldn't let the mob just take advantage of you.  And I remember like this time when we were arrested.  And this time, they charged us with conspiracy to overthrow the government of Alabama.  The rest of them were kind of like misdemeanors.  They put this new law on the book, and this one was a $50,000 fine and 20 years hard labor.  But anyway, and this time they took us to county jail instead of city jail.  And I was the leader of my group.  And in each group, the leader, when you got arrested, would make the one phone call that was allowed.  And so, I went over to--I asked for my phone call.  And the county jailer slammed the phone across the desk.  So, I walked around the desk to pull the phone back, and I was sitting in his chair dialing.  He came and grabbed me and knocked me up against the wall, and he was getting ready to do me a job.  And Morrison stepped in and said, "Hold it, wait a minute.  We don't do that.  He has a right to that phone call.  You let him make it, don't you beat him up."  And so, he would do things like that if he was around.  Not that he... I don't perceive that he had any love lost for blacks, but I think it was his sense of what his duty was as a police officer.  I think he took that seriously.  And when he was around, you could tell, the rest of them straightened up, too.  They weren't as even verbally as abusive when he was around, as when he wasn't.
Speaker 2: Now, your mother [Roberta Ford] and grandfather [Fred Tate], did they know about--
Speaker 1: They did not know.  No, they did not know.
Speaker 2: How was that?
Speaker 1: If they had known, my mama probably would have come down there and beat me to...  Now, my grandfather, interestingly enough...  And they didn't find out until a story was carried in the local black paper back home, the Charlotte Post.  And I think it was maybe even carried in the major media, too.  But anyway, they found out and called me and asked me was I...  I said yeah.  My granddaddy said, "Well, Bo, if any of them crackers down there do anything to you, you shoot them and call me, and I'll be down there to get you."  (Laughter).  I said, "Okay, Granddaddy, but what I'm going to shoot them with?"  You know, "Okay, don't worry, Bo, I'll be down there to get you."  I said, "Okay."  But no, they, oh, my mama was scared to death.
Story_ID: 54085
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us your mother's [Roberta Ford] thoughts about your activities [in college].
Speaker 2: Oh, boy.  When my mother found out about it, she called me at school [Talladega College in Alabama].  And the thing was her concern about my personal safety.  I think, you know, people have heard the expression, "I sent you there for an education," and all that.  I don't remember my mama mentioning that.  She was concerned about me being hurt.  This is 1962 now, and the Civil Rights Movement--especially with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], and Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], and with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]--was really going full blast.  And it was being met with tremendous resistance.  I mean, Birmingham [the 1963 Civil Rights campaign in Birmingham, Alabama organized by the SCLC, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., James Bevel, and Fred Shuttlesworth] hadn't happened yet.  Leading up to that was as bloody and violent as that was.  [Eugene] "Bull" Conner had just made international news when he turned those fire hoses on kids.  But leading up to that, kids were being beaten in Orangeburg, South Carolina.  And at South Carolina State University, three black guys were handcuffed, put down on the pavement face down, and shot in the back of the head.  A lot of people don't remember... I remember that.  Those were, yeah, those were the kinds of things that were happening in this timeframe, okay.  And all over Mississippi in voter registration drives, people were disappearing, getting killed.  I'm trying to remember the brother's name that was so big down there.  He's a math teacher, as a matter of fact.  I think now he's teaching in New York.  I'll try to remember his name.  Heck of a brother--had more guts than I think I'll ever have.  But anyway, my mother was just upset with all of these things.  And one of the positive influences for the Civil Rights Movement in America was the media.  America really hated being depicted this way.  And in those days, the media covered that movement, and especially Dr. King and SNCC.  John... he's a Congressman now.
Speaker 1: Lewis.
Speaker 2: Yeah, [HM] John Lewis and [HM] James Bevel.  And I can't remember Dorothy's name.  But they were some brave people.  They had started in Nashville [Tennessee] years before this.  They started in the late fifties, I think.  The SCLC was the new organization, because CORE had been around awhile with James Farmer, and he was big in the Freedom Rides.  And so, all of this violence, my mother was seeing on TV, and that's what she was reacting to.  And when I showed her I was alright and that nobody had beat me up... which wasn't true...  At that lunch counter, a white guy put out a cigarette on the back of my neck.  But that was the only violence I...  I'd been slapped around a couple of times, but nothing bad.  Like I said, never nothing worse as football practice.
Story_ID: 54086
Speaker 1: Now your mother [Roberta Ford] had seen, I'm sure, some terrible segregation.  She worked for white folks.  Did she, what were her feelings on how this needed to work out?
Speaker 2: I think my mother, I really don't remember her reaction to the Civil Rights Movement, except that I was okay.  Now, my granddaddy [Fred Tate] thought that this was a long time coming.  My granddaddy, I can remember--like I mentioned, my aunt lived in D.C. [District of Columbia], and his other daughter.  And we would drive... and back in those days that it was a twelve hour drive from Charlotte [North Carolina].  Today I think it's a little over six, maybe seven hours, with the freeways.  But back then you had to go through the mountains, you know.  And there were certain stops that we knew where we could stop and use the restroom.  Because I remember my granddaddy stopping at a service station.  And in those days, they serviced your car; there was no self-service.  And while the guy--he'd tell the guy to fill it up.  And he'd say, "Where are your restrooms?"  And the guy would point us around back.  And my granddaddy said, "No, if I'm going to buy your gas..." he said, "Well, stop pumping."  And my granddaddy carried a 38 that he called "Shorty."  (Laughter).  Okay, it was a little snub-nosed 38.  And lots of people knew my granddaddy didn't play.  And he would tell them, "You stop right there then."  And I remember one time my mother was sick when we were going to D.C., or coming on our way back.  And he threatened the service station owner, a guy that was working there.  He told him my mother was going to use that restroom, or they were going to come in and find him dead in the morning.  (Laughter).  So, my granddad... I remember a statement he made.  We were... because the [Ku Klux] Klan... when we started demonstrating, the Klan came and burned a cross on the faculty's dorm [at Talladega College in Alabama], the faculty dorm lawn.  And so, I was telling my granddaddy about it, and my granddaddy said, "Yeah, Bo, it used to be we ran from them sheets.  But now, we shoot at them, and see what's in 'em."  (Laughter).  So, my granddaddy was the one that saw this as a long time coming.  Because I can remember his words.  He told some white boy one time, "I'll slap the ham sandwich out of you."  (Laughter).  I never heard my granddaddy curse, never heard my granddaddy...  He didn't smoke, and to my knowledge he didn't drink or nothing like that.
Story_ID: 54087
Speaker 1: So, you didn't have any fear when you were in these marches?  You didn't have any fear that something would happen?
Speaker 2: I can remember fear, but not to the extent that I wouldn't go do it.  Even in my high school yearbook, you know, where you put your motto?  My motto is, "Do the things you fear, and the death of fear is certain."  I can't remember when I first read that, and I can't remember who made the quote.  But I remember being struck by that when I first read it.  And I can remember like in the movement... I mean, being afraid... or going to school, you know, before a big game, or going to a gang fight.  So, I can remember being afraid.  But I would say to myself, "If you do this, you'll kill fear."
Speaker 1: And so, when you heard about Medgar Evers and you heard about the Freedom Riders in Mississippi--
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't necessarily get so afraid that that would cause me not to react, but to do something.  I'm not saying that I didn't have some nervousness or fear, fear even.  But I still think you've got to go do it.
Speaker 1: Now, besides--
Speaker 2: But Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] said, "If there ain't something you will die for, then you don't deserve to live."  That's paraphrasing it. (Laughter).
Story_ID: 54088
Speaker 1: Now, besides Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and [HM] Jesse Jackson, there's another important person you met while you were at Talladega [College in Alabama].
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Talk about that, please.
Speaker 2: My sophomore year in college, I met the lady that I've now been married to for 37 years.  And we dated for two years in college.  Her maiden name is Beverly Ann Odom.  She's from here in Macon [Georgia].  Came to college as a freshman, really an early entrant.  She skipped a grade in secondary school, and she came out of high school after her junior year.  So, when she came to college, she was actually 15, until her birthday that March when she became 16.  I began to notice her, because at Talladega we would support the United Negro College Fund, Talladega being a UNCF school.  And to support that, and to have your--for our campaign, the class queens and their presidents would set at a special table in the dining room.  We served lunch and dinner family style at Talladega when I was there.  You only went through the line for breakfast.  And we had waiters, students.  That was the most prestigious job on campus, $30 a month, the highest paid job on campus.  (Laughter).  And so, I was president of my class.  She was queen of her class, okay, so she was at that table.  Now, I was a waiter, so I had to go take care of my duties and then come back to the table.  And then during the meal, you know, some program would be given to recognize the queens.  And it was all about raising money, you know.  Because the class that raised the most per capita, their queen got to go participate in the national.  And she said I scared her, for two things.  One, I was a sophomore, and I would come to the table and really talk junk to the seniors and juniors, and tell...  Because my class had won the year before, and my queen went.  But we were really embarrassed at the national, so I told them.  I was coming back just, you know, jiving, building it up.  "Y'all raise some money this year, so that my queen won't look so bad when she goes..." blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And she said that made her nervous.  And the other thing she said made her nervous was that--like I said, I played basketball.  And I played center in basketball, I'm not but 6'2".  But back in those days, that was...  And so, I was always guarding about the biggest guy.  And about every game, I'd end up in a fight.  (Laughter).  So, she thought that I was some thug.  But anyway... and she was, oh boy, just the most beautiful thing I ever seen.  Her brain... always been on the Dean's list.  Like I said, came out of school after her junior year, tested out, and had already skipped a grade.  Her roommate was dating one of my frat brothers.  Well, we were line brothers at the time.  And her roommate kept talking about me, in relation to James Shark, who was the guy she was...  And so she, she said yeah, she liked him.  So, what she--and she would tell this story.  This is one of those instances where I--how do you say that?  I ran after... she ran after me till I caught her?  Or whatever, or maybe vice versa.  What she would do is sit in the window of the girls' dorm.  The cafeteria was adjoined to the girls' dorm.  And she could see me after I'd come out.  After everybody ate, you had to clean up your station and set it up for the next meal.  So after the noon meal, she would sit in the window of the girls' dorm, and wait until I come out.  And then she would come out, and act like she was going to the mailbox.  (Laughter).  And she said she'd always try to start up a conversation with me.   Well, I was going to a class with a professor that didn't take any slack, so I had to be on time.  I mean, he didn't allow you to...  So, I was always rushing, always rushing.  But she'd be there every day, like she was mailing a letter.  And she said she was about to get discouraged, because I would never do more than just say something in passing.  One night... but I'd noticed her.  And even the guys in the dorm... because everybody was talking about this beautiful freshman girl.  And I'd noticed her, and so I knew that she was talking to this freshman guy.  And sure enough one night, one Friday night, I was coming across campus with a bunch of my drinking buddies (Laughter) and she was going in the movie with her boyfriend, standing in line to go in the movie.  Every Friday, there was a movie at the chapel.  So, I just stopped and said, "Hey, come on and go with me."  She said, "Well, no..."  I said, "Well, I'm going to the Union.  If you want to see me, I'll be over at the College Union."  So, I went over there.  And sure enough, she broke her date with him, and she came over.  And so we started, you know, we said a few things, sitting there talking.  And then we came out, and it was raining.  She had an umbrella, because she had come after I did.  And so she had...  So I said, "Hey, can I walk you back to the dorm under your umbrella and use your umbrella to go to my dorm, and I'll bring it to you at breakfast in the morning."  And she said, "It's a free country."  And she said I acted like I got mad.  So, she thought she had blown it, you know.  (Laughter).  But anyway, she didn't.  So I walked her to the dorm, and we talked.  And then after that... and then we started dating.
Story_ID: 54089
Speaker 1: Now another little interesting thing about that...  You know, like I said, my books...  As a matter of fact, my sophomore courses were pretty much the same as my senior year in high school, except I had German instead of French, that I took in high school.  And my chemistry book was the same book I used in high school.  (Laughter).  So, and I had tested out of freshman math, so I'm taking--my sophomore year I'm taking my senior math courses, because my freshman year I took my junior math courses.  And so, I'm, you know, I'm playing ball and running women and having a good time.  And some of her friends--and some of my friends that I thought were my friends--told her not to talk to me, because she was a nice girl, and I was this thug.  (Laughter).  As a matter of fact, you know how you have little sisters?  One of my little sisters even begged her not to talk to me.  "He's just no good.  He don't want but one thing, and you don't need...  You know, you're a nice girl, you don't need him."  And she said somebody even bet her that I wouldn't come pick her up in the dorm, which was standard.  At Talladega [College in Alabama], girls outnumbered boys four to one.  So, what you do... you didn't want to like get tied to one.  So, you'd go to the dance, and so you didn't take anybody.  You'd just go over there and, "Okay, tonight is your lucky night."  (Laughter).  And so, they bet I wouldn't do that.  Another one of my friend girls bet her a dress.  Another one bet her ten dollars, you know, that I wouldn't be no good and all of that stuff.  But she, from day one... from day one, she's been a very, very, very special person.  She is just tremendous, one of those people that's just special.  She's just very, extremely bright.  And as I mentioned, married to me for 37 years.  Something I didn't find out until later, was that her senior year she turned down a fellowship.  Because we got married my senior year [1965], we eloped.  (Laughter).  Didn't tell our parents until they came for my graduation.  We got married that February, and I graduated that May.  But her senior year, she was offered a fellowship that she turned down.  Every move we made, except this one, and we made several... I'm assuming we'll talk about later.  But every move we made was for my career.  And she has always been a career person.  But she would, we'd sit down and discuss it.  And she'd say, "Well, if you feel that this is going to be good for the family and you, we'll do it."  And she has made every one of those moves with me--moves that I--in some instances where I know that she would have preferred to not have gone, but she did.  Over the course, she's borne me three sons.  She's gotten a master's and a doctorate.  Since 1989, she's owned her own company and is doing extremely well, always has been.  Tremendous mother.  She's just, she's my life.  She is... I can't think of a thing that has happened in my life, especially since we've met, that a large part of it isn't due to her.  She's been so, so, supportive.  I can remember I was catching the devil... and we'll talk about this later.  One of my jobs in one of the cities I went to... and I can remember... and I was all upset.  And she said, "Baby, don't worry about it.  That moving sticker is still on the furniture.  If they don't want it, just tell them to kiss your ass, and we're going."  (Laughter).  You know, she's always been there.  And I haven't always been--I haven't always appreciated that and returned that.  And we can talk about that a little later.  There's some parts of my life I'm not very happy about.  But, but she is my special lady.  And we met there, got married there, and like I said, dated those two years, and got married in my senior year.  She went back to finish, and came to Charlotte [North Carolina] and has been there ever since, been there doing it.  She's a, she's the one that ought to be on HistoryMakers, in my mind.
Speaker 2: Well, we'd better get her on here.
Speaker 1: I think you might have to.
Speaker 2: Well, you didn't, I didn't see you put that recommendation in.
Speaker 1: No, I didn't, because of some things, and we'll talk about that later, too.
Story_ID: 54090
Speaker 1: But, so now you're finishing Talladega [College in Alabama], and you're married [to Beverly Ford]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it's as if the world is turning upside down.  The Civil Rights Movement was going on.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But you're graduating.  And now you're thinking, I have a wife to take care of, I need to get a job.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, what are your thoughts on what are you going to do now?
Speaker 2: Oh, and you're absolutely right.  I mean it shows you how non-thinking (Laughter) we were.  I didn't have a job, didn't have a job when we graduated.  Came back to Charlotte [North Carolina] that summer, seriously looked for jobs... couldn't find one.  Either I was over-qualified...  This is '65' [1965] now.  I was either over-qualified, or people knew with a college degree, you know, that just wouldn't work out.  So, I actually went back to the roofing company--something I'd done every summer from the summer between my sophomore and junior year in high school, all the way through college.  Even a few Christmas holidays when I was in college, I went back to the roofing company.  So, I went to the roofing company and I was working there.  I'll never forget, I went to apply for a job at North Carolina National Bank.  Being a math major, they said that--and computers were just coming on the scene, commercially.  And they were saying that that would be a great field for a math major.  And I went down, and they had about 30 or 35 of us in a room.  And to keep it non-biased, they assigned you a number when you went in.  And I was the only black in the room.  And they gave us a test, it was a two-part test.  And I'll never forget.  The guy came back in after the scoring, and he said, "I'm going to call the numbers of the top three.  And I'm going to ask you to move over to this room, and the rest of you, thank you for coming."  The first number he called was mine.  And I mean I was so shocked, I sat there for a while.  And everybody was looking around.  And then I stood up, and I mean you couldn't...  Even him, he was outdone, you know.  I went on in the room.  You know what, I never heard back from them... never heard back from them.
Story_ID: 54091
Speaker 1: So anyway, I was sitting there at the dinner table one day, got home from work.  My wife had circled in the paper that they were looking for a math teacher and basketball coach at Charlotte Catholic High, and I was familiar with Charlotte Catholic High.  It was predominantly a white school when I was growing up, but some of my friends that were Catholic had gone there.  As a matter of fact Edwina Lewis, the girl I told you was my first love, she was Catholic, and she had gone to the white--I'm sorry, to the girls' school.  In those days the Catholic schools were separated, boys and girls.  And another, oh, several of my good friends had gone to Catholic school.  So anyway, I'm thinking, "Ah, they don't want me."  She said, "No, go on and apply."  Sure enough, I went and applied and I got it.  But that didn't start until August, you know, when school started.  So, I finished out that summer working at the roofing company, and then went to Charlotte Catholic High School as the math teacher.  As a matter of fact, he made me chairman of the math department.  There was only one math teacher. That was me, (Laughter) so I was chairman of that department.  But I'll also never forget, my starting salary was four thousand dollars a year.  And I got over it 12... you could either get it over 12 months or 10 months.  And I got it over 12 months so that I could have some money next summer.  I didn't know if I wanted to go to school or something.  And I can remember I brought home $198 a month.  And I sent a hundred dollars of it to my wife at school, and the other ninety-eight, I lived off.  I lived with my mother's boyfriend.  He had a house, and he had given us a room for that summer in his house.  It was just him, so we basically had the run of the house.  So, that's where I stayed.  And he, I was supposed to pay him $25 a month for rent that he never took.  (Laughter).  And he was a chef in a country club, the big country club there.  So he, we always had good food, and all that kind of stuff.  And Horace Nelson was his name.  Everybody called him "Butch."  So, that's where we lived until Beverly graduated college, then we got our own apartment.  But I started teaching math and loved it, loved it.  Teaching was one of those things I fell... I just fell into it just like I did scouting.  I loved it.  Probably had a unique situation, in that I had small classes.  I didn't have the discipline problems there that you heard, even at that time, at some of the public schools.  Plus, I think being a coach gave you some kind of status, you know.  Because I remember the coaches, and even the coaches that didn't coach me--you know, like the track coaches--you gave some play.  You didn't mess with coaches.  (Laughter).  So, I only had four classes that I taught, pretty much all college preparatory.  As a matter of fact, I came up with a scheme, so that I could give them five years of math in four... in four years.  Because that's what I had when I was in high school.  So, my kids took trig [trigonometry] and calculus in high school.
Story_ID: 54092
Speaker 1: Now, did you reflect upon your experiences from Mr. Pyles when you worked with these kids?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how did that work?
Speaker 2: Truly, really enjoyed it.  Had a small group of black students.  And they had to sit me down, because they said... and I was glad they had enough guts to do it...  They said that I was tougher on them than I was on the white kids.  And that they didn't mind a hard taskmaster, but they wanted me to be fair, and not hold them to a tougher standard than the others.  They didn't... now they were really good kids.  They didn't mind standards, but they didn't want...  And I think subconsciously I was.  I wanted so much for them to succeed, that I think that I was more critical of them--harder on them, less lenient, you know, and that kind of stuff.  But after they pulled me to the side and talked to me, you know, I think we got on a good track.  I had some disappointing kind of things there, too.  Several of the white kids that were there were very, very, well off.  And I remember coming in the class one day, and this guy was talking about his nigger maid.  He said, "That nigger this, and that nigger that..."  And I said, "Chris, what are you... who... wait a minute."  He said, "Oh, Mr. Ford, we're not talking about you."  "What do you mean, you're not talking about me?"  "Oh, no, this is our maid.  She's not like you."  I said, "What the devil you mean, she's not like me?  She is."
Speaker 1: Do you think he understood that?
Speaker 2: And I don't... I think Chris and his brother, his brother even more than him...  Chris was younger, but he had another brother.  Both of them were extremely arrogant and racist.  And I, and I don't think... I don't know if "understood" is the right word.  He, he just didn't care.  I was perceived as different.  There was another black teacher there named Frank Parker, who became one of my best friends.  And he... because he said, "You and Frank are different."  Or Mr. Parker, he said Mr. Parker.  He said, "Y'all are different."  I said, "What about the other blacks?"  He said, "Oh, no."  And I don't think he was alone in his feelings, okay.  I mean he, and one or two others, were arrogant enough and comfortable enough that nothing would happen to them that they didn't have any problem saying and doing things like that--even with their classmates, their black classmates.  I was also coaching, as I mentioned.  And I can remember going to a gym.  And my trainer, my white tenth grade trainer, had to get me in, okay.  My team had gone on, had gone in the locker room.  And I was hanging around outside.  And I came up to the door, and the guy wouldn't let me in.  And I said, "But I'm the coach of the team."  "No, I don't want no niggers in here."  And my trainer came up, "Mr. Ford, what did he say?"  And he looked at him, and he said, "He's the coach of that team?"  And my trainer said, "Yeah, this is our coach.  This is Mr. Ford."  That's how I got in the gym.  Football game...  I wasn't a football coach at all, but you know, I supported the team.  And we went to play a team in, no, it was still in North Carolina; I can't remember where.  And at halftime when they were out doing their little routine, they turned out all the lights in the stadium.  We had a black halfback and defensive back.  That kid made all-state in football, basketball, and baseball.  He was a catcher in baseball; he was a guard in basketball.  He was one heck of an athlete.  And I don't know what ever happened to Harold.  But anyway, but I mean he was, had gotten a lot of notoriety because he was one heck of an athlete.  We went there, and at halftime they turned out the lights and burned a cross in the middle of the field, and said it was to reflect bringing that black player down there.  And there were other times I remember at a white Catholic school, the officiating was so bad that I had my player to throw me the ball.  And I took the ball and... all the other black people in the stands were beckoning at my friend, Frank.  And they said they were about to die.  They said I took the ball, and I said to the referee... I wanted to curse at the man.  And, but it was just that bad, you know.  And I used to coach my... I said, "You let the officials call the game, you play it.  They can't take points off the board."  That was a... they took points off the board.
Story_ID: 54093
Speaker 1: Now, I want to know what takes you out of teaching, out of the classroom, to the private sector--to the business world.
Speaker 2: Maybe personally, it's a shameful thing.  But for the American capitalistic system, it was the right thing.  I left for money.  I loved teaching.  I can't remember a day that I got up in the morning and didn't love going to work.  I can't say that about all my other jobs.  But I could never make enough money.  I taught for three years.  My third year, I made fifty-four hundred dollars.  My wife and I wanted to buy a house.  In order to get an eight hundred dollar down payment--which is all I needed in those days--she was working, and I was teaching and coaching and working thirty hours a week at Sears selling paint.  And the only reason I worked thirty is because they wouldn't let part-timers work more than thirty.  (Laughter).  If they had let me work forty, I would have worked forty.  And I cleaned up buildings at night, in order to get enough money for a down payment on a house.  My wife [Beverly Ford] was working at the newspaper that summer.  No, it wasn't, it was in the fall.  But somehow she heard about a job at Allstate for a claims adjustor.  And I forgot how she knew about it now or whatever.  But anyway, got me in for an interview and the test.  So, I said, I've always done...  So, I did perfect on that test.  And they said, "Hmm, do you mind taking one more test?"  I said, "No."  So, I took another test and made a perfect score on that one.  And they said, "Hmm, will you take this one, this one last one?"  And I said, "Okay."  And I took it, and I made 21 and a half out of 22.  And then I said, "Do you mind telling me where I missed the half point?"  And they showed me, and I said, "No, that's wrong."  And I was right, they were wrong; they didn't switch a minus sign.  (Laughter).  And so, I made a perfect score on that.  So, instead of claims adjustor, they offered me a job as an underwriter.  And they told me--whether or not this is true--that I would have been, that I was, the first black hired as an underwriter.  I understand that there was an agent in Alabama, I think, that had gone through the ranks and became an underwriter.  But--
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: This is 1968, a lot of things happening that year.
Story_ID: 54094
Speaker 1: And I had some real bad experiences out there.  And I guess I should have known from the beginning.  I'd been to work there [Allstate] about--well, first of all, they offered me the job like in March [1968], something like that, during the year.  And I said, "Well, fine, but I can't leave school now.  I can't leave them in a lurch.  Unlike public schools, where they've got teachers in the wings, they don't have anybody else.  I've got to finish out the year."  So I did, and I didn't go to work for them until June 1 of '68' [1968].  I'd been to work there about three or four weeks.  And my examiner--there were 425 people that worked in that building.  I was the only African American.  Even the... like it had its own cafeteria... they were white.  The janitorial staff was white, which was... blew my mind.  But anyway, I'd been there for a little while.  My examiner came to me and said, "You know," he said, "You're alright.  When they hired you, they called all the women into a mass meeting and told us, we are going to hire a colored fellow.  But he's a nice colored fellow.  So you all can go home and tell your daddies, and your husbands, and your uncles, and your brothers, that they don't have anything to worry about, because we checked this colored boy out, and he's a nice colored one."  So, that was kind of unnerving.  I think, too--not think, I know, up until that point you could, at least back in those days, you sometimes would question your education, as opposed to the education that the whites got from noted white schools.  So, I'm sitting in this room with these underwriters, and underwriting is supposed to be the elite of the company.  This is what makes or breaks the company.  You determine which business the company takes and which accounts the company counsels.  And it's your job to keep the bad stuff off, so that the company stays positive and grow... profitable and grow.  So, this is the elite of the company.  I'm sitting next to this white boy that graduated from Elon [University in Elon, North Carolina]--that in those days was supposed to be a good school.  That mother leans over to me, and asks me how to spell insurance.  Now, insurance is on the form that he's writing on.  (Laughter).  It is all around the room.  And I'm not lying.  I mean, this boy, comes over... and I look at his... He's starting sentences with small letters, the pronoun "I," words just terribly misspelled.  And he was just one.  But it just began to dawn on me, wait a minute.  And then I remembered that test I took three years earlier for North Carolina National Bank that they never called me back on.  And if they were telling the truth, I made the best score on that.  So, I'm beginning to think my education was alright.  And I mean, you go through... because you're hired as an underwriter trainee, then you go to underwriter, and account underwriter, and senior account underwriter.  It was supposed to take you three years, the way they had it planned out.  In a year and a half, I was senior account underwriter.  Because it was all studying the book and--
Speaker 2: Were you the first African American senior underwriter?
Speaker 1: Yes, to my knowledge.  Nobody ever told me that, but that's what I understand.
Story_ID: 54095
Speaker 1: Were you the only one there when you were there?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was the only there.  Now, whether they had some more in the country, I don't know.  Remember, Allstate was a national company.  Now, there were two other occurrences that just stand out in my mind now.  One... that was the year [1968] George Wallace was running for president.  And his ticket was very, very... or his platform... was very, very hateful and divisive and racist, and all of that stuff.  And remember, I'd been in Alabama when he was governor.  And I was there when George said, "I won't be out-niggered again."  That was the first time he lost.  Every, it seemed as though every pickup truck and car in the parking lot had a "George Wallace for President" sticker.  And all that could evolve from that, and happen from that, did.  But the straw, the proverbial straw...  As underwriters, we had to prepare what they call risk analysis, RA's, where you would write down why you were doing what you were doing.  And that risk analysis was kept in the file.  So, I'm looking through this file, it's up for renewal.  And I notice that this driver, this insured, has killed someone.  And we had been trained that anytime anybody is in a serious accident, let alone kill somebody, you basically cancel that.  Because if something happens in the future, then you're more culpable if you insure them.  So, I'm wondering why we're still on this.  So, I go back through the file till I find the risk analysis that is written by the guy who is, at that time he is an underwriter like me.  But now, he's not my immediate boss, he's the second in command.  He's my boss's boss.  And I look in that risk analysis, and it says, "Only killed the C-15, would continue."  C-15 was the code for black folks.  So in effect, what he said was, "Only killed the nigger, would continue."  The head of the underwriting department, and he and my boss were in a meeting where they would meet every month, every morning; they'd be in a meeting in the underwriter's office.  I don't know what I saw, but I was... oh... I mean...  So, I just took the file and just went in, just barged in the meeting and threw it on his desk.  His name was Art Ivy, I'll never forget that.  And he looked at it.  And he just looked up at me and said, "How did I know you were coming to work here when I wrote that?"  That did it; I started looking for a job right then.  I went to work there in June of '68' [1968].  This was like the middle of '69' [1969].  And the only reason I stayed longer, I had a collapsed lung and had to go in the hospital.  And I was in the hospital for I don't know long.  But it took me like about six months to recuperate.  And then that's, but then I had found another job and I left.  I just couldn't...  From that point on I just, I couldn't function there, with everything that was going on, and then that.  And about now, they had hired one black guy as a claims adjustor.  And I knew him when he was a kid, I knew his family.  I knew one of his brothers that was along the time of me.  But I even knew of him... and they hired him.  And that's when I, I just couldn't take it.  That place just weighed on me.  And I also think that was the serious beginning of my drinking.  But I'll talk about that later.
Story_ID: 54096
Speaker 1: But I had to get away from there [Allstate], because I was going to do something bad.  I had to get away from there, so I did.  I then got a job with The Equitable.  But now my job was selling, and that was a little better.  In that I was out in the field.  Had a fairly successful career, again, one of those deals where you were to remain a trainee for four years.  And I won, in my second year, I won the Trainee of the Year Award, which I was competing with people who had been there for four years, up to four years.  I became a district manager, and I think, in retrospect I think that happened too quickly.  I wasn't the first black they'd hired, but they were looking to get blacks into management.  And in retrospect--and nothing against them--I think they were doing everything they could.  But I think I went in to management prematurely.  In selling insurance, the key to your success is developing a good, strong book of business that continues to renew.  And also, now the kids are coming along, you know, and that kind of stuff.  And I'd been with them, I was with them two and a half years.  And I think after a year and a half, they promoted me to district manager, I made district manager.  Now as district manager, you're responsible for growing your book of business, too.  But you're supposed to bring in and develop other sales people and get them up to... and their levels they have to make... and that kind of stuff.  And that really drug on my, on developing my personal book of business.  And I just think it was just premature.  So, and in my personal life at that time, we had two kids, and my wife was pregnant with the third.  And she's working at the University of North Carolina, she's teaching out there, and working on her master's.  And she says, "I need some help."  Because I was--I was leaving home in the morning before they got up, and I was getting home at night after they were in the bed--trying to do my business--the people I was trying to hire, and all of that stuff.  And seems like I wasn't very good at who I'd bring in.  I was bringing in friends at first, you know, and that wasn't... You know, "Hey man, I need a job."  "Okay."  (Laughter).  That just didn't work.  So, I didn't do well as a district manager there.  But I do think--and this is in retrospect--maybe I never would have done well.  But I think if I had really gone through maybe four or five years of just selling--and developing my book of business--and then maybe taking a crack at that.
Speaker 2: So, how did those pressures affect you?  How did they express themselves?
Speaker 1: I think my... I think I've always had a strong desire to succeed, to be good.  I don't make any bones about wanting to be, if not the best, certainly as good as I can be.  And I do view that as a failure.  I don't know that everybody would call it that, but I do.  I didn't develop any people.  I didn't keep my book of business going strong.  And so, I view it as a failure.
Story_ID: 54097
Speaker 1: So, did you start drinking at this time?
Speaker 2: I was drinking when I was at Allstate.  That's when I... and oddly enough, it was only beer.  Because up to that time, you know, I'd fashion myself a little junior athlete, you know.  And the only time I'd drink is at frat parties or something.  (Laughter).  I mean, you know...  But no, I, I think I started... and I don't know...  You know, like they say, you never know when you cross the line and become...  It's kind of hard to... I don't know when that happened, but I do know that I was drinking at the, when I was working there.  And--
Speaker 1: Would you say that was the pressures of the job?
Speaker 2: You know, I, and that's something else, too.  I know that in dealing with my alcoholism, supposedly... not supposedly.  There's enough research that says that there's something that typically drives you to it--for lack of a better word.  But I don't know what mine was.  You know, you hear people talking about the wife left, or poor health, or finances went through the... hell in a hand basket... house burned down and the dog left.  I didn't have any of that.  I think when you look at where my life was--very loving and adoring wife and family, and mother, friends, and decent job...  I mean, I don't know what it was.  I do know that part of my mine was physiological.  One of the reasons I was so skinny... I'm learning all of this... is because I had a high rate of metabolism.  And of course, getting drunk, that's all it is, alcohol gets into your blood system and deprives you of oxygen, which makes you lightheaded and drunk.  Well, I would be drunk really the second or third drink, but I would keep drinking, because my metabolism was so high.  And then I would go into blackouts, and wouldn't remember.  When I came out of the blackout, I wouldn't remember what I did when I was in the blackout.  And people that didn't know me well, didn't even know I was drunk when I was in the blackout.  You know, because I didn't slur or stumble, or any of that kind of stuff.  And you just get into another physiological mindset.
Speaker 1: How was your job performance at this time?
Speaker 2: I'm sure it was lousy.  But evidently, I was getting by.  And I didn't reach, it didn't reach the state of just being--you know, recognizing that I was a problem until I had left The Equitable and went to work for the city of Charlotte [North Carolina] in '72' [1972].  But I was drinking--when I got out of school, I was not a drinker.  I mean, that's just wanted something I did.  Like I said, sometimes at special occasions I might have a beer, and that was it.  But then at Allstate... because every Friday...  For one thing, the crew of underwriters, we played ball.  So, we would go, you know, we'd go to the ballpark and play ball, and then go somewhere and drink.  And you know, and every Friday we'd go bowling, and we'd do the same thing.  And so, I started there.  You know, I don't want to put it on the pressures of--I don't want to think I was that weak and gullible, but I probably was.  But in terms of having a real sad or adverse personal life that drove me to drinking, I can't pinpoint whatever it was.  Although I know it had to be something there--and maybe that was a big part of it, but I don't know.
Story_ID: 54098
Speaker 1: So, what moved you on from The Equitable to the City of Charlotte [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Like I said, my wife wanted...  Like I said, I wasn't doing well there.  And then a newspaper article came out.  The Public Works Department in Charlotte was being challenged by the Department of Labor.  Because a year earlier they had been there, the Department of Labor, and had noted that the department, sixteen hundred employees, did not have any black employee higher than an equipment operator.  Most of them were laborers--no foremen, no supervisors, no division heads, nobody in the offices--okay, nobody.  And this guy, Robert Hopson, you know, said... and a line that was common back then... this is '72' [1972]... that they had been looking, but they just can't find any qualified.  And seriously, I sat down on an old IBM Selectric--I don't know if you remember that typewriter, and typed out a line that said, a little letter, that said, "I read with interest your article in the Charlotte Observer" on such and such a date.  "Attached is my resume.  I am black, and I am qualified."  And Sam, at that time, I didn't know what a public administrator was.  I only knew that there were policemen, firemen, and garbage men, and every now and again you saw somebody leaning on a shovel in the street.  I didn't know (Laughter) what the other services, cities did.  And I didn't know, you know, really, what that was all about.  But, and this also no joke.  Like if they got my letter on Tuesday, Friday I was in there for an interview, okay.  At the time, another little story...  At the time, Charlotte had seven council members elected at large.  One was an African-American, Fred Alexander, one of those funeral homes I was telling you about, of Alexander Funeral Home.  My... one of the Alexander boys had graduated from high school with my mother, Zack Alexander.  And in those days, and I imagine they still do, black funeral homes gave out calendars every December... and fans.  But they gave out calendars, and Mr. Alexander would let my brothers and me come over and deliver calendars, to make a little extra money.  So, I'd been knowing--you know, they'd been knowing me since I was born.  Fred was out of the country, okay, when they interviewed me.  But they wanted to run it by him, to make sure I was alright.  Well, that was--you know, the rabbit and the briar patch.  (Laughter).  Because when they called...  When Fred got back to town, he said, "Oh yeah, I know him, he's a good boy."  And so, they hired me.  And I came on as an administrative assistant to the director, Robert Hopson.  And he told me, he said, "Euly," he said, "I've never worked this closely with a black before."  He said, "I was a colonel..." I think it was, "...in the Army, and I had like an aide de camp."  And he said, "That's the closest I've ever worked with a black person before."  He said, "In addition to that, I really don't know what your job is.  So, we're going to learn together."  And that turned out to be a good thing, and we'll talk about that.  So, that's how I got to the city.
Story_ID: 54099
Speaker 1: The other thing that just stands out in my mind... There was an elderly black gentleman that was a custodian [in the Public Works Department].  And every day, he would come into my office and just wipe around and dust off, and emptied my trash.  And it was embarrassing to me, you know.  I'm going, "This black man don't need to do this for me."  And so, finally one day I just... it ended up about two or three days... and I said, "Sir, please, I don't mean no harm.  And don't take me wrong, I really appreciate what you're doing.  But please, you don't have to come in here."  He said, "No, no, Son, you don't understand.  You don't know what it does for me to come in here and see you sitting at that desk."  I didn't recognize what that meant to him, you know.  And he would tell me the stories of stuff he had to take off people, how nasty they were to him, and how they would dirty up something and then just call him in to clean it up, and just had no, no thought about his feelings or anything.  And he was just proud to see me there, and he just wanted to come in and see me sitting there.  And he would come by my office every day.  He retired... to show you how elderly he was, he retired a couple of months after I went to work there.  But he came by every day, and he just, "I just want to see you sitting there."
Story_ID: 54100
Speaker 1: That, in the long run, turned out to be pretty good.  As Mr. [Robert] Hopson said, he didn't know what I was going to do, and I didn't either.  So, we just started feeling ourselves around.  And I started doing monthly reports of all the divisions; there were ten divisions in the department.  And I'll never forget, I went to our first or second staff meeting.  And no, it wasn't the first.  It was... his secretary had attended the staff meeting and took minutes.  And then for some reason--I don't know where Carol was, but she wasn't there.  And he looked at me and said, "Euly, take minutes."  Well, I, in those days, minutes were taken by females.  You know, it was the stereotype.  And so, I was offended.  I didn't say... like Richard Pryor said, "I didn't say nothing out loud, I bit my lip."  (Laughter).  But I was offended.  And I came home and talked to a friend of mine, James Ross.  And I was running the story to him, and he just shook his head.  He said, "Man, don't ever give up the pencil."  I said, "What you mean?"  He said, "I guarantee you, they never remember half of what goes on in those meetings.  The minutes are what they go by."  And I said, "I'm going to test this."  Sure enough, we met weekly.  I went back to the next staff meeting.  And you know how you discuss an issue and you never really resolve it?  You know, you just go on to the next thing, you know.  Because sometimes I felt we just met to meet, you know, just to see what we were going to talk about at the next meeting, you know.  So, I started putting closure to them.  (Laughter).  I'd write, "So and so and so was discussed, and Bob Seals, the street superintendent will do so and so."  And I just did that, and I turned the minutes in to Mr. Hopson in draft form.  And my office was right outside of his.  And I can see him now walking into my office reading those minutes.  And he'd look at those minutes, and he'd look at me.  And he'd look at those minutes, and he'd look at me.  And then he looked at me, and he said, "Euly, you going to follow up on this?"  And he gave it me.  And from them on, I had the stick to whoop them about the head and shoulders.  (Laughter).  And so, I went on from there.  I went on from... and I would... I'd set policy.  (Laughter).  I'd do budgets. (Laughter).  I ordered trucks.  (Laughter).  I did all kind of stuff.  There are programs in Charlotte [North Carolina] right now, like those median plantings and stuff like that, that I wrote in the minutes what happened.  So now, it's policy.
Story_ID: 54101
Speaker 1: Another one of those things that I fell into that I did very well at...  [Robert] Hopson began to get me to fill in for him at meetings that he couldn't attend.  I didn't have any authority, but I could go there and sit there and take notes for him so that...  And then, you know, then he would know how to react from there.  As a matter of fact, I found out a couple of years later that my nickname was "Hopson's Boy," because I showed up for him just about--you know, and was with him everywhere.  I wrote his speeches, I wrote his presentations for Council.  I wrote magazine articles that had his byline...  that I wrote...  Everybody says they used to know when he did something, and when I did it.  I was very good with the community.  I began to--because we had all the public works--like solid waste, street maintenance, landscaping, cemeteries--all of those were public works divisions, which had a lot of city, citizens involvement.  So, I began to handle a lot of citizens' complaints, and go to community meetings and stuff.
Speaker 2: So, at this point it's growing?
Speaker 1: Yes, because he's letting me do what I wanted to do.  I began to visit the divisions.  And here's where it really got, I said it really got good.  I began to go out to those divisions and find out how things were done, and what was going on.  But the division that I gravitated to was the solid waste division.  Why?  There were people working there that I knew--men that I'd known since I was a kid.  Guys that I'd gone to high school with, you know, were working as garbage men, if you want to call them that--but people I'd been knowing all my life.  They said that I worked in the big house.  (Laughter).  You know how brothers...  So, they started giving me their concerns and problems that I would either take to Hopson, or I'd do something to the minutes (Laughter) and write something in there.  Like standardized uniforms, different kind of gloves--all those kind of things I got for them... that they were...  So, they kind of began to look up to me, that they could come to me and get things done.  The next thing I knew, the guys from Streets, the street maintenance division... and the guys from fleet maintenance, you know.  Back in those days, they called it the motor pool.  And they were coming to me, "Hey, man, take something to the big house for me."  But the one that I gravitated to, and spent the most time with was solid waste.  I mean, I knew the most people... I mean some of my...  I mean guys I played ball with and everything else... guys I grew up with that were working there.  So I spent more and more time there, did more and more studies, and really began to learn solid waste.  Sometimes when the division head would go on vacation and stuff, Hopson would let me go out there and kind of play superintendent for a while, you know.  And so, I really got to know a lot about solid waste.
Story_ID: 54102
Speaker 1: What did that do to you, to make you realize I can do this in other places, not just Charlotte [North Carolina]?  I can--
Speaker 2: I'll tell you what happened... I'll tell you what happened.  The superintendent was not doing very well.  And everybody there knew it, including my boss, who was the director [Robert Hopson].  My boss hated his guts.  But for whatever reason, they wouldn't fire him.  I heard later they didn't fire him because I would have been the next one, and they were waiting.  Now, he may have had some reason for that, too.  Remember, now my drinking is getting to a real serious point, to the extent that the assistant director, Pres Beaver (ph.), pulled me aside one day and said, "Come on go riding with me."  Because I think they had gotten to the end of their rope with me.  My attendance was sorry, my... you know.  And I remember when they showed me my attendance report, I could not believe it.  But anyway, he took me out and talked with me.  We went for a long drive in the city.  And I found out later both his parents were alcoholics, so he recognized that in me, and we had this long talk.  And that broke it.  Because up to then, my family, friends, everybody, had been talking to me about my drinking.  I'm saying, you know, "I ain't got no problem.  I can quit this anytime I want to, you know."  And I think I did quit a thousand times at least, you know, for about an hour or so.  (Laughter).  But anyway, it finally got to the point where Pres took me out on this... we had this long talk.  And I don't know what snapped, because they say that you've got to decide that you want to do.  And something snapped, that said, "Yeah, you need to get something done."  And Pres recommended me to a guy at Mecklenburg County, at one of the county services.  And he explained to me they had three approaches at that time.  One was an approach that would teach you how to drink sociably.  I didn't think that would work for me.  One was like a six month program, and at the end of that you were supposed to be cured.  And the other was a life one.  I said, "I need that."  So, and that's AA.  And they sent me to AA.  So, knocking on wood.  And I guess I'm supposed to say I went to AA.  December 26, 1974 was when I had my last drink, up until today, up until this moment.
Speaker 1: How did that affect your family, your drinking?
Speaker 2: I think, well, I know my wife [Beverly Ford]... it was, it had to be a terrible blow to her.  I mean I would come in late at night, I'd mess up the money, you know.  And I remember when I began to get sober, I remember asking her...  Because I'm going to say this went on for a good year, maybe even a little longer, at that level.  Remember, I told you I'd starting drinking before, and this is now '74' [1974].  So, but it was really bad--a good year, if not a little longer.  And I asked her, I said, "Why did you stay with me during that time?"  And she said, "Well, one, I knew that wasn't you.  And number two, I loved you."  And like I say, she's my rock, she's my lady.  She's my life.
Speaker 1: Do you counsel others now?
Speaker 2: I don't now.  When I first went into the program, every Monday night I'd go down to the...  There are several programs around Charlotte, but I went to one that I would answer the phones for four hours every Monday night.  That's an experience.
Speaker 1: Any stories?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not doing any stories; you don't want to tell stories on other people.  I can tell you, it was very helpful for me.  But it's not appropriate to talk about other people.  I'd go to two meetings a week.  One was an open meeting where everybody attended.  One was what we called a closed meeting, just us drunks.  And I did that for many years, until I even went to Ann Arbor [Michigan].  The rest of my time there in Charlotte was four years, I did that.  And that was extremely helpful to me, that whole program.  I owe so much to that program.  And so, to me, people with a drinking problem... and I understand that it can even work for other substance abuse; it's effective also.  That's the, that's one you ought to consider.
Story_ID: 54103
Speaker 1: Did you mother [Roberta Ford] know you had a drinking problem?
Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody knew I had a drinking problem.  I mean, it's not something you can hide from somebody when it gets to that level.
Speaker 1: Did you try to hide it?
Speaker 2: I think I did.  You know, you do the things that alcoholics typically do.  You promise everybody that's important to you--your wife your mother, your brother, granddaddy.  The only time I saw my granddaddy cry [Fred Tate], I got arrested one time.  And that was even stupid, but I got arrested for public intoxication.  And although I had the money in my pocket to bail me out, since I was drunk, they wouldn't do it--let me do it.  And also, my wife [Beverly Ford] went and got my granddaddy.  And I was standing there when I walked out of that drunk tank.  And he was standing there paying the man.  And he just looked up at me, and there were tears coming down his face.  He didn't say one word.  He just paid the bond and then turned and walked out.  And I thought that that did it.  Because maybe for--I don't know if it was a week--but for a couple of days, I didn't drink, only because I'd disappointed my granddaddy.  But that didn't... I forget how much longer after that, before I stopped.
Speaker 1: Was he around when you stopped?
Speaker 2: Yes, so he did--
Speaker 1: Did he talk to you about it?
Speaker 2: No, he never did.  And the other thing is my boys.  So, they don't remember.  And I stopped in '74' [1974].  And the oldest boy was born in '67' [1967], so he was seven.  And the middle boy was three, and the baby boy was two.  So, they say they don't remember it.  But I can remember coming in and passing out at the foyer, and waking up the next morning as they were stepping over me going out to catch the school bus, or to go out with my wife to go to the babysitter.  I remember stuff like that.  But they say don't remember it.
Speaker 1: And you didn't realize it was affecting your work?  You didn't--
Speaker 2: No, you don't, until you begin to sober up.  When you're drinking like that, you think you're invincible.
Speaker 1: So after you were sober, and looking back, what did you think?
Speaker 2: It scares you to death... it scares you to death.  You just... all those times I drove home.  I can't... I can't...  There were many nights I can't tell you how I ended up in my driveway.  I don't know how I got from where I was to home, don't remember.  Red lights, don't remember.  Stop signs, don't remember nothing.  You know, I can remember--I kept it for a long time, and then I lost it.  I had a report that my secretary kept that I handwrote.  You should have seen it, it looked like chicken scratch.
Speaker 1: Now, the name of the individual who intervened in recovery?
Speaker 2: Presley Beaver.
Speaker 1: Is he white or black?
Speaker 2: He's white.
Speaker 1: Now do you, did you keep in contact?  Did you--
Speaker 2: I did for a long time.  Pres and I... because he and I belonged to the same professional organization.  So, we would see other a couple of times a year at that.  And then every now and again, we'd call each other, but then we'd distance ourselves.
Story_ID: 54104
Speaker 1: So, what took you from Charlotte [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: To Ann Arbor [Michigan]?  I think I started talking about Harry [superintendent of the Public Works Department], who was evidently not meeting the, doing the job out there, but they wouldn't replace him.  So, I began to get frustrated, okay, that I wasn't moving up.  Every time a job would come open in another department and I'd talk to my boss about applying for it, he'd give me a few more dollars and tell me stay there.  And it was good, because public works was like the darling department of the city.  That's where a lot of the action is, you know, and things get done.  And a lot of good things you can...  One of the things I appreciated about my career, being the kind of results-oriented person that I am--every day you can go home and reflect on something you've accomplished that day.  You got the garbage picked up here, you got a pot-hole fixed over here.  You got a traffic signal straightened out over here.  And often you've resolved an issue for somebody, you know, somebody that was frustrated about something, or you've helped an employee get through something.  So, I really enjoyed my twenty years of public service.  But in the beginning right now I'm a little frustrated, but I think I'm ready for this role, and they won't do it.  And every other week he's cursing out Harry, and ready to fire him and all that stuff.  So, I began to look, and got an opportunity in Ann Arbor, Michigan.  The city manager there was a black guy named Cy Murray--that's the other individual in my life--who hired me as a director, the head of the solid waste department in Ann Arbor.  And so, I left the city of Charlotte.  And I can remember my boss being very frustrated at the time that I was leaving.  And one of the things--my secretary, who had become real close to me--we still are, we still talk to each other.  Carol called and told me--because when I left, I had six weeks of vacation or something like that.  And so, you are in effect on the payroll until your time runs out, because they were paying me for that.  The day my time ran out is the day he fired Harry. (Laughter).  My secretary called and said, "You were right."  She said, "I want you to know Mr. Hopson has Harry in his office, firing him right now.  I got his paperwork right here.  They waited until your time ran out."  So, anyway...  But, like I said, good things happened there that allowed me to get director on my resume.
Story_ID: 54105
Speaker 1: Now, I'm a manager.  And my public sector career... I left there and went to Fort Worth, Texas.  I was interviewed with consideration that I would be the Public Works Director, because I was interviewed by the city manager, although they were advertising for a public works administrator that would report to the director.  Again, an instance where a white boy's a director, for four years.  The city manager tells me, "We knew the first week we put him in there, we had made a mistake."  (Laughter).  Okay, four years later, he's still sitting there.  So they bring me in, and I ask the city manager, "Why are you interviewing for this position?  This would be something that the director would interview for."  And he said, "Yeah, we're looking for our next director.  If you're successful here, you'll be the next director."  They gave me five goals that they wanted me to achieve.  I went to work there in July.  In November, we'd accomplished all five of those goals.  So, I wrote a note to him.  (Laughter).  "Hey, you know, what are we going to do?"  And by now... oh, not only that, they had moved Keith.  Keith was the public works director, and he had made another big boo-boo--a several million dollar contract that he had missed up.  So, they moved him.  So, now I'm basically running the department for a few months.  So, I wrote and said, "Hey folks, we need to make some decisions.  I mean, you know, I mean if I'm going to run this show and taking over, I mean, these people need to know that."  Because there was no formal announcement.  Now, this is rumor.  But I heard it is a fact that there is, was at that time, a group they called the Seventh Street Gang.  There was a club on Seventh Street in Fort Worth that the shakers and bakers met to determine the fate of the city--the whole city, not just city government.  These were the bankers, and oil people, and the money people, the media people and all that--Sid Bass and his crowd.  I don't know if you've heard of that name.  And supposedly the story goes, somebody said, "Who is this black guy we keep seeing in the paper?"  And somebody said, "That's your next Public Works Director."  And allegedly that individual said, "I'll be damned if that will happen while I'm alive.  There will never be a nigger Public Works Director in Fort Worth."  Well, I don't know if that happened or not.  But what did happen was that they combined--right after I wrote that letter, they combined the public works department with the traffic and transportation department, and made the traffic and transportation director, the director.  They called me in and say, "This is what we're going to do.  And Gary is going to need your help, because he doesn't know anything about public works."  Well, I went straight back to the projects.  Like my wife says, "It's right below the surface, and if you scratch it, it comes out."  So, I commenced to cussing everybody out. (Laughter).  I called them all kinds of lying bastards.  "And I'll be damned if I'm going to train somebody to do my fucking job.  If that was the case, you can have it."  And that's when I came... my wife said... "Tell them to kiss your ass.  The moving sticker is still on the furniture.  We can move if you want to."  (Laughter).  So, they combined the departments.  I started looking, I became assistant director.  About two months after they did that, I get a call down to the manager's office.  "How do you want... what do you think about having your own department?"  "That's what I came here for."  They re-organized (Laughter), took all the public works stuff out, called it City Services, and made me the City Services Director; left Public Works over here.  In public administration, Public Works is a sacred title, okay.  Even though you might be doing the same thing, if you name it something else...  But anyway... and it had always been reserved for white boys, including women... always reserved for white boys--dumb ones, whatever, it didn't matter.  And so, anyway they did that, and formed a new department.  And I had everything but the engineering stuff.
Story_ID: 54106
Speaker 1: So I stayed [in Fort Worth], and did that [City Services Director of Fort Worth, Texas] for--I went there in '80' [1980], left in '87' [1987], and went to the city of Houston [Texas].  Very interesting situation.  There are two forms of local government.  One is what they call a strong mayor, like Chicago [Illinois], where the mayor is also the CEO in the city and actually runs the city, as well as being the honcho elected official.  Then there's what they call council manager forms of government, where the city manager is the CEO, and he's an appointed position, not elected.  Okay, a real difference.  Supposedly that's a more professional way to go about it, although strong mayor forms of government can be run professionally.  But often you'll get political appointees in the top roles, and then they go out and hire skilled people under them.  So, up until this point, every system I'd worked in was a council manager.  Houston was the first strong mayor.  And I tell people, I was in public administration for twenty years, but I grew up the last five in Houston.  Because that, in addition to my professional work... I had to put that political overlay on it that I hadn't been accustomed to.  And while there's always some politics to play...  Like the charter is supposed to prohibit a council member from calling a director in a council manager form of government.  They did. (Laughter).  I mean you know, "Come pick the garbage up over here.  Fix this pothole over there.  Give me a traffic signal over here."  But in Houston, they were purely political, okay.
Speaker 2: What was your title in Houston?
Speaker 1: When I initially went, I was Director of Solid Waste.  I was there about eight, nine, ten months, and then I was made Public Works Director.  So, I accomplished my goal.  My goal, after I'd been in public administration a couple years, was to be a public works director.
Story_ID: 54107
Speaker 1: After you transferred to the city of Houston [Texas], how was it different after you arrived?
Speaker 2: After I arrived?  Oh, boy.  You mean the city services, or--?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  I guess--and by now I have really developed a national reputation in solid waste.  That came about while I was in Fort Worth [Texas].  I did some things that were supposedly cutting edge for local public administration in the solid waste arena, and began to get a lot of national attention--being called on as a speaker, and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: What areas were you in?
Speaker 2: It was primarily in the area that in those days was called privatization.  There were certain services that were considered only city forces can do--police, fire, and solid waste.  And water and waste water were services that--while private sector did a lot of the other stuff--cleaning buildings, designing buildings, designing roads and all of that--those services were considered to be purely services provided by public forces.  My thought was that as a public administrator, I was responsible for providing the level of service specified through City Council, being the people's representatives, and doing that in the most cost-effective and efficient manner possible.  So, I didn't feel that public employees were the only way to accomplish that task.  You tell me what you need.  You want twice a week garbage service picked up within these hours?  You want this much picked up?  This... and no later than this time of day?  Then let me design a system to do that.  I began to look on privatization as a way to accomplish that.  In those days... oh, what did they used to call it?  Revenue sharing.  It went away, okay.  Up until '79' [1979] or '80' [1980], there was a thing called revenue sharing, where the federal government rebated a lot of money to the local government that you could use.  That went away.  And there was a lot of tax reform.  California and Michigan passed laws where you just couldn't increase local taxes without a public referendum, and all of that kind of thing.  So you're having, you're being called on to provide the same level of service--or higher level of service--with the same or less money.  So, I thought that the job I was supposed to do was to find a way to do that.  I mean, I could do that.  I could, say, pick up garbage once a week, and be within the money you gave me.  But if you want me to do it twice a week, I'm going to have to do something else, okay.  So, privatization became something that I looked at.  The private sector was saying, "Hey, I can do that cheaper than you are."  And so, I did; I looked at it.  It was one of the largest cities in the country to go out and say, "Okay, private sector.  Here's what it cost me to do it.  What can you do it for?"  And drew up a contract that spelled out what they had to do, and what would happen if they didn't, and all that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 54108
Speaker 1: What type of sand was raised when you started working there [in Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a... everybody took...  First of all, they, the first hue and cry we heard was that the private sector for garbage was the Mafia, okay.  (Laughter).  "You're going to be dealing with organized crime if you do that."  The next thing I heard was that, "You get them involved.  If you let them do it, then yeah, they'll give you a low-ball figure now.  And then after a while, when you can't do it anymore, then they'll begin to raise the rates on you, and you can't--there's nothing you can do about it, because you're not in the business anymore."  And so, I heard all of those issues.  The first one I tried to deal with, the organized crime issue--I noted that the companies I was dealing with, or considering, were all traded publicly.  And I figured if they're organized crime, you know, then it's alright for somebody, you know. (Laughter).  The other issue--I say, well, I think I can handle those other issues in my contracts.  So like, I wrote in my contracts, "Whatever rates you bid now, you can never... in five years... If this is a five year contract, in the course of five years, you can never, you can never do more..."  And I think I put six or seven percent a year, "...and over five years, the total of it can never be more than twenty-five percent," which was less than what the public forces had been doing for those same...  So, this protects us.  If they sign this contract, that's what they got to charge; they can't charge us any more than that.  Then, some other things I put in.  So, I began to be called on the national circuit as a speaker at the different professional organizations.  Even the elected officials--the U.S. Conference of Mayors, I remember had me to come speak.  I mean I was always speaking at the Solid Waste, and the APW, American Public Works, and those kinds of things.  I'd been called in the National Officers and those organizations already.  But even the League of Cities, which was council members... the International City Managers Association... I remember being called to speak before them to say how this could be done, and what the benefits were; what you needed to look out for and that kind of stuff.  So, by the time I got to Houston [Texas], I was pretty well nationally known.  As a matter of fact, at that time, New York, D.C. [District of Columbia] and Chicago [Illinois] had even made offers for me to come.  Neither of those three did I even go for an interview, okay, (Laughter) in those days.  But I did go to Houston.  And there, knock on wood again, my reputation began to expand even a little internationally.  I got to go to Australia and a couple of places and talk garbage.  And who would have thunk it.  I can remember saying to myself... we were riding through Sweden.  I was looking out through the window and I said, "This ain't bad for a little colored boy from the projects."  (Laughter).  You know, and all for garbage?  You know, I mean... (Laughter).
Story_ID: 54109
Speaker 1: Now, during this time while you're in Houston, your grandfather [Fred Tate] passes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how was, how did you take that?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, no, my grandfather passed before I left to go to Ann Arbor [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather passed in 70...  You know what, I think my grandfather passed in '72' [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, my grandfather never got to see me sober.  That's right, that's right, my grandfather passed in '72' [1972].  That was a tough blow for me.  Like I said, he was the one we called Daddy.  My brothers too, we all called him Daddy.  We'd say Granddad sometimes, but we called basically called him Daddy, and he was there.  That was my man.  He let me drive his car to the prom.  He was in the stands at all my sporting...  He was at the... anytime I was getting an award somewhere.  Anytime I needed a dollar, you know, my granddaddy was there.  And I'd always hug him, and he was telling me I was good, and I was going to be something.  I'll never forget that.  Granddaddy was my man.
Speaker 1: When those successes started coming, what did you do?  Think about him?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, always... I do now, yes.  My wife will tell you.  My wife knew my granddaddy.  And he was... oh, he loved my wife.  Her name is Beverly, but he called her "Bevly."  (Laughter).  "Come here, child."  Oh, yeah, she liked my granddaddy.  She and my mama don't get along, but she liked my granddaddy.  And, but he was, he was a special man.  And yeah, I think about him all day.  And every time I'm doing... saying something about work, she'll say, "That's the Fred Tate in him."  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you attribute that work ethic you have to--
Speaker 2: Yes, my granddad, my granddaddy taught me that you had to earn your way.  In order to be compensated, you had to give, and you had to give good.  You couldn't do it halfway, you couldn't do it sorry.  You didn't expect anybody to give you anything, you had to go earn it.  I remember him telling me that I was going to have to be better than white people, he told me that.  He said... you know, he didn't make no apologies, no bones about it; that was just a fact.  (Laughter).  "You know, that's the way the world is, and that's what you gotta do.  But Bo, you can do it."
Speaker 1: So, did you take that philosophy when you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I took that--
Speaker 1: --left to start your new business?
Speaker 2: That philosophy today, all through my life... racism is a given in this country.  This country functions because of it, not in spite of it, okay.  So, you know, I mean, in my lifetime I've seen blacks being given the right to vote; I've seen lynching being outlawed.  Lynching was legal, I remember that.  I remember reading articles in the paper about lynching, you know.  When Lady Day [Billie Holiday] sings "Southern trees bear strange fruit," that's what she was talking about.  That stuff, I remember.  And it no ain't long, long, time ago on a planet far, far away.  It's right here in America, in my lifetime.
Story_ID: 54110
Speaker 1: You innovate... you've innovated Fort Worth [Texas] and Houston [Texas]?
Speaker 2: And in Houston.
Speaker 1: Now, you're taking a step to--
Speaker 2: In Houston, I reached 20 years in public service.  And in public service, the way you go up the ladder is to go to larger cities.  Houston was the fifth, the fourth largest city.  So, the only cities larger were New York, L.A. [Los Angeles], and Chicago.  And my wife and I both, you know, we didn't want to work in those cities doing this.  So, well, maybe now is the time to look to the private sector.  And so, I did.  I put it out on the wire that I was interested in leaving, and got several points of interest.  Because the two largest garbage companies also showed interest--Waste Management which is the largest, and BFI [Browning-Ferris Industries], which is the second largest.  And BFI was headquartered in Houston.  I told my wife, "Now I know how a good athlete feels at the end of his contract at the height of his career."  Because one would make an offer... and then the other one would go up... make it go up.  (Laughter).  And so on one side, that was quite gratifying, and on another side, that was really draining.  So, finally, I made up my mind that Waste Management was the one that I wanted.  And it was a conscious decision, even though we were going to have to move.
Speaker 1: Okay, we can go back to Waste Management.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I went to work for Waste.  It was a very conscious decision, to go with them as opposed to BFI.  They had a little better definition of what they wanted me to do, and I felt a little better about the people that I would be working with.  So, I went to work for them.  They had never done public sector marketing.  They had a lot of municipal contracts, but they didn't even know how many they had.  They had what they called--they had gotten them by what they called "drop in the lap" business.  They either bought a company that had the municipal contract, or a city put the bid out and they won it.  So, they hired me to establish a program, and that's what I did.  The Public Sector Services Department is what I installed there at Waste Management.  So, as I mentioned, they didn't even know how many contracts they had; they didn't know anything.  And I come to find out they had a little over 22 hundred contracts developing right at two billion dollars' worth of revenue every year.  And we were successful in retaining that, and growing it.  I added some new business; kept some existing contracts, and we were able to expand on them and that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Now, during this whole time you're making in-roads and contacts at these local governments.
Speaker 2: I'd been doing that for my entire public sector career.  I began to get the national exposure a little bit at Charlotte [North Carolina]; some at Ann Arbor [Michigan], but an awful lot at Fort Worth.  I was the president, for example, of the State Chapter, one of the professional organizations, which automatically put me on the board of the National Chapter, a national organization.  And another one, American Public Works Association.  I was a member on what was the Education Foundation, which was a prestigious group in that organization.  But in all of this, I'm meeting my peers and colleagues from all over the country, and we're developing mutual respect and getting to know...  Because as you know, in the public sector it's all about relationships and who you know.  And so I've had over thirty years of developing those relationships, and networking and getting to know people.
Story_ID: 54111
Speaker 1: When I went to Waste Management, one of the ways that that was leveraged was that I began to really get involved with the elected officials.  You know, before then I knew mostly my peers--public works directors, city managers, you know, other department heads.  But at Waste Management, I had to interact with the U.S. Conference of Mayors, which was made up of mayors; the National Conference of Black Mayors; the National Association of County Officials; the National Association of Black County Officials; and the National City Managers Association.  The League of Cities, which are council members, and NBCLEO--National Black Caucus of Local Elected Officials--those are councilmen.  So, I got to interact with them.  My relationship with them was enhanced, because I also brought the funding.  And Waste Management participated with these organizations in many ways--having a booth and all that--but also supporting its programs and stuff.  So, people got to know me very well, including the staff people in these organizations.  So like even... now that I'm on my own, I have been able to use those connections.  But at Waste Management, I think I had a good six years.  I only met--when I went, I had every intention of retiring from Waste Management.  But they were bought by a company called U.S.A. Ways that was headed by individuals that were at BFI when I made the decision to move to Waste.  So, that was deja vu to me.  And I knew then that I didn't cherish working with those guys; I didn't see me working with them again.  So, the merger went through, and I resigned.  Now, I had planned out my entire work year.  So they asked me to stay on through September.  I resigned like in March, or something.  But there were things I'd lined up, and so they asked me to stay on through the end of... and I did, to accomplish those for them.
Story_ID: 54112
Speaker 1: And then in October...  Well, I formed my company in August of '98' [1998].  In October of '98' [1998], I began to work it.  And those relationships that I had developed over the thirty years just did it for me.  What I do is represent private companies desiring to do business with local governments.  So, if you've got a good or a service that you want to market to anybody--to any city or county in the country--then I'd like to be on your team, to help you get that business.  I mentioned getting to know the staffs of these professional organizations.  I remember a client saying that they wanted to go to Salt Lake City [Utah], because the Olympics was coming.  And they financed airport work, and they knew from Atlanta [Georgia] that Salt Lake City would be doing a lot of work at their airport, and they wanted to be the bond financier of it.  And I said to myself, "I don't know anybody in Salt Lake City.  I never... to my knowledge, I've never met a Mormon."  (Laughter).  So I said, "Um."  So, I called the Executive Director of the U.S. Conference of Mayors [Tom Cochran].  I said, "Tom, who do I know in Salt Lake City?"  He says, "You know Deedee."  Deedee Corradini was the mayor.  I said "Well, I know Deedee to speak, and she may know me to speak, but we don't know each other.  You know, we're not buddy-buddy."  "Oh yeah, you do."  He said, "Hang around."  About thirty minutes later, Tom calls back.  He says, "See, I told you Deedee knows you, she's waiting on your phone call."  Sure enough, I call up Deedee, take my client out, and we got the business.  (Laughter).  So, those kind of relationships worked, as well as me being able to pick up the phone and call a Solid Waste director, or a Public Works director.  I remember when I was with Waste, and we were going after the city of St. Louis, and another company had the business.  And supposedly the city, the Solid Waste director, really liked the other company, and wasn't interested in changing.  The other company had had the business for 15 years or something.  We put our bid on the table, and we were high bid.  Not high, we were the second high bid.  But we came in and did our presentation.  And I'll never forget when we walked in to do our presentation, there was Steve sitting there.  And he said, "Oh, hell, Waste Management has got to be serious now.  They done brought that damn Euly Ford here."  Well, I had forgotten Steve was a Solid Waste director in St. Louis.  I'd flat-out forgotten.  Steve and I had been on the Education Foundation for eight years; we had some real war stories to tell.  (Laughter).  You know, we got the business.  And people say when we left that night, Steve was the one that converted everybody to vote for Waste Management.  So, those relationships have come in very, very handy for me.  And now, I'm able to help my clients that in turn help me.
Story_ID: 54113
Speaker 1: So now, where you look back and reflect upon... Seeing where you are now, where do you reflect upon?  That colored boy from the projects, as you said... to how you got here?  What do you see, that gave you the motivation and the impetus to get through the drinking, to this moment right now?
Speaker 2: I think the key pieces in my life were my family--my dear mother [Roberta Ford] and my grandfather [Fred Tate].  I got a lot of support from other family members, but they just kind of--you know, their lights were just a little brighter.  You know, a lot of support from other family members and other community people.  My high school teacher, Mr. Pyles, along with other church people and school people.  But Mr. Pyles... meeting Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and getting a new focus on who I was, who my people were, black people in America... where we, how we were really situated in America.  Like I say, until then, it just hadn't dawned on me.  I just hadn't thought about it like that.  I knew about segregation, but I didn't know about Civil Rights, you know, until then.  Professionally, Cy Murray, the city manager of Ann Arbor [Michigan] that gave me my first break, who has not only been a mentor, but he's now a best friend.  As a matter of fact, he has his company now, and we've done some business together, doing some together.  But those are the things that I--and people that I look back on.  I think scouting was very helpful to me.  Although it's poo-pooed a lot, I think sports helped me.  That whole notion of teamwork, being a part of something, as opposed to setting itself yourself out from something--I think that had an impact.  But scouting was certainly...  The Civil Rights Movement was important to me.  I think as I got older...  There had been some other things and other people that have played a big impact on me.  Howard Zinn.  I remember when I read of "A People's History," [A People's History of the United States] I initially felt so uneducated.  Because he presents history from a standpoint of other people, than the way history is traditionally presented and taught in this country.  You know, starting with Christopher Columbus and what an evil person he was, and all of the lies that were built up around him--you know, this thing of "scared of sailing off the ends of the earth."  That was crap.  Everybody knew by then the world was round.  (Laughter).  And I knew that.  I don't know why I didn't...  You know, being a math major I knew that, you know.  But I don't know why I didn't notice that that wasn't true.  I mean but he has... and a lot of his readings... I read a lot of his books.  One of the things that it taught me was that we all--I don't care if you went to Harvard [University], Yale [University], or Talladega [College]--we all got the same sorry education.  It's just, for white people, it's more to their interest to believe it and participate in it than it is for us.  But we all got the sorry...  That's why I think I was just as able to do well on exams as they were.  Another author that I've been reading is Bishop [John Shelby] Spong.  His first book that I read, "Rescuing the Bible from Fundamentalism"... that was one of the things I wrestled with... is religion in my life.  And I've got a different perspective now--that I don't want to necessarily talk about on film.  But he has been very instrumental to me.  He's written many, many books that have helped me understand religion, the Bible, for me different than I...  Because I've always questioned it, even as a kid.  Although the first time I said something about it, I got bopped.  So, I knew not to verbalize it any more  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 54114
Speaker 1: Do you think those books will help you, give you the ability to reconcile your feelings about your father [Ulysses Ford]?
Speaker 2: They haven't.  Now, I don't ever want to say never.  They haven't... and I will admit to thinking about that... thinking about my father in relationship to some of the things I've read, and especially by them, but it hasn't.  Another person that I've read a lot about is [HM] Lerone Bennett.  I really, really appreciate that brother's writing.  I've also read Taylor Branch.  He... and especially "Parting of the Waters."  I read all three of his books, but "Parting of Waters," too, because he writes about the Civil Rights Movement at the time that I was involved.  And it was so much more going on than that little bit that I was doing then.  So, it really makes you feel a part of something huge, you know what I mean?  When you recognize just all that was involved, and the kinds of changes that have been wrought--not just in this country, and not just for black people.  Gays, women, the disabled--all of those movements in this country came up out of that Civil Rights Movement, you know, and was where Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was--that's where he was headed, I mean all along.  It was, you know, he was African American, and he was talking about civil rights for blacks.  But he, his general message was civil rights for everybody.  You know, he felt everybody should be in.  And so, all of those movements grew out of that, you know.  And the war movement--all of that grew out of, grew out of, out of that Civil Rights Movement.
Story_ID: 54115
Speaker 1: I have one more question before we go to pictures.  What would you want your legacy to be, to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I've never thought about it; I've never thought about that.  Sam, you got me.  I know when I talk to my boys I try to share with them that if their involvement with me hasn't made them better than I was, then I failed, and I haven't given enough and I haven't done enough.  So, I would hope that I could be remembered as someone that tried to give.  I would also hope that I could be remembered as someone who is so thankful for all that has been given to me.  Africans have a notion called "Ubuntu" that Hawaiians have that's called "Aloha," that I think kind of encompasses that.  That is, "You grow by giving."  Well, I grow by giving.  The other thing--those are the two things--that people know that I'm grateful, and that I hope that I've been able to be of some meaning to somebody.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much, Sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you, Sir.
Speaker 1: Great talking to you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 54116
Speaker 1: Let's start with the top picture.
Speaker 2: My left to right, or your left to right?
Speaker 1: Your left, left to right.  Start with the top picture.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This top picture, and I really can't remember the year.  But it's going to be sometime in the fifties.  This is my mother [Roberta Ford], this is my cousin, Reginald.  This is my brother Frederick [Ford], and my brother DeHavillane--my youngest brother DeHavillane.  And he's playing with a puppy.  And that puppy belonged to Reginald as I remember, and his two brothers.  The picture is taken in the Fairview Homes [Charlotte, North Carolina].  That's at the back door of our apartment, which was 1817 Edwin Street, Apartment 124.
Speaker 1: Excellent.  Okay, and then moving to the center picture.
Speaker 2: The center picture is my mother, very young mother, and me, a very, very, young baby.  So, this picture has got to be either late...  Well, I was born in September of '43' [1943].  Looking at that picture, it was either December of '43' [1943] or early '44' [1944].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This bottom picture--
Speaker 1: Tough to make out, huh?
Speaker 2: Oh, I know what it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to... I think... I just can't remember where it was taken.  Because it's March of '58' [1958].
Speaker 1: Maybe go ahead and start describing the people in the frame, and then we'll know where we'll come to.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I can tell by the imprint on the picture that the picture was taken in March of 1958.  I know this me and my two-toned shoes, which was the play back in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My middle brother, Frederick, my mother Roberta Ford, and my baby brother, DeHavillane, and we affectionately called him Dee Dee.  I still just can't place where that picture was taken.  In 1958, I would have been a sophomore in high school.
Speaker 1: Next group.
Speaker 2: Oh boy, that's my granddad [Fred Tate].  (Laughter).  I see that top picture, yeah.
Speaker 1: And we'll start from the top again.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  Okay, this top picture.  Believe it or not, this is me at four.  This is my grandfather, Fred Tate.  And he was a tremendous influence in my life, and continues to be, even though he passed in 1972.  And this is my middle brother, Frederick, he was two at this time.  This is my high school graduation picture.
Speaker 1: Hold on one second.  A few technical adjustments to make here as we go.  Okay, now we're going to go, okay.
Speaker 2: This middle picture is my high school graduation picture.  And I graduated from high school in 1961.
Speaker 1: And maybe, could you give us the name of the high school?
Speaker 2: The high school was West Charlotte Senior High School, in Charlotte, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Great.  Okay, the bottom photo.
Speaker 2: The mighty, mighty, Lions.  Our colors were maroon and gold.  Oh yeah, and I still got some maroon and gold.  As a matter of fact, I've still got some West Charlotte sweats upstairs.  This picture, as I've noticed from the corner, was taken February of '57' [1957].  So, I was in the ninth grade.  This is myself, my middle brother Frederick, who has always been the showman of the family, and my baby brother DeHavillane.  And this was taken in our apartment.  This is in the living room, and I'll never forget this mirror.  And on this wall over here is another picture of the flowing brook that I think everybody had.  And of course somewhere in the living room there's a picture of the folded hands, the praying hands.  But this was taken in our living room in the Fairview Homes.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Next, please.
Speaker 2: I was so glad to see that picture of my granddad when my mama sent these.
Speaker 1: Oh, you haven't seen them in a while?
Speaker 2: I haven't seen... No, I have not... These pictures we're looking at, I saw them yesterday when I went through this box.  The box came the day we left for Hawaii, so I didn't get a chance to look at them.
Speaker 1: So some of them, you have never seen?
Speaker 2: I've never seen, right.  Like this, I had never seen.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: This is my dad.
Speaker 1: Alright, go ahead with the description.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture of my father, my biological father, Ulysses Grant Ford, Jr.  He was a master sergeant at the time, this is his military picture.  And this picture was taken sometime in '43' [1943] or '42' [1942].  Oh, '44' [1944], I'm sorry.  Because he was in the service when I was born.  My mother went down to visit him.  He was stationed in Anniston, Alabama at Fort McClellan as a matter of fact.  And we, after I was born, my mother said we lived in--well, we went down to visit him and stayed a few months there in Anniston.
Speaker 1: Very good, next series.
Speaker 2: Oh, boy.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Disco era.
Speaker 2: Oh, hey, can't you see it?  (Laughter).  You ought to see the bottom of these pants.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're going to start at the top.
Speaker 2: At the top, this is a picture of my going away party from Ann Arbor, Michigan when I was leaving Ann Arbor, in the summer of '80' [1980], going to Fort Worth, Texas.  This is myself, and this is Richard Caray.  Richard was my administrative assistant in the Solid Waste Department there in Ann Arbor, Michigan.  Okay. Well, I don't know if you saw my, did you see my goatee, man, and my 'fro?  Did you see my goatee and my 'fro, Sam?  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, it was Black Nationals Day, and you were feeling black?  You had the fish pick, too, didn't you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but my mama wouldn't let me wear in my hair, even when I was grown, okay.  This is a picture taken of me in the conference room of the Public Works Department in Charlotte, North Carolina.  It was taken sometime in the mid-seventies [1970s].  I don't know the exact year.  But you will notice my afro and my attempt at growing a goatee.  I've always had a mustache since I was in high school.  But that was my first attempt at growing a goatee.
Speaker 1: Okay, here's the next one.  And I'm going to go and get a family picture from upstairs.
Speaker 2: Alright, alright.  This is a picture in my living room--no, my family room in Fort Worth, Texas.  This is my, on the left here, this is my middle brother, Frederick Douglas Ford, and this is myself.  And we're there in Fort Worth, Texas in our family room.
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: It had to... oh boy.  It was between '80' [1980] and '87' [1987].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember it was when my brother came to visit, which he did a couple of times.  But I cannot tie down the year.  But it was between '80' [1980] and '87' [1987], that's when I was in Fort Worth.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.
Speaker 2: Okay, I don't see a date on this, but I know what this is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, you ready?
Speaker 1: Ready.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This photo is in a newsletter that Waste Management put out, and it is a picture at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Convention.  What I can't remember is what city we were in at the time.  But we're at our booth at that exhibit for it.  This is myself, this is [HM] [Joseph] Joe Donovan, who used to work for Waste Management.  This is Mrs. Ben Chavis [Martha Rivera Chavis].  This is [HM] [Benjamin F.] Ben Chavis.  Ben was executive director of the NAACP at that time.  And this is Calvin Booker.  Calvin Booker was governmental affairs for Waste Management, and still with Waste Management.  Ben and I have some history.  My wife [Beverly Ford] taught at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, which is where Ben went to school.  Ben, along with some other people, and some of the students I taught at Catholic High [Charlotte Catholic High School], formed a Charlotte chapter of the Black Panther Party in my basement.  Ben is very, very close to my wife.  She was one of his instructors there at UNCC.  And Ben recruited some of my students at Charlotte Catholic High when he helped to form the Black Panther Party in Charlotte.  And this was in the early seventies.
Speaker 1: Perfect.  Okay, and Samuel ready for the next one, please. (Off-camera discussion)
Speaker 2: Okay, I remember this one.
Speaker 1: I hope so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Alright, anytime you're ready.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This picture is very special.  My wife and I eloped.  We got married one Saturday morning at 10 o'clock in a courthouse in Talladega, Alabama.  That afternoon, I left on a ten-day basketball trip.  So, she never had a wedding, and she never had a honeymoon.  This is our, the re-saying of our vows in 1995 at our 30th anniversary.  It was a tremendous ceremony.  Starting left to right--this is our oldest son, Anthony, Anthony Scott Ford.  Anthony is a medical doctor.  He's head of triage at Emory [Emory University Hospital], and has just been promoted to assistant director of Emergency Medicine Department.  His specialty is emergency medicine.  This is myself.  This is my lovely, lovely wife, Beverly, the person of my life.  She's just sweet and special people.  This is our middle son, Steven.  Steven passed two years ago in January of 2000.  Steven would have been 30 today.  He was the assistant city manager in Galveston, Texas, one of the youngest assistant city managers in the country.  Had a great career going, was a very, very special person.  He was the light of this family.  Everybody said that Steven was the one most like me from the day he was born--had my personality, went into my line of work, and also pledged the fraternity that I'm in.  Steven had diabetes.  He also had kidney failure unrelated to the diabetes.  And Anthony the oldest son, donated Steven a kidney.  The kidney was doing perfect, no problems with that.  It was his diabetes that got out of control.  I don't think I mentioned, Anthony finished Morehouse [College in Atlanta, Georgia] and then went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] Med School where he graduated.  Steven finished the University of Houston [Texas] in political science, and got a master's in public administration from Cleveland State [University in Ohio].  Michael, our youngest, is now 29.  Michael is a supervisor in the Solid Waste Department for the City of Atlanta.  Michel attended Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas], didn't finish school, but is doing well as a supervisor.  And I was talking to some of his superiors, and they say he's doing a great job.
