Story_ID: 156387
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer--
Speaker 2: Hi, Larry.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  Hi.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  And, ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Toni Georgette Fay, T-O-N-I, Georgette, G-E-O-R-G-E-T-T-E, Fay, F-as in Frank,-A-Y.
Speaker 1: Now, is Toni short for anything or--
Speaker 2: No, that's my given name.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: April 25, 1947.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: New York, New York.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and your title?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm retired, happily retired.  So I'm a volunteer, activist and I was trained as an educator and social worker.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your big title that you retired from?
Speaker 2: Well, I think all my jobs were big titles.  But when I retired I was corporate vice president at Time-Warner, Inc. and an officer of the corporation and, in fact, the first African American officer of the corporation.
Speaker 1: Okay, there we go.  All right, and you also--are you still working with your own company, TGF [Associates]--(unclear), (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.  Oh, I did establish--but that's kind of a joke.  I should tell that, right.  When I, when I retired from Time-Warner, it was the result of the acquisition of AOL buying Time-Warner.  And for those of us who were officers, it triggered something called "change of control."  And I had been through four deals, four acquisitions, mergers--I'm sure we'll get into that a little later in terms of the impact that that has on one's energy (laughter), life and everything else.  But I could leave.  The night the deal happened, I knew I could leave.  And I had reached a stage where I was ready to go.  So when I did, one of the things that people told me, I stayed on a few years to do other projects, which we'll talk about.  With, "Toni, well, you need to have a title."  I said, "What do you mean?"  So I incorporated to TGF Associates.  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I'm president of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what year did you retire from Time-Warner?
Speaker 2: Two thousand, 2000 to 2003, around in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I just wanted to know.  Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question.  Is it July 31st?
Speaker 1: No, it's--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It's August 1st.
Speaker 1: It's August 1st, 2010-2012 [August 1, 2012].
Speaker 2: Right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We're in my--
Speaker 2: You don't have to give your address, but--
Speaker 1: We're in my home in Englewood, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 156388
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five light-weight questions we always ask that only require a short answer.  They're sort of like a warm up.  So the first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Earth tones.
Speaker 1: Okay, time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Paris [France] and Morocco thus far.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156389
Speaker 1: All right, now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side first, then your father's side.  Then we'll put the two together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Allie Clastene Smith and then Fay.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: A-L-L-I-E, Clastene, C-L-A-S-T-E-N-E, Fay, F-A-Y, and maiden name, Smith.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is March 12, 1922, New York, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: I have a very small, close-knit family.  And as far as I can trace back is really through my grandfather because I'm one of those kids who experienced the disadvantage of not really knowing grandparents.  I only knew my grandfather on my maternal side.  So I do know about my grandmother, maternal grandmother and grandfather and I spent a lot of personal time with my grandfather.  You wanna know where they're from?
Speaker 1: What's your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name is James Perry Smith.
Speaker 1: P-E-R-R-Y?
Speaker 2: P-E-R-R-Y.
Speaker 1: Smith, okay.
Speaker 2: And my maternal grandmother was Lucille Walker.
Story_ID: 156390
Speaker 1: Well, okay, I didn't wanna step on your line then, but from what, from the reading I was doing, one of your parents came from a, a Garveyite background?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather [James Perry Smith], but prior to that I wanna speak to their Southern roots.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was my, my grandmother [Lucille Walker] and father met in Augusta, Georgia at Haines Institute, which was a very famous institute, started by Lucy [Craft] Laney, a--the first black woman graduate of Clark Atlanta University [then Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], first black woman in Georgia to, whose picture is in the state capitol.  And my father, my grandfather and mother went to school there after Boggs Academy [Keysville, Georgia], which was another famous black institution outside of Augusta, Georgia.  While my grandmother was from Augusta, from something called Walker Settlement, which was a settlement that her family had settled, they were then educated at Boggs and Haines.  And my grandfather was from Tallahassee, Florida but went to Haines Institute.  And then they migrated together to New York [New York].  In New York, since you were asking me about that movement, my father [George Fay] became involved with the [Marcus] Garvey movement in Harlem [New York, New York], and my grandmother was very active as well.
Story_ID: 156391
Speaker 1: Okay, so did your grandfather [James Perry Smith] obtain a title or anything in the [Marcus] Garvey movement--?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge.  That I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was an early entrepreneur.  As my mother [Allie Smith Fay] would always say, you know, they lived in Harlem [New York, New York], even moved, moved a little uptown into Washington Heights [Manhattan, New York, New York], but my grandfather was a tailor, an entrepreneur and commuted every day to Newark, New Jersey where his business was.  So while she grew up during the [Great] Depression, she said that they were one of the few families where there was a working person with a business.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  Yeah, so he was a tailor.
Speaker 2: And he became a tailor.  I forget now the stories of how he was trained because after my grandparents came to New York, he--prior to that, he was a, a Pullman Porter on the railroad, and belonged to a family of three brothers.  And he, being the oldest, he, each one helped the successor with school.  So his brother, he put through college and medical school.  And my Uncle William who became the first black graduate of Temple med school [Lewis Katz School of Medicine Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And then my grandfather--you know, maybe--
Speaker 1: Now, this is your great uncle William--
Speaker 2: That would be my great uncle William.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: William Smith.
Speaker 1: That's, okay.
Story_ID: 156392
Speaker 1: So your grandfather [James Perry Smith], being the, the eldest, there was nobody to put him through school.
Speaker 2: No, no, but, but with a great trade.  You know, I have a funny story about going to see my grandfather when the riots broke out [1967] in Newark [New Jersey] because he was still working then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is the story?
Speaker 2: Well, this was in, I guess about '66 [1966], '67 [1967].  And my grandfather was still working.  It was a gathering point.  I mean even in those days, Amiri Baraka--LeRoi Jones--and others because there weren't that many black businesses, would congregate around my daddy's shop.  It was called, you know, J.P.'s Shop.  And he did the pressing.  He did the sewing, and that's how tailor shops were in those days.  So the day after riots and fires broke out in Newark, my family jumped in the car, and we had to go to see what was happening with my grandfather because you couldn't place calls or anything.  So we pull up to his shop first, and everything around him was burned down except for his business.  And in the window--I mean I think his shop made a lot of the national news.  In the window, it said, "Soul Brother", and I said, "can you believe that?  I've never heard Daddy Smith talk about Soul Brother."  And my father [George Fay] said, "Are you kidding?  These people would not burn down their clothes."  (Laughter) so it stood there as, as the center of black business.  And he held onto that business until I think some highways came through that street.  But he was in the center of the black community for many, many years.  That, gosh, he must have been in business in Newark for about sixty years.
Speaker 1: Okay, wow, that's quite a story.  I've seen that picture.  Yeah, or a picture like it with that Soul Brother sign--
Speaker 2: Yes, because they had, you know, I think activists in the communities, of course, would know which ones were really black businesses.  And I was told that they put those signs, they went around and gave them those signs to put in the window.
Speaker 1: Okay, which demonstrates on some level that the riots just weren't random--
Speaker 2: As haphazard as people, yes.
Speaker 1: --outburst of anger--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --as it was a planned--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And that there was some kind of respect for people who were supporting the community and taking care of them.  I mean my dad, my grandfather never gave out a ticket.  I couldn't believe it.  When I would go in to help sometimes, he never gave out a ticket.  He knew everybody (laughter), you know, everybody's name.  There was, well, it was no need for tickets and what they had, and, you know.  And whatever he'd tell 'em, "Mr. Smitty, is my, is my stuff ready?"  "Oh, maybe tomorrow."  They'd say, "Oh, Mr. Smitty."  You know, so they went through that, that negotiation of what would happen in our community, right.
Story_ID: 156393
Speaker 1: Now, my grandmother [Lucille Walker].  You want me to talk about my grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes, right, right.
Speaker 1: My grandmother, again, from Augusta [Georgia], from right side--outside of Augusta called Walker Settlement.  I wish I had known her because my mother [Allie Smith Fay]--she would always just say to me, you re- "You remind me so much of my mother, and I wish she had known you."  My father [George Fay] said that as well because my grandmother really helped my dad who was very active in sports, get space for his football teams, even when he was in high school in New York [New York], in Harlem [New York, New York].  And she was very active in the [Fiorello Henry] La Guardia campaigns.  She was a--oh, what did they call them?  Street captain or Democratic captain in the old days for La Guardia in Harlem.  And--
Speaker 2: Committeemen or--
Speaker 1: Precinct--
Speaker 2: --precinct captain?
Speaker 1: Yeah, something like that.
Speaker 2: Okay, I know it's--
Speaker 1: In New York, it was a different--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: There're different terms in different--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --cities, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, and so she was involved and having four children and my mother being the oldest.  So, she was very engaged that way in terms of after-school programs for young people, and politically with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and, and politics.
Story_ID: 156394
Speaker 1: So (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I should also say something about the church or is that coming later?
Speaker 1: No, you can, you can--yeah, enter it in now.  This is--
Speaker 2: The interesting thing, because someone just reminded me.  They said, "Toni, there're very few people who can tell that story."  I recently received a certificate in the mail from a church called St. James Presbyterian Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's one of the larger black, Presbyterian churches in Harlem [New York, New York], which I have to say, many of which are declining in membership.  But they said, "Well, you still attend there."  I said, "Oh, my goodness, I feel like I'm legacy.  I'm third generation member of that church."  And they said, "Oh, my goodness.  How many black people in New York [City] can say that their grandmother, mother and now, you, are, are real members of the church?"  But just to reflect a little bit on black history, I looked up Lucy [Craft] Laney, soon after I retired.  My mother [Allie Smith Fay] had never been South, and she was well traveled, had never been--my father [George Fay] had, had died.  She was world traveled.  I said, you know, we're gonna go to Augusta [Georgia].  Let's go see what it's like.  And she always wanted to see Boggs Academy [Keysville, Georgia].  She had heard so much about it.  So took a week off, and we went down to Augusta.  Well, after getting over the fact that there wasn't really a Martin Luther King Boulevard, but everything was the James Brown Boulevard, you know, (laughter) we kind of branched out and, and looked, and looked around.  And when we found Haines Academy [Augusta, Georgia] and Lucy Laney, and realized that that was the first black institution even before many colleges there, that was financed by the Presbyterian Church, I said, oh, that's why St. James had a Lucy Laney League.  And so many black Presbyterian churches throughout the country had a Lucy Laney League where many of the people out of Augusta or Georgia had migrated North, and which my grandmother [Lucille Walker] did.  And at St. James, there was a Lucy Laney League so that a lot of the people from Georgia and Augusta were Presbyterians and came to that church.  So I remember finding a tea from 1940--oh, about 1939 or 1942 from St. James, showing Lucy Laney Leagues.  So just a little bit of history.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's good too 'cause I didn't, I didn't realize that.  Lucy Laney League, okay, the Presbyterian Church.
Speaker 2: Which financed a lot of the, you know, including Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and a lot other things through Atlanta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 156395
Speaker 1: Oh, when your maternal grandparents [James Perry Smith and Lucille Walker], you know, moved to New York [New York], did they live in Newark [New Jersey] or--
Speaker 2: No, in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, so his shop was in--your grandfather's shop was in Newark?
Speaker 2: He commuted, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, but he, you know, actually, lived in Harlem.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  You know, is that a long commute (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, I have to, I--you know, I don't know what was available, but I can imagine being in New York, he just went on the subway, on the train, Penn Station [Pennsylvania Station, New York, New York], you know, and you would take the train out to--'cause there were long days.  He would take it out to Newark.  You know, and I never understood the story.  Maybe that's where the opportunity was or maybe that's where the hook-up was with the Garvey movement because you know they were business-oriented.  So, but he worked in Newark, and commuted every day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were they a part of any other organizations (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge, but between the church, having four children and that, I don't really know of any others.
Speaker 1: Politics, Garveyism and--
Speaker 2: Education and raising four children.  Now, you have to recall too that my grandmother died when I believe she was thirty-nine from tuberculosis.  And my mother [Allie Smith Fay], who was really the, still the genius of the family, she'd gotten out of college at nineteen.  My grandmother died right before she graduated and left four children.  So my mother kind of became the maternal head of the family.
Story_ID: 156396
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause your mother [Allie Smith Fay] was raised in New York [New York], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did she--what did you find out about her experiences growing up?  Did she talk about the--
Speaker 2: Well, just in terms of how, how wonderful it was when they were, you know, a normal family, four kids and a father who worked and how great Harlem [New York, New York] was in those days.  She'd always talk about growing up in the valley and how, what a cooperative environment it was for black people growing up in Harlem.  She would refer to 7th Avenue as the Champs-Elysees [Avenue des Champs-Elysees] and tell stories about when Joe Louis or Sugar Ray Robinson would win, the streets would all empty out and celebrate.  So she has all those original stories of growing up in Harlem and being proud of it.  She was fortunate enough to, to go to special schools in New York because she was identified as gifted, and was one of the few black women who were able to go to Hunter College [New York City, New York] which was all girls then.  So even though she was there, she couldn't even go to some of the restaurants in the neighborhood of Hunter.  But, oh, so many stories.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, now, what did she study in school at Hunter?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess what all black girls did, education and sociology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have any stories about any of the, I guess the cultural or political figures in New York, in those days?
Speaker 2: No, my mother wasn't really--I think she had to get so preoccupied with my grandmother's [Lucille Walker] illness and the fact that there were three kids under her.  I mean that was a lot of stress.  You know, I could tell.  If anything--she never really talked about it much, but I could see how much stress it was in terms of her dad [James Perry Smith] leaving early, coming home late, and my mother, like all of a sudden, here are these three kids, and she wants to start to live her life too.  So she wasn't really involved in any associations.  She was always shocked how engaged I got.  And I got that from my father's [George Fay] side.  And so, no, but, you know, she, she read a lot, you know.  She was a bookworm.  And the one story she told me when I started to work for Time, she said that was the only time I thought about dropping out of college.  She was--one of her summer jobs was to be a tester for the Urban League.  You know, so they would always round up kids who could pass tests and take them into the league to see, now, would this employer hire them if we find people who can pass tests.  And she would pass tests.  And she said the only time I really thought about leaving was when they were gonna hire me as a researcher.  So her first job out of college was as a researcher in a law book firm because she wanted to go to law school but didn't have the opportunity.
Speaker 1: So that's what they'd call paralegal or something or, or--that, you know--
Speaker 2: No, you mean a publishing firm for law books?
Speaker 1: No, okay.  So she was a researcher for--I'll just leave it at that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I won't speculate.  Researcher for a law firm.
Speaker 2: In publishing.  You know, that's when you look up the facts.  You verify, you fact check, things of that sort.  And then she went, you know, when she started having children, of just two, she went into the school system because she could be home with her kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, so then she became a teacher.  Now, did she teach in Harlem or--
Speaker 2: She never liked the classroom.  No, so she really didn't teach.  She first went--I misspoke.  She first went to the New York City Department of Welfare and became a welfare investigator and was also getting her master's.  And then there was a special unit set up that was not the classroom.  She, she found out before I was born that she did not need--want the classroom.  But she, she got a job with the board of education [New York City Department of Education] and eventually became head of the New York and Bronx division for the board of education as their liaison to those courts, you know, working with families whose kids have to be taken to court.
Story_ID: 156397
Speaker 1: Now, let me go to your father.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name, George Edward Fay, G-E-O-R-G-E, E-D-W-A-R-D, F-as in Frank,-A-Y.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 20th, 1920, Boston, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about the Fay side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, I never knew his parents, who were Enid and George Fay, but I do remember who I would call Auntie and Dinnin [ph.].  And that's who raised my dad, his aunt and his grandmother.  So that would have been my great aunt and great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how do you spell her name, Aunt--
Speaker 2: Auntie, Mrs. McKenzie.  Now, I can't remember her first name.  McKenzie would be M-C-K-E-N-Z-I-E.
Speaker 1: No, you gave a name, her name of--
Speaker 2: Auntie.
Speaker 1: --of, I think you gave the name of your, your--
Speaker 2: Enid?
Speaker 1: No, that was the grandparents, right, Enid and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --George.   And then you said, Aunt, and you gave a name and I can't--
Speaker 2: Auntie and--
Speaker 1: And I was wondering how to spell it.  It was somebody that, I thought--
Speaker 2: Dinnin.
Speaker 1: Is that it?
Speaker 2: Dinnin.  D-I-N-N-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her real name was Deashenbow [ph.].  Don't ask me (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Just pronounce it again slowly.
Speaker 2: Deashenbow, very West Indian.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's her last name?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And that's who raised my dad in Harlem [New York, New York].  They came to Harlem too, but they lived on the hill [Sugar Hill, Harlem, New York, New York] in the same building with Duke Ellington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were on the hill.  And my father always said the only way they could pay the rent on the hill is because not only did they work at things, but they did a lot of bathtub gin and (laughter) things of that sort.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were--they came along during the Prohibition era, I guess.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, okay, yeah, there was a lot of money in that, and so they lived on the hill.  This is--
Speaker 2: Sugar Hill [Harlem, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Sugar Hill, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, okay, like there is in The Sugarhill Gang, you know that--
Speaker 2: Well, no.  That's, that's--
Speaker 1: More like (laughter)--yeah, more or better, yeah (unclear)--okay.  That's the sugar, same Sugar Hill, but not of the same (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Not of the same era, not of anything.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  What's that--now, Sugar Hill and there's another place called Strivers' Row [Harlem, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Well, Strivers' Row is what we would call still in the valley.  And it just consists--it's just considered like one or two streets that have beautiful brownstones that are architecturally great.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And it's just been called Strivers' Row.  But for old New Yorkers, of which there aren't too many anymore, we call that still in the valley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which means it's down the hill from the--
Speaker 1: Up the hill is Sugar Hill.
Speaker 2: Up the hill is Sugar Hill.  That's like the St. Nicholas [Avenue], St. Nicholas--
Speaker 1: St. Nicholas, Fourth Avenue--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Convent Avenue.
Speaker 1: Convent, okay.
Speaker 2: All up there.  And in the valley would be your Eighth Avenue, Seventh Avenue, you know, which is now Malcolm X [Boulevard] and Lenox [Avenue] and around in there.
Speaker 1: So, so Sugar Hill is up in a area near City College of New York [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, that's exactly right.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so, so they lived--
Speaker 2: And Columbia [University, New York, New York], let me put that in.  Most people don't realize that Harlem has Columbia and City College.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 156398
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you--were, were your father's [George Fay] people then involved heavily in--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father really didn't speak much about them.  I don't think he knew his parents [Enid Fay and George Fay] well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, they died.  I don't know--
Speaker 1: So, he was raised by his aunt?
Speaker 2: He was raised by his aunt and his grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what about his grandmother?  Do you know much about her?
Speaker 2: I--because they both died while I--I think even before I started school.  But I mean who I remember in my dad's family was my Aunt Marie.
Speaker 1: It's interesting, (unclear) you said your grandmother's name was Joy.  I was thinking about Joy Street in Boston [Massachusetts] in a historic black neighborhood there with African meaning and how (unclear) and all that.  I just wondered if that had anything to do with that name?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so he was raised by his Aunt Marie and--
Speaker 2: No, that was his sister.
Speaker 1: Oh, his sister, okay.
Speaker 2: His sister who I remember--what I was saying is, the most vivid memories of people on my father's side is my Aunt Marie.  She was my Auntie Mame.  I mean she was, she was gorgeous.  She had a different kind of bon vivant lifestyle.  It was the first interracial marriage I had ever been around.  She married a German guy, my Uncle Fritz, and they didn't have children.  So my brother and I were their kids.  So we got to do all kinds of things (laughter) with them.  And my father and, and his sister were very close, very close.  She was older.
Speaker 1: Okay, so well, he would have been an era of one of the few Germans actually living in Harlem [New York, New York], I guess, during the War [World War II].
Speaker 2: They didn't live in Harlem.
Speaker 1: They--oh, they didn't.  Okay, oh, they didn't live in Harlem.  Okay, all right.  So they lived--well, where did they live?
Speaker 2: West Side.  He was a jewelry designer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the village, I mean she was the first person I know to be in the Greenwich Village.  My aunt was out there (laugher).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: In a good way.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was she an artist too or did she have--
Speaker 2: No, I--she, she modeled for a while, but really got into the marketing business of, of home goods and things of that sort.  But, you know, we didn't talk a lot at family gatherings about what people did as much, only about the expectation that we do better than they do--they did.  But, you know, they were happy, and we were always together for family occasions, always knowing that the family was close knit, but--and small.  You know, when you consider my mother [Allie Smith Fay] had three siblings.  My father had one, and I have one sibling.  I have one first cousin.  So it's a very small family.
Story_ID: 156399
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did your father [George Fay] say about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my father said about growing up, it is--it was tough.  But he was so self-directed.  My dad was a leader from day one, just self-directed and, I think, although they lived in a great address or whatnot, you know, they didn't have many resources.  But my father was always involved in sports and football.  He started a black semi-pro league as a high schooler.  He got to college on a football scholarship coming out of--he went to high school in the Bronx [New York, New York].  And it was my maternal grandmother [Lucille Walker] who got to know him because they'd be in the street playing football, that said, you know, you need to do this in one of the schools, that got him the space, to hold blackboard sessions and what not when he was a high schooler.  So, you know, he was just very sports-oriented, and, again, that's how he got to, that's how he got to college.  There was an older person, Tommy Curtis [ph.].  That was his mentor who recognized that too.  People in school.  It tells you how tight and close the black community was, got him in school, and he went to South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] on a football scholarship.
Story_ID: 156400
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Now, was your father [George Fay] associated with the Harlem "Y" [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association] at all?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they both were, but not, not in the sense of what, what you would think, you know, in terms of the theatrical kinds of things.  But they all--those were recreation areas.  His thing was football.  I'm telling you.  They were the Rivets [ph.] and the Giants [ph.], and they had their own identity.  I remember my mother [Allie Smith Fay] saying--in fact, they were my babysitters, you know, when, when I was born, what I remember growing up is, I'd be in the living room just like this, and I'd be part of the blackboard sessions, just as quiet 'cause they--my father would have them in the house all the time.
Speaker 2: So, now, let me get this straight.  Now, your father, as a teenager organized the other teenagers in football teams and actually, you know--
Speaker 1: And carried it forward after school, after the [U.S.] Army 'cause he was a war, World War II veteran.
Speaker 2: He came up with formal plays and all of this stuff--
Speaker 1: He had, absolutely.  All of that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All of that.
Speaker 2: So these informal teams became like semi-pro teams?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what were the names?  You said the--
Speaker 1: The Rivets.
Speaker 2: The Rivets.  What'd they call themselves, the Harlem Rivets or just--
Speaker 1: New York Rivets.
Speaker 2: New York Rivets.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, that's, that's what existed in those days.  They were all leagues that--so most of your major cities had black leagues in most sports, and there was a football one as well.
Speaker 2: Okay, the New York Rivets and there's another team called--
Speaker 1: There was.  Was it the Bears?  I can't remember.  Oh, I wish I had a football picture.
Speaker 2: I thought you mentioned the Giants, but I'm not sure you said that.
Speaker 1: I wish I had a football picture.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, that would be something I'd have to look for.  There is a, a picture of one of his teams that he played with because we even had reunions at my house when we left New York [City, New York], and I could remember more things that he would, you know, that all the guys would come out who were still around and all the people he got scholarships for later on.
Speaker 2: Now, now, were they--you said, they--did he play in a league?  I mean were the Rivets, were they--
Speaker 1: It was a Negro league.
Speaker 2: A Negro--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I understand that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: But I'm just saying, and do you know where some of the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I'm talking about the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, ma'am.  I understand what you're talking about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So were these--'cause the NFL [National Football League] hadn't even been formed at that time.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: The '40s [1940s], they were still, I mean--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they had leagues.  I remember going to parks, you know.  I think my mother always told me the largest argument they ever had was he raided their savings account to buy uniforms (laughter), you know, owners.  They needed uniforms, and my father would get the uniforms.  But this is after college.  This is when I'm a young kid.  We're still living in Harlem [New York, New York], before we left Harlem.  But I remember so many of the guys 'cause they literally were my babysitters, you know.  And I remember blackboard sessions.  My father would take me to the park to run patterns and sequences to see how they would look, (laughter) which I think is, I became quite athletic later on.  But I knew all about it.  I knew all the plays.  I knew the playbook.  I knew, you know--
Speaker 2: Okay, did they play teams from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Boston [Massachusetts]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I would think so, but see, those are the things I wouldn't really remember.
Speaker 2: I just wondered if you remember the name of any other team?
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't.  You know, gosh, I should ask my brother.  He might know.  You know, but my father even carried it forward because--well, I'll talk about that later, when we moved to Teaneck [New Jersey] which was a very isolating and segregated community, Teaneck, New Jersey, he--one of the first things he did is start a Boy Scout Troop for the black kids who were here, and he, he coached Ivy--they called it Ivy League football.  You know, he had football teams of young people going (laughter).  So it continued.  My house was always full of kids, either scouts or football players.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's been through my whole life.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: As well as him being just extremely social, loved to entertain.
Story_ID: 156401
Speaker 1: So, so, so your father [George Fay] got a scholarship to South Carolina-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: --Carolina State.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was drafted.  You see in those days, the draft didn't mean anything for World War II [WWII].  He was drafted out of college to go to the war.
Speaker 1: Now, South Carolina State is--
Speaker 2: Orangeburg [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Orangeburg, okay.  Okay, but he was drafted, and so did he serve overseas?  Did he go--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, Okinawa [Island, Japan].  In fact, I have his discharge papers and his medals.  France, Northern Africa and Japan.  In fact, the only thing, the war is hard for--you know, when you talk to those World War II veterans, he became very active in the 369th Veterans' Association.  You know, that's a dying thing.  It's unfortunate.  But I recall, they really didn't wanna talk too much about the war except that he'd always say he never really believed that he'd get home.  And the one most heartbreaking experience was when he did come home, I think they were based in South Carolina, and they would allow him to come up to New York [New York] to see his family.  And he had already been gone like a year and a half, but yet he wanted to go to an officer's club or a club for enlisted men, whatever kind of club there was.  And he said it was the first time a gun was put to his head, and he was in a U.S. uniform and this was in South Carolina.  And they said, "No, you can't go in there, nigger," in a uniform in South Carolina--
Speaker 1: I knew the "N" word was in there somewhere.
Speaker 2: --with, with stuff that he had been already overseas.
Speaker 1: Now, did he serve as a officer or--
Speaker 2: No, he became a master sergeant, 'cause he was drafted.  He didn't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And he was in the [U.S.] Army.  And as soon as he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And do you know if he was in the [U.S. Army] Quartermaster Corps or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I bet if I read some of the papers, it would be there, but I just don't know.
Speaker 1: So, was he actually in the 369th [infantry] himself or did he--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's interesting 'cause he may not have been since he was drafted out of South Carolina, but, you know--
Speaker 2: But Harlem [New York, New York] is still his home base.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, that's true, so they could of, he could of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because those old--
Speaker 1: --been involved in the 369th.
Speaker 2: --guys in the 369th, they were also all in my house growing up.  We knew all those guys.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we just interviewed [HM] General Nathaniel James yesterday, who was a general over there at--and the founder of the 369th Historical Society.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: He, he and William Miles.  So we were just talking to him yesterday afternoon.  So this is--
Speaker 2: Isn't that something.
Speaker 1: How (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Probably knows my dad.
Speaker 1: I, I would bet.
Story_ID: 156402
Speaker 1: So, but he [Fay's father, George Fay] served in these three different theaters of the war [World War II, WWII]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in North Africa, Okinawa [Japan], and France.  And this is something--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that, I know my father did it, so I know it's pos- possible to do.  But very seldom do you hear--you talk to people that went to all three--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: Sites.  So--
Speaker 2: I do remember, though, I mean they're really gung ho guys, you know, despite what they know the--how this country is 'cause I remember when Vietnam was coming, and my brother [George Fay, Jr.] was part of the lottery.  You remember when they had the lottery for the draft, and he got a low number.  And I'll never forget at the dinner table because the one thing my family always did is Monday to Friday, we ate dinner all the time.  And the conversation came up about George's, my brother's draft number.  And my mother [Allie Smith Fay] said, "Well, if my son is drafted, I'm taking him to Canada."  Well, that had to be one of the most (laughter) heated discussions where that's when I realized, I said, my father is really, you know, patriot, you know, believes in "you serve," you know.  It had nothing to do with whatever the environment was in the United States or what her--his children were going through even in the environment we lived in.  No, George will serve if he is called.  So, very interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's some interesting positions that come out of that experience--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Interesting positions.
Speaker 1: --that you would never expect.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I--over here the press proclaimed, you know, Double V, you know, victory at home, victory overseas--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, as both, as dual objectives 'cause you--we had a lot of soldiers, you know, fought the [U.S.] Army and the war, had to fight the U.S. Army--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as well.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so--
Speaker 2: And, and, and negotiate for the, for the same benefits coming home.
Story_ID: 156403
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] meet before--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, they grew up together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They grew up together because my, my grandmother [Lucille Walker] knew his aunt and grandmother [Enid Fay].  And as I said, my grandmother was like one of his adult sponsors for his football teams (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so they grew up, they knew each other--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they fell in love?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't know any of that.  I don't know.  But I know it was after the War [World War II].  I think they started writing each other.  Then once my--yeah, my mother--my grandmother had to have died.  I think they became closer when my grandmother died, my maternal grandmother.  So they always, you know, so much, so much loss in their families.  I think my father was overseas when he lost his grandmother.  So through that in terms of the mutual support of what they did for each other and each other's families, they knew each other.  But, no, I never got any of the juicy details.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she had been a, your maternal grandmother had been a mentor to your father?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And so, that was, and so--all right, so when did they get married, your mother and father?
Speaker 2: In 1946, May, 1946, and I came along in April, 1947.
Story_ID: 156404
Speaker 1: Now, and you have one--
Speaker 2: I have one brother [George Fay, Jr.].
Speaker 1: One brother.  Okay, and he's younger than you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, so when you were growing up, the household consisted of just the nuclear family, or did your grandmother live--(unclear) somebody--
Speaker 2: Remember I had--
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --I didn't have any.  That's, see, that's a deficit.  I just didn't have grandparents really around.  My grandfather [James Perry Smith], my maternal grandfather had remarried and was now living in Newark [New Jersey] even though he was still having his business.  But my mother's [Allie Smith Fay] younger sister lived with us for the first, oh, I remember Gee [ph.] with us all through elementary school because she took care of us.  So my aunt lived with us too, the first, I'd say ten years of my life.
Story_ID: 156405
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you think about your parents' [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] talents and their dispositions and their attitudes, their hobbies, how they walk and how they look, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I'm a blend.  I really am a blend.  My mother was a sharp dresser, you know, liked--'cause she was a New Yorker.  She was a Harlemite, proud of it, and well read, spoke up, wasn't engaged in social things, but they were both very, they were race people.  We were always taught you will do better than us, and you will always lift someone else up.  So our jobs, you know, they say your job at school--we both work.  You know, we both work.  No one has given us anything.  We've had it the hard way.  We were told that all the time, and, and it was never a question of you go to college 'cause we did.  And if we could go to college during the [Great] Depression, we know you all can do more.  So education was instilled, always helping other Negroes was instilled, being proud of who you are.  And I tell you, you know, we--my, my parents were just with us all the time 'cause it was tough times even for my brother [George Fay, Jr.] and me.
Story_ID: 156406
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so they [Fay's parents, Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] came to your events and supported you--
Speaker 2: Oh, not to--I didn't have events.  My brother [George Fay, Jr.] did.  My father used to follow his bus.  But when we left New York [New York] and moved to Teaneck [New Jersey], it was an all-white--we were part of the experiment, you know.  When the Northern suburbs redlined, that's, where the first flight from Harlem [New York, New York] so that my friends went to the Cambria Heights [Queens, New York, New York], the St. Albans [Queens, New York, New York], the Hollises [Queens, New York, New York], the Teanecks, and Teaneck is in the history books in terms of what they called volunteer desegregation.  We started fair housing.  But it was a segregated, red-lined suburb of New York, and all of the blacks that had moved in, which weren't many, were all New Yorkers, commuting still to work every day.  But their kids were thrown in this environment where they didn't really want us.  So when I started school here in the eighth grade, my first day, they wanted to put me back because I wasn't old enough.  And that became the relationship with my mother and father and the Teaneck School System (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you moved to Teaneck when you were thirteen or--
Speaker 2: Twelve.
Speaker 1: Twelve, twelve, okay.
Speaker 2: So I was a year ahead in school.  So all I--you know, when I was registered, they told my mother, "Oh, no, she'll have to be in seventh grade."  So as I said, that started that relationship.  They said, "Have you read her records and have you done this?"  They made me audition for the school band and in those days, I was already reading music and playing the flute and clarinet.  And I remember my mother stayed home from work to say, "What do you mean, audition?"  See, I didn't realize all this later.  She stood with me through my audition, and they still didn't take me.  But, you know, so I had to learn how to cope with rejection.  And those are some of the very interesting conversations my mother and I had, that I didn't even get till later on 'cause she said, "Well, you know, I, I've been to all white schools too, you know, except for junior high school.  No, starting in high school and college I would have to take some of my friends' papers to say how come they have an "A", and I have a "B"?  Why is this better?"  I said, "Oh, ma, I can't do that."  She said, "Well, you may learn.  But sometimes that's what it takes."  So I had to learn that at twelve and thirteen years old because it was just a matter of, well, you're not good enough.  You won't, you know--it came to a point my mother was at school at least every other week because it was something I was told, and I'd come home and say something that she didn't like.  But that happened with quite a few of the parents.  They just had to get the school system ready for this infusion of what I would call middle-class kids whose parents weren't gonna be pushed around.
Story_ID: 156407
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we're gonna go back even further 'cause we, we started--
Speaker 2: We have to.  We jumped, didn't we?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we did.  So we're gonna start with--but it's in the context of talking about your parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay].  But back, we always ask this question, do you have an earliest childhood memory or babyhood memory?  Earliest memory?
Speaker 2: I think my earliest memory--because we were always together, my family.  But it was when my brother [George Fay, Jr.] came home from the hospital.  And maybe that might be too early, too, too late.  But I was five.  And I was so excited 'cause I was ready to have a live doll (laughter).  Yeah, I had plenty dolls and Howdy Doody 'cause my father would take me everywhere.  My father would take me to the, you know, living in New York [New York], you could hit all the studios and hit all the shows.  So I would be on 'Howdy Doody' and all of that, even though they didn't put me on screen.  But they also had a peanut gallery--
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So you were in the peanut gallery?
Speaker 2: And that's where, and that's where they would put the black children.  So, you know, not the ones that they would film on television, but there would be plenty black kids who were also coming to the studios for the shows.  So I remember they picked me up from school, and I jumped in the car.  And I saw my brother.  So maybe that was one of the profound memories.  I'm sure there're others, but I was just so--I never remember being so excited.
Speaker 1: Now, were you disappointed when he couldn't really play with you?
Speaker 2: Not at all, not at all.  You know, my mother said she felt, she felt a little, she felt like she was taking advantage 'cause I wanted to change his diapers (laughter), I wanted to (laughter).  So she said, "I'd give you all that stuff and you'd wash out his diapers and you'd wanna feed.  I said, now, wait a minute, Toni."  You know, so they would take time to try to show me how to hold him.  I was just excited about having company 'cause it was just me and them for, what, five and a half years.
Speaker 1: I suppose you and your brother are close today?
Speaker 2: Very close.
Speaker 1: I would think so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very close.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what's your brother's name?
Speaker 2: George.
Speaker 1: Okay, he's George--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He's George, I'm Georgette (laughter).  George Fay.
Story_ID: 156408
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so you started off in, the first part of childhood was in Harlem [New York, New York] on--
Speaker 2: Yes, well--
Speaker 1: --on the hill [Sugar Hill, Harlem, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Well, Washington Heights [Manhattan, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Were, were, were you on the hill--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, my parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] were there.
Speaker 1: You were in Washington Heights.
Speaker 2: We moved to Washington Heights.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Although they kind of call that part of Harlem now, but we, we lived there.  And I went to elementary school--when I tell people, yeah, I'm a New Yorker, and I was born at Columbia Presbyterian [New York Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York], right across the street from the Audubon Ballroom [later, The Malcolm X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial and Educational Center, New York, New York].  But that was mostly Puerto Rican, Jewish and black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and a lot of the--I could walk outside and across the street to the park and see the Polo Grounds.  So on my way, going to my elementary school, which was mostly Jewish, and I'd say about 30 percent black, even in New York in those days, we would go by--I, I always remember walking by Willie Mays' house and ring the bell, and we'd run (laughter) because we could--that was part of the history.  You could see all of that.  You know, it doesn't exist anymore.
Speaker 1: So that's actually when Willie Mays was still in New York.
Speaker 2: Still in New York, of course.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he played for the New York Giants.
Speaker 2: New York Giants.
Speaker 1: New York baseball Giants.
Speaker 2: That's right.  The baseball Giants, but the Polo Grounds was in Harlem, and in the valley.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that.  So that's near the Audubon--
Speaker 2: The Polo Grounds--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Ballroom.
Speaker 2: No, the Polo Grounds was what we called in the valley.  It would now be like 8th Avenue, and 155th Street.  Now, they're all housing projects.  But that was the site of the Polo Grounds.  And from up top in Washington Heights, there was always parks, Edgecombe Avenue was one street of park, parks and buildings on the other side.  And you could go over to the park and just sit there and look right into the Polo Grounds 'cause we were at 164th Street.  The Polo Ground was 155th [Street] down, down, down.  So you could see the Polo Grounds.  I remember my mother saying that the night Jackie Robinson walked out on the baseball field was when she came home from the hospital with me.  And they went out and sat on one of those benches to, to--because it was the [Brooklyn] Dodgers playing the [New York] Giants [later, San Francisco Giants].  And so she, you know, they witnessed all--they was, all so excited.  She said, Harlem was just so excited, and Jackie was coming to the Polo Grounds, you know, 'cause they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So was this first night--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --they were in Brooklyn [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: --night that he played?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think that's what she told me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, she might have had it mixed--but, she said, and you were in my arms, you know, things can be--it was drama.  But she remembered that (laughter) and proud Harlem was that Jackie was playing.  But see those are all things, all New Yorkers don't realize all those things were in the cities, even though we weren't the ones filling the stands and the things of that sort.  But those were in our neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: Did you ever see Willie Mays in person?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Handsome.  That's why we'd ring the bell (laughter) and run away.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so he was somebody that--it's interesting now.  It doesn't seem, the athletes don't seem to live in the community anymore, and in the city.
Speaker 2: Well, they certainly lived in Teaneck [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: But inner-city, no.  I think Walt Frazier just came back to Harlem, but everybody's coming back to Harlem, and he's not--
Speaker 1: Clinton [President Bill Clinton] even has, he came back to Harlem--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, he doesn't live, his office.
Story_ID: 156409
Speaker 1: We always ask this question in this way.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights.  Wow, sights.  I, I don't know how to answer that.  I mean I was a city kid, you know.  So the sights were, my parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] encouraged us to do anything.  So the sights were, I, I saw most things.  I--family, always being around, good times, lots of laughter.  Smells, my mother was a great cook.  So I'd have to say food.  What's the third, you said?
Speaker 1: Sights, sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Sounds, I mean, you're living in the city.  You hear the car and the buses and the, you know, I loved riding on the double-decker.  We used to always on weekends--I learned how to ride the subway very early.  And so I remember that because my mother always instilled independence and always said, you're going to school 'cause you'll never--you're always gonna be independent.  She started telling me that very early.  And said, so on Saturdays was our day to hang out, when we were still living in New York [New York].  But I learned how to ride the subway to get to dance class.  And dance class was on 47th Street.  So I was one of those kids who was kind of lucky.  I would--I finally learned how to get to dance class, and then she would meet me after that.  And I went to a place called the New Dance Group, and that was a place where dancers who were trying to break into Broadway shows and what not, taught dance to little kids during the day, right (laughter).  So if I wasn't staying to see rehearsals of some of them dancing, like [HM] Donald McKayle was my favorite dancer.  He became a famous choreographer.  My mother would meet me, and we'd go to shows, the opera, shop, but learning how to ride the subway and being able to do that by myself.  I remember once I got lost and I said, oh, I can't tell my mother.  But you could walk up to a policeman, you know, you could, you could talk to anyone.  They didn't bother any kids.  So being able to go from Harlem [New York, New York] or Washington Heights [Manhattan, New York, New York] to Midtown for--my dance class was 47th Street, which is not far from Rockefeller Center, and, and then, you know, I was just culturally stimulated and exposed.  And, of course, the football teams.  I knew the blackboard sessions.  And there was always a pot on the stove, even though my mother worked every day.
Story_ID: 156410
Speaker 1: Now, did, did your father [George Fay] know some of the NFL [National Football League] players in town that played for the [New York] Giants and--
Speaker 2: When we moved to Teaneck [New Jersey], yes.  In fact, I used to beat 'em all at foot- at ping pong.  Rosey, [Roosevelt] "Rosey" Brown lived right around the corner from me--from us in Teaneck.  And I forget who else he would tell, and they--I used to have this reputation 'cause we had a ping pong table.  They would talk about this little colored girl who beat all of them at ping pong (laughter).  During the winter, the ping pong table held my brother's [George Fay, Jr.] trains, but then they would--
Story_ID: 156411
Speaker 1: Well, what was the difference between, I guess, well, growing up in Harlem's [New York, New York] gotta be one experience and then growing up in--now, you were in--not Harlem, but in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's all--when you're black, it's Harlem.
Speaker 1: Well, Washington Heights [Manhattan, New York, New York], yeah.
Speaker 2: But when you're black, it's Harlem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and we didn't differentiate.  You know, I, I, I'd never been--it was always interesting to me when I started meeting other black people who would try to make these class distinctions 'cause I didn't grow up that way.  And so as far as I'm concerned where there were black people, it was Harlem, but geographically, to be correct in history, I have to say to you, 164th Street was considered Washington Heights.  But we all called it Harlem.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I know there're similar neighborhoods in Chicago [Illinois] that change depending on who's living there.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: They used to be called one thing and now they're--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: --something else.
Speaker 2: Same thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 156412
Speaker 1: Where, where did you start school?  Did you start school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: P.S. 169 in Manhattan [New York, New York], 169th Street.  Now, that's what was across from the Audubon Ballroom [later, The Malcolm X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial and Educational Center].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause the Audubon Ballroom--and it's restored now.  You know, when you come through New York [New York], you should try to see it.  It's the Betty Shabazz, Betty and Malcolm Shabazz Center [sic].
Speaker 1: Yes, I realized.  In fact, I'm, I'm--I think I'm gonna try to see it tomorrow.
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, it's just lovely.  It's right at 165th, 66th, and my elementary school, that no longer exists, it was like, like 168th [Street] and Audubon [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, I take it you liked school.  You had a lot of encouragement.
Speaker 2: I loved it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I loved it in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I mean what kid--I remember the, oh, but we had a little altercation.  Now, in the fourth grade, that's an early memory.  And I said, boy, this is gonna be something.  My mother [Allie Smith Fay] is on this.  I didn't do well sewing.  And, again, I, I never had a black teacher until sixth grade, Mrs. Bradshaw [ph.].  I'll remember her 'cause of the fact she was the only black teacher I had my whole public school career.  So fourth grade, we had to make aprons in home ec [home economics], and I couldn't sew.  And they would ask me, "Well, doesn't your mother sew?"  My mother didn't sew (laughter).  So, I would go home so frustrated to say, "Mom, they're telling me I could be left back if I don't make this apron."  My mother hired somebody to make a apron, and said, "Bring it in and see what they say."  "Did you make this apron?"  I said, "No.  But you wanted an apron."  And I don't make aprons.  So, you know, and my mother had to come and say, no child should be told that they're advancement is gonna be based on sewing, fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, you had a grandfather [James Perry Smith] who was a tailor now?
Speaker 2: That's right.  But guess who, guess who made it (laughter).
Speaker 1: I was trying to make a connection, so.
Speaker 2: Guess who made it.  But my mother and my aunt, now, her sister was a great person, you know.  But I, my mother didn't sew.  I didn't sew, still don't.  I know how to hem things and fix buttons, but I'm not a--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: I'm a good cook.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject or part of school that you liked the most?
Speaker 2: Well, in those days, I considered myself--those are the days I was most motivated 'cause I liked being around other, other black children.  I liked the energy of New York.  I didn't feel as put upon--and we'll talk more about moving to Teaneck [New Jersey].  I thought it was a disaster for me.  But I loved math then and geography and thought I was gonna be a doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were skipped ahead too, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I started early, so they, they skipped me early, yeah.  They, I skipped kindergarten because I guess my mother already had taught me so I was already reading and writing.  So I never did kindergarten.
Story_ID: 156413
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you just go to the one school in, in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: I started seventh grade at [Edward W.] Stitt Junior High School [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: That's S-T-I--
Speaker 2: T-T.
Speaker 1: --T-T.  Now, where was Stitt?  Was that--
Speaker 2: Right in the neighborhood where we lived, a block away.  And by the time I went to junior high school, New York was the, Harlem, New York, was declining, you know, and a lot of people were thinking, "Do we leave?"  You know, this is the part, we came to Teaneck [New Jersey] in '59 [1959].  So my parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] said, "Well, we either stay and figure out how to pay private school tuition or leave and find a town where the schools are great."  And they wanted to stay in New York.  They were looking at the Bronx [New York, New York] for a long time, and eventually, we, you know, as I said, if you found a black couple who could have--and my father was a veteran, so they could get one of those mortgages.
Speaker 1: V--yeah.
Speaker 2: So, the redline, it was one of the redlined suburbs, a famous one in all of the desegregation textbooks.  So we moved to Teaneck.
Story_ID: 156414
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're--we got you to junior high school.  Anything about [Edward W.] Stitt Junior High School [New York, New York] before we take you to Teaneck [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: No, I was in a band.  That was my second, that was my second black teacher.  I forget--I remember Mr. Brown [ph.].  He was terrific, and he was the bandleader.  I loved it.  I was having a great time.  I was thinking about the possibility about going to [The High School of] Music & Art [later, Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & the Arts, New York, New York], which is a special high school in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Yeah, the one up on the hill there on St. Nicholas [Park] with--
Speaker 2: It was that, it was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, now, it's LaGuardia [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], which is around Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Right, right 'cause it was up there when they made the movie 'Fame' and all that--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, it was--
Speaker 1: --about a high school up there on the hill, right?
Speaker 2: --there.  It was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: On City College's [City College of the City University of New York, New York, New York] campus.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But they combined the High School of Music & Art, and the High School of, oh, gosh, what's the other one [the High School of Performing Arts, New York, New York]?  Music & Art, they combined two of them into LaGuardia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Performing Arts.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what did you play in the band?  What instrument--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Flute and clarinet.
Speaker 1: Okay, flute and--
Speaker 2: And I was taking piano lessons, but never made the band in Teaneck [New York].
Story_ID: 156415
Speaker 1: Now, this is story--it sounds like, well, I'll ask, I'll ask you that in a second, after we get you to Teaneck [New Jersey], but so your parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] decide that the schools are better in Teaneck.  And the--
Speaker 2: Well, and the community.  I mean Harlem [New York, New York] was falling apart.  It was just getting the nasty, ugly, you know, this--things were getting unsafe, you know.  It wasn't necessarily--it was okay that all the wine-o's knew you, 'cause that was just part of Harlem.  My mother could come out of the subway on her way home from work, and the wine-o by the subway station could tell her if, if her kids were home (laughter), you know.  But everybody knew everybody.  Drugs changed all that.  Drugs changed our community.  And when that started, people didn't know people.  You had too many people moving in and out of the buildings that were very solid.  You know, 'cause that--New York [New York] is apartment living.  Conditions were declining, schools were declining.  It just wasn't safe.
Speaker 1: Describe the place your parents lived in New York.  Where was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In a five-story walk-up apartment.  It was about a six-room apartment, six or seven-room apartment.  You know, I'd love to have it (laughter).  But the building was, you know, all the families knew each other.  My mother would always say my next-door neighbor who I got to know, Ms. Davis [ph.], taught my mother how to wash me when I first came home.  The, the, my next-door neighbor on the other side, they had a daughter one year older than me.  And my father was the one--she'd come over every Friday, and my father taught us chess, Monopoly, all the card games, rummy, 'cause he loved it.  He was very competitive.  I got to be like him in that way.  So I mean, after I started beating him at chess, we couldn't play anymore (laughter), but he, they would come over.  And so people knew each other in the building.  Things changed--was changing, you know, and it was just time.  And it was time to go.
Speaker 1: Was the building getting dangerous?
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All of that.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, Teaneck, New Jersey, did you move into a house?
Speaker 2: Yes, private house.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That was a new experience.
Speaker 1: So you had a backyard, front yard?
Speaker 2: For everybody, 'cause New Yorkers don't have houses, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you excited about it?
Speaker 2: Very, oh, my goodness, we were excited.  You know, to ride your bicycle without issues and, you know, to kind of just have clean air and we thought this was gonna be great.  And it was only ten minutes from New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1959?  (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-nine [1959].
Story_ID: 156416
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and, now, what was the name of the school that you attended in Teaneck [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Benjamin Franklin Junior High School [later, Benjamin Franklin Middle School, Teaneck, New Jersey], and then--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Teaneck High School [Teaneck, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: So at Benjamin Franklin, this is where they, they gave you a test to see if you could--
Speaker 2: No, they didn't test me.  They didn't have the first record.  They just said I had to go back because I was too young.  I couldn't possibly compete with the current eighth graders.
Speaker 1: So they actually sent you back a grade?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: No, they--okay.
Speaker 2: No, they, they wanted to talk to my mom [Allie Smith Fay] about it (laughter).  So it never happened.  Let me just put it that way.  It didn't happen.  They wanted to put me back, and my mother said, "Well, I'd love to know how you made that assessment.  Do you have her records?"  And that was the mistake they made.  You don't have her records.  So well, I--she said, "Well, I can tell you them verbatim 'cause I know what's there.  And she can do this and do that."  So I stayed in eighth grade.  You know, eventually, they tried to offer my mother a job.  She said it would have been so convenient, but they couldn't pay her.
Story_ID: 156417
Speaker 1: One question I neglected to ask, and I guess we should ask this for anybody watching this.  Do you have any idea, I mean--Teaneck [New Jersey] is spelled, T-E--
Speaker 2: T-E-A-N-E-C-K.
Speaker 1: T-E-A-N-E-C-K.  Okay, all right.  All right, all right, that's all (laughter), just wanna make sure we know how to spell it.  So--
Speaker 2: Not like the Isley Brothers label, T-dash-N-E-C-K.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.  That how I would--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Although it's the same town (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, T-Neck Records.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, were they in the neighborhood when you moved there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Isleys, so they--a large family, I would guess, just from what I see on the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm not saying all the Isleys.  The mother [Sallye Isley] was in Englewood [New Jersey], 'cause we could hear them rehearse.  And then, Ron [Isley] was a couple blocks away, the lead.  And his children and a couple of other children went to, were in junior high and high school more so with my brother [George Fay, Jr.].  But we had lots of people.  Nat Adderley was a couple blocks away.  It was a community where black people who could left New York [New York] and settled.  So we had the big entertainment influx, athletic influx.  Again, it was a redline, we--Teaneck is great.  Let us put black people in this part of New Jersey.  You know, they did the same thing with the New Rochelle [New York] community.  If we start looking at the whole mi--Northern migration--you know, everybody thinks that migration is all about from South to North, but the Northern migration of those of us who grew up in cities all have the suburban story.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And Teaneck--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: From Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to Nicetown [Nicetown-Tioga, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--(simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And Teaneck is a major part of the history in terms of Northern integration because of the, the landmark decisions and things that were started here.  As I said, fair housing, the movement started here, and I had a great--I mean the only thing that happened to me when Teaneck--when I came, 'cause I was one of the older kids, I joined, I got into a junior high school.  I think there was about four black kids, and, but I had a great babysitting clientele because I was one of the older kids of families who were moving in the community.  So my parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] said, do you have to babysit, 'cause they would have to stay home if I babysat.  But I had a wonderful baby clientele, babysitting clientele, Supreme Court judges and the deputy head of the Urban League, and nationally, and, you know, because Teaneck was one of those communities.  As I said, around New York, the people who left New York were out here, even though who couldn't give this as an address because they wanted to get their kids in good schools.
Story_ID: 156418
Speaker 1: They, they gave you, you say they gave you a test for the clarinet, I guess--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Band.  Yeah, no, an audition.
Speaker 1: An audition.
Speaker 2: Can you imagine?
Speaker 1: You had to audition to get in the band.
Speaker 2: To get in a school band.  And then they didn't take me.  They told my mother [Allie Smith Fay] there wasn't any room.  So my mother enrolled me in some other kind of lessons.  I could tell then, I tried out for cheerleading.  Nothing I did was gonna be good enough in Teaneck [New Jersey].  So it was clear to me--although, I couldn't articulate.  I said, these people don't want me.  And I had taken on a little more responsibility at home.  My mother was a little nervous now.  My aunt was no longer living with us, and they were a two parent, two-parent working household.  So my mother had to work, and she was a little concerned about how would she manage all of this.  George [Fay, Jr.] is at this school, I'm this school--my brother, George.  So I was always someone who had to get home after school and meet my brother.  And I learned, you know, because I was, I was junior, junior mom (laughter).  And I would start dinner to my father's [George Fay] chagrin 'cause most of the time, it was half cooked, but my mother kept encouraging (laughter) me to do so.  And so I would be coming home quite a bit.  So she started organizing what I would say, organized play, things for me to get engaged in, where there were more black kids.  And, 'cause I was the camper in the family.  I loved going to camp, loved it, loved it, became a lifeguard.  But then when we moved to Teaneck, there was this black camp, historic camp.  And she said, you know, maybe it was time for me to go there.  It was called Camp Minisink [Glen Spey, New York].  So one of the things I did is--
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Minisink?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: M-I-N-I-S-I-N-K.  You will find most black New Yorkers somehow figured out how to go to Minisink or become part of the Tapawingo Honor Society as they have been called.
Speaker 1: Tapawingo?
Speaker 2: Tapawingo, T-A-P-A-W-I-N-G-O.  Well, I got involved--I went to camp for one year at Minisink.  It was an all-black camp.  It was quite different from the camp I was used to, but it was cool.  And they asked me to be part of a summer prog--fall program.  So this fit my mother's agenda beautifully because all fall, I then would come into the city once a week for leadership courses.  Now, I'm what, thirteen, fourteen, with regard to, again, understanding desegregation, understanding hiring practices of big companies.  They, they wanted kids like us to go around and interview senior executives about their practices.  I mean this is the first time I ever even used any of this language, but then I was identified to go on television on Sunday mornings on some religious program.  They used to have public service television.  And they would have these young people just talk about their experiences, about going around the city, having interviews.  So I was one of them.  I'd been on about twice.  Boy, that was fun (laughter).
Story_ID: 156419
Speaker 1: But Teaneck [New Jersey] was--I mean I hated school.  I wasn't involved in anything, you know, but I went through.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is Teaneck High--in Teaneck High School [Teaneck, New Jersey]?
Speaker 1: Teaneck Junior High [Benjamin Franklin Junior High School, later Benjamin Franklin Middle School, Teaneck, New Jersey] and high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It just wasn't welcoming.  I didn't, you know, there weren't proms for us to go to.  It just was a different environment.  By the time my brother [George Fay, Jr.] came through, totally different because a larger influx of blacks had come to the community, you know.  So now, let's say the town was maybe now 10 to 20 percent African American.  But also, it was a culture that was more welcoming to African American families.  So, it had changed.  But my experience at Teaneck went--by the time I graduated, I think my class was about eight hundred people.  There were ten of us.
Speaker 2: That was a big high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a big high school.
Speaker 2: So this is like four thousand kids or something?
Speaker 1: Then, my class was big, eight, sixteen, twenty-four.  No, it would have been--it was just three grades, nine--it was ten, eleven, twelve.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: So, 2,500.  And my brother just mentioned to me, he said, do you know, Teaneck only had three hundred and some from their senior class.  But, again, the school has changed.  It's mostly black and brown now.  So that goes to show you what can happen in, what, forty years.
Speaker 2: Now, were there any teachers in school, though I don't think that's likely that you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Which school?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Teaneck High School, that were mentors or--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --role models for you?
Speaker 1: No, none.
Story_ID: 156420
Speaker 1: Okay, then the next question is, who in the community, you know, at the camp [Camp Minisink, Glen Spey, New York] or some of the other activities you were involved in, and served in that capacity--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] had to step in and do that.  I mean there wasn't, and, and their friends.  I mean, as I said, my family was very social, and so loved entertaining.  So I remember growing up, their friends, we didn't know people by aunt this or uncle this or Mr. and Mrs. this, 'cause they all considered themselves so hip, they said, you know, we, we--all their friends, we called by their first names.  So, to this day, you know, my godmother was Helene [ph.].  My godfather was this, you know, (laughter).  So that's how we all grew up and--
Speaker 1: And that is really new style for the black community.
Speaker 2: Really?  Well, not New Yorkers.
Speaker 1: Yes, even, okay, yeah, 'cause--
Speaker 2: Not New Yorkers.
Speaker 1: --most blacks, and most families, you have to have--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --some kind of method of addressing your parents' peers.
Speaker 2: No, no.  They would always say--they all thought they went for bad, you know (laughter).  So, we all grew up--they said, we all grew up together.  I would hear them say that.  And we all traveled together.  I mean if there was company, I was never dismissed.  I was part of--I knew how to be quiet, but I was in the room.  I was in the--and when I left, it's 'cause I wanted to, not because I was dismissed.  So I always heard the discussions.  I was always there, and I could always tell them, and if you walked in, and you were one of my father's friends, I'd say, "Hi, Myron, how you doing?"  "Fine."  They would never, no one was ever corrected.  They called my father Bert and Allie.
Speaker 1: You were one of the privileged few.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, but their children were the same way.  So I knew (laughter) a whole group of them (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your associates in those days were like a very tiny minority in the black community, for those days even, you know, yeah.   So, I don't know if you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I mean the only people I met--
Speaker 1: --realized it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --before, I'm talking about people who like grew up (unclear).  But, you know, then it later--of course, people who I would meet along the way, it was Mrs. so and Mr. so, but people who were like my, my parents' close friends, oh, no.
Speaker 1: Yeah, even so.  I mean, yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I was bartendering at--
Speaker 1: So you had a different kind of experience than a lot of black kids growing up in terms of--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Maybe so.  I was bartendering at thirteen and fourteen.  You know, I didn't drink, but when they had parties, I knew how to make the gin and tonic and the scotch and water, and the--behind the bar (laughter).
Speaker 1: So--
Story_ID: 156421
Speaker 1: --I guess, I guess--what I'm seeing here is, just thinking about this, I mean you're, at high--in high school--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --you were set aside.  And they tried to kind of diminish you in some ways.
Speaker 2: Oh--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But at, at home, and in the (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, at home, it was very different.
Speaker 1: --you had a, you had a big role.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, at home, and I think that's the kind of balance they tried to create.  And it was a full, engaged community.  You know, and my parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] were always very--never tried to be anything else but who they were, hard-working people who believed in, in black progress, taught their kids to believe the same thing.  My father had the place full all the time, as I said, with boy scouts and (laughter) and his Ivy League football team, and my mother was happy just, kind of just managing the family.  She wasn't engaged in, in anything external.
Speaker 1: So the Ivy--your dad started the Ivy League Football Team in Teaneck [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In fact, I have his football--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --with the boy scouts and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I have one of his footballs from his, one of his winning championship teams, Princeton (laughter).
Speaker 1: Is there any--do you have any idea why he called it the Ivy League Football Team?
Speaker 2: No, I think that was a, I think that was a--you know, in those days, it might have just been let our kids know, know their aspiration, you know.  So they were named Harvard and Brown and those were the names of the teams.  Now, they were integrated teams.  There weren't enough black kids to do all these teams.  But that was what it was called, the Ivy League, league.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Isn't that interesting?
Speaker 1: Right, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And we didn't think anything of it then.  But also, in those days, Teaneck was a community that every parent went to college.  All our--everybody's parents went to college.  Now, most of our mothers were teachers and, I mean, I'm not talking about rich kids.
Speaker 1: Now, did he operate his football league and Boy Scout troop out of the Presbyterian Church?
Speaker 2: No, my father was not a Presbyterian.  He was an Episcopal--remember that?
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: No, out of my--our house.  What are you talking about (laughter)?  Out of--and places they would find, you know, other--he, there were other people he would recruit in town because I think the 369th [Veterans' Association] was active then.  So, no, it was, it had gotten organized and external to the home.  In fact, his first--I'll never forget it, how things come around.  His first Eagle Scout, Lowe [ph.]--why can't I think of his first name, became a physician, and because my father died at sixty-four.  And was like, with him, day-in, and day-out.  It's very interesting, and spoke at my dad's funeral.  And I stay in touch with him.  But--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you know, they found--they were resourceful.
Story_ID: 156422
Speaker 1: Now, when, when you were thinking about then, what college to go to, how did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I just knew I had to go to--I--you are looking at somebody who was just basically, you know, making the motions.  I wasn't on any teams.  I wasn't involved--oh, I did go to the March on Washington [1963].  That was a high point.  I was shocked when my parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] let me go on the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: So now, did--was there a bus arranged to go?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And through the Urban League?
Speaker 2: Yes, through New York.
Speaker 1: Through New York?
Speaker 2: Through New York, through the same--
Speaker 1: What was it (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --mission society [New York Mission Society].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when I came home and said, you know, there's gonna be this March on Washington, and I'd really like to go.  And the exercise was, we made our own signs because, what, I had to be maybe sixteen 'cause I got out of high school for the early--or fifteen.  And when they said, yes, you could go, I was so excited.  And I'll never forget that experience as a young person, going to Washington [D.C.] for the March on Washington.  And it was funny because when--I guess our bus got in late, and my father was the parent who was always the one taking us to the house for parties.  My, my father was gathering up the girlfriends, and be the parent to take us to parties and make sure parents were home (laughter).  My father would be the one interviewing the boys who would come to say they're visiting (laughter).  So he said he saw me walking home with my sign, but didn't pick me up 'cause I was just so happy, just walking across Teaneck Road with my picket sign.  He said, I think you were making a statement in Teaneck [New Jersey], so as long as I knew you (unclear) were stable, you know, but it was a great experience, the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: And did you think at the time that this was historic?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I knew it.  You know, plus, because those were conversations going on in my home.  You know, even though Saturdays when I was allowed to learn how to do the subway, I'd have a little spending change, and I was told where I could spend the money or not.  I couldn't go to Howard Johnson's, I couldn't go to Woolworths, and we would ask why.  And they said because they're not serving colored people in the South.  We didn't know the South (laughter), you know, but you could see on television.  But my parents would say, this won't make them broke, but enough of us do this, and please don't, you know, degrade this--what our people are doing, trying to get ahead in the South.  Do not spend your money there.
Speaker 1: It's interesting, they weren't serving 'em in Dayton [Ohio] or Cincinnati [Ohio] either.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, and maybe not New York [New York], but I didn't know that--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I mean it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --but we were told.  We would have our little quarter or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I didn't know when I was a kid that they weren't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --or fifty cents, right.  A quarter or fifty cents, and my mother would say, do not go in 'cause in those days, you know, Woolworths was everywhere.  And I think they were serving us in New York.  And so was Howard Johnson's.  But do not spend your money there.  When you'd say, well, why, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's funny how it varies around the country.  One city, one town, you have one that'll seat you at the counter and one won't.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: It depends on where you are.
Speaker 2: Well, New York was supposed to be progressive.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, but, no, we, you know, we were taught that.  Do not do that.  So, no, I knew the March on Washington was a big deal.  And I, I'll always remember coming home and saying, I don't believe how quiet and how everybody was and all the different signs.  I was just thrilled, just thrilled.  I'll never forget it.
Story_ID: 156423
Speaker 1: Okay, now, growing up in New York [New York] was, were you more keenly aware of Malcolm X than maybe other people were?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I don't know why.  We knew his name, but, no, because I wasn't somebody allowed to just go out.  My parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] planned organized play (laughter), you know.  They knew all our friends.  They kept us engaged in activities.  So, no, I really didn't know about any of the street-corner stuff going on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Although, interesting later, in later years, I became very good friends with Betty Shabazz.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I know he was on New York television too from time to time--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and radio, but I don't--
Speaker 2: But that was later on.
Speaker 1: And we're going towards--now, you graduated in what, '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Sixty-four '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Sixty-four '64 [1964], okay.  Yeah, that's the year before he was assassinated, and, okay, so '64 [1964], that was the year of the Democratic [National] Convention in Atlantic City [New Jersery].  Did you get a chance to go to that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or did your mother go?
Speaker 2: No, no, they didn't go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember if my father did.  Atlantic City had a bitter taste in the, in the minds of some black people, you know, 'cause it was really segregated.  And I know my mother said anything going South, she didn't need to deal with.  We would go to--the only place we had real relatives was Washington, D.C., and that was our trip South, you know.  People laugh at that now, but it is the South.  So we would drive down to Washington, and visit our Southern cousins and see Confederate flags.  We couldn't understand it, you know.  It was funny, when, you know, now when you think about the, the impressions you get, particularly because of the actions of your, your parents 'cause my mother had not been exposed to any of this other than through stories from her parents [Lucille Walker and James Perry Smith].
Story_ID: 156424
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you--so I was asking you how you chose a college.  So--
Speaker 2: Happenstance.  I just said, lo, let's look at a--I was not motivated.  I came out of Teaneck High [School, Teaneck, New Jersey] not really being motivated.  I said I wanna be in a city, I wanna do this.  They accepted me.  I said, I looked at the pros and cons, and so I wound up at Duquesne [University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  It was the right size.  I said, never been there in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], so I went.
Speaker 1: Was there any attraction to Pittsburgh whatsoever that you had or--
Speaker 2: No, I just thought it was a big city.  I'm telling you.  It was--I knew I had to go to college so it wasn't about gap years.  We didn't even know about that.  Or that you don't go.  You know, I remember when my parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] gave me my high school graduation party, and all their friends came, you know.  And I, and I remember asking my mother, I said, why is this such a big deal?  I said, why, why are you making this a party, coming out of high school?  And the next day, she said to me, I'm so glad you feel that way.  Now, feel that way getting out of college (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: So did you--what, was there--now, did you graduate with any honors or anything?
Speaker 2: Nothing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a mediocre, you know.  I knew my job was school.  We were told, your job is school.  We provide the funds for you to go.  You know, and I was fortunate.  And, again, you don't realize all this until later on.  You know, I never had a school loan.
Speaker 1: Did your--do you remember what your counselors told you at Teaneck High School?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I couldn't do anything.
Speaker 1: So they just made it real clear, you couldn't do anything?
Speaker 2: (Unclear), My, you know, all we needed them to do is send in transcripts.  My, my--I had to get my applications in, and my mother, my mother managed that whole process and would talk to them in school.
Speaker 1: Now, nobody tried to get you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: See, remember now, the times.  This was before people were going after African American students, you know, so none of that was anywhere, existed, you know.  Yes, Teaneck was known as a market and if we're gonna have colored kids, let's get 'em there.  Let's get 'em from towns like that, you know, 'cause they can do the work.  And--
Story_ID: 156425
Speaker 1: Okay, so, no one--you didn't consider one of the black colleges [HBCUs] when you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I did, Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], only because my mother's [Allie Smith Fay] friend, Fern [ph.], (laughter).  Again, who we called Fern, was a former Howard Homecoming Queen 'cause that was the joke, you know, in the house.  Any time Fern would, would dress up or look particularly good, they'd say, "Oh, here comes the Howard Homecoming Queen."  So, and then my very good girlfriend went to Howard, and she was a year before me.  So that's when my parents surprised me again.  Her parents, Rochelle's [ph.] parents were gonna go to homecoming and said, "Well, why don't we bring Toni, and she could stay on campus with Rochelle."  Oh, I was so excited, you know, go to Howard, homecoming, and here I am a junior.  So--or maybe a rising senior or whatever.  So I went to Howard's homecoming.  That's the first time I saw, saw all those black sorority and fraternity stuff and the quad and, you know, all the things that happen on black campuses.  And I didn't like it.  It's so funny when I think about it now.  I said, you know, I don't know what it was, but it was just--it wasn't an environment that I wanted to be in for school.
Speaker 1: Now, there was a tendency, I know in those days for black people with college aspirations to sometimes think that the black schools were more party-oriented, and so you shouldn't wanna go to those schools.
Speaker 2: No.  And I never had that from my parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The only argument in my house was my father [George Fay] insisted that I go away.  And my mother said, "Oh, no problem."  But that was their experience.  My mother stayed home for college.  My father went away to college.  And, and my father went to a black college.  So they're--no, that was never--they would never introduce that idea, you know.  So it wasn't them.  But when I went there, I just said, you know, I don't know if I'll do well here.  I, I felt a little animosity toward me, and I could just feel it.  And Rochelle, my friend, I said, you know, she's just--I hope she makes it through here 'cause this is just a little wild.  And so I was just turned off.  So my parents, my mother said, that's when she knew I" was ready to go away.  She said, "Okay, so you wanna go to Howard now, huh, when I came back from homecoming.  She said, "No, I don't think I wanna be there."  She said, "Huh?"  (Laughter) 'Cause now I loved to party.  I mean we had enough at my house, so, you know, I--that wasn't it.  It was some element that just didn't, didn't suit me.
Speaker 1: So, so did you visit Duquesne [University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] first before you--?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156426
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Duquesne [University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] then.  You, over the summer--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, Duquesne was an environment I, I kinda knew of.  During the summer, my mother [Allie Smith Fay] had--her friend found me some little summer job that helped me buy my luggage (laughter) that was in New York [New York], you know, licking stamps and being exposed to--I think she was at a book club company.  So I worked there perhaps six weeks or so, and then got ready for college.  And my parents drove me up to school.  I remember it being so sad when they drove off.  I said, "Oh, my God, here I am.  This is what I wanted, right?  To be in a downtown of a city?"  And I looked around.  It was me and two other black girls, you know.  I knew how to manage those environments, but I didn't know it would be that stark.  When the commuters came, you know, there were a lot more people 'cause it was a urban city.  So Duquesne was cool, you know.  It was large enough.  I could get lost there.  I, I had a great time.  In those days, you met other people in the city if you, like were in a sorority or something, and I did join a sorority.  None of them were on campus, of course.  So I pledged Alpha Kappa Alpha citywide for a year (laughter) and could meet people it had in all the other schools, Carnegie Tech [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and everyplace.  And I had a ball.  I, you know, I had a ball.  And with the commuting student body, there were an awful lot of, you know, local people who were there.  So I got to go to a lot of people's homes and students' homes and what not.  So I had fun.  No, was I a incredibly good student?  No.  But my parents didn't set any expectations.  They said, okay, now you're in college.  Guess what your job is?  To get out (laughter), you know.  So there wasn't any, you know, pressure.  I didn't have scholarships.  They were paying, you know, all which I, I took for granted, but realized later on.  But it was a period of time too when we were becoming more racially aware in terms of power-to-the people stuff.  It was just under the surface, starting to come.  And I, you know, and I remember coming home, maybe in '66 [1966] or '67 [1967] saying, blaming them for moving me to Teaneck [New Jersey], and how I'd been, you know, I haven't been able to live my, my potential because (laughter) of all of this racism and--they would listen.  You know, I would have slapped me, I think.  They would listen.  And they would just look at me and say, well, you know, you turned out okay.  You turned out okay.  So it's just the naivete of what environments (unclear) you think you--so I got out of, I got out of there fine.  My last year I had a Volkswagen.  That was funny.
Story_ID: 156427
Speaker 1: Now, was there--was there any particular teachers or mentors at Duquesne [University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Not then, later on 'cause it was only one--and I see him today.  There was only one black faculty at the time on campus.  His name was [HM Ronald] Ron Davenport.  And Ron--and you, name--if you haven't done him for HistoryMakers, you should absolutely get to him.  Ron was on the law--was the only black on campus professor, teaching at the law school [Duquesne University School of Law, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  He eventually became dean of the law school and the first dean of a major law school in the country.  And then, of course, he was the owner of, oh, what radio network?  He and his family owned the Davenport, still in Pittsburgh,--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --owned a radio network.  Ron's terrific.
Speaker 1: We interviewed him.  We did interview him.
Speaker 2: Oh, great.
Speaker 1: In fact, I interviewed him--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: I can't remember--and I'm trying, was that Mutual--was that the Mutual Broadcasting?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  It wasn't--something like that though.  It might come to me later.
Speaker 1: Mutual Black Radio?
Speaker 2: No, but he did have a partnership with Percy Sutton, but that wasn't his.  And his daughter's great and in New York.  But--
Speaker 1: Sutton's Inner City Broadcasting [Corporation].
Speaker 2: Inner City Broadcasting, but--the Sheridan Broadcasting [Corporation, later American Urban Radio Networks].
Speaker 1: Sheridan, right, the Sheridan Broad--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sheridan Broadcasting.  Now, I'm saying Ron at least reached out.  He was on a graduate level in the law school, but it was the person we could see.  So there was really no relationship.  And you don't, you know, and in schools that size, in those days, you didn't really get involved into your major till junior year.  So I majored in sociology.  I didn't know what else to pick.  You know, I was definitely a liberal arts girl.  I was--it was about what my parents said, just get out (smile).  So I coasted, had fun and got out.
Story_ID: 156428
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, did you do any extracurricular activities in, at, at, at Duq- at Duquesne [University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] or in Pitt- in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Just sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know towards the end there, the black theater movement was starting out.
Speaker 2: That was way before.  That was way after I left.  See I left--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Some of August Wilson and his friends, you know.
Speaker 2: --but his, his sister-in-law was on my line for AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha].  August Wilson, we're, we're contemporaries.  So I think you're thinking of something that happened later.  I got out in '68 [1968], and the biggest story in '68 [1968] was that's when either--that's when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and, and [Robert] Kennedy were assassinated because I remember I couldn't get back on campus the night they assassinated King because the police had surrounded all the access points.  And any black people--and Pittsburgh was on fire, and any black people trying to get on campus were stopped and your I.D. had to be looked at and things of that sort.  So you--the kinds of things you're mentioning really didn't start until some years after.  That's how I got to go to graduate school.  I came home and worked two years, and said, oh, let me go back or do I wanna study?  I don't know.  I was still kind of in a fog.  I said, let me do social work.  I was into "save the world" mode then.  And because I was now going back and forth.  I got married and moved back to Pittsburgh because my husband was from Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He went to law school.  I went to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Did you meet him in Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Um-hum.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) met him there, okay.
Speaker 2: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Was he a student in Duquesne or--
Speaker 2: At Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: At Pitt, okay.
Speaker 2: And so, and then, I mean we were just surprised.  Neither of us knew how to respond.  By this time, this is when they were offering fellowships, and this is when they started really welcoming blacks to be parts of institutions.  This was a whole new experience, you know.  So while I was always someone who knew how to thrive in majority environments, to be able to go to graduate school for free was wonderful, you know, and I was a lot more engaged in graduate school.  I had the--I became head of the student government in the school, and I stayed for three more years.
Story_ID: 156429
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, according to our outline, you--okay, so, so you worked for the New York Department of Welfare--
Speaker 2: Um-hum--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --for a while?
Speaker 2: For two years.
Speaker 1: For two years before you went back to school?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you went back in what, '70 [1970] or so?
Speaker 2: I went back in '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I came out in '68 [1968], went back in '70 [1970] and stayed till '73 [1973].  And my third year in school, I just decided--'cause my husband was in law school, and we were, I--we called ourselves professional students.  I mean we were living well.  We had stipends, we each had a car (laughter).  And you were also kind of taught, you don't compete with your mate 'cause I would have gone to law school too.  So I said, oh, well, let me just take this other program in education while you're still in school.  And that third year, that was such a light curriculum that I was recruited by friends I had gone to graduate school with to come get involved in this whole new drug rehabilitation movement.  And so, not knowing a thing about it.  You know, when you're a student, you think you can do anything.
Speaker 1: So this is considered new, this drug rehabilitation?
Speaker 2: All of it, all of it was brand new.
Speaker 1: I know I first became aware of it around that time, but I wasn't so sure if it was new or not--
Speaker 2: It was new.
Speaker 1: This, so what was new about the approach to it?
Speaker 2: What was new about it, now that I (unclear) the, have more of a business mindset, the addiction wasn't new.  But methadone maintenance was new.  Black doctors being in charge of, of facilities and being recognized as experts in, in the addiction field was new, but the economic driver was hospitals were beginning to recognize drug rehab and detoxification as new income sources for their hospitals.  That's what was really new.  That's what drove, you know, all of a sudden, it became part of the third-party payment to keep emergency wards open and things of that sort, which I didn't learn until a little later.  But--and the proliferation of drugs.  I mean you just had too many people of all races addicted.
Speaker 1: And a larger percentage of the black community, I guess, addicted--
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: --than, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know, well, percentage, yeah, maybe.
Speaker 1: Yeah, not numbers but percentage, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And because we're, you know, more vulnerable to it on the level of economic, where we meet it.  There was discussion in those days, I know, about the methadone clinics.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: I remember an episode of '[The] Phil Donahue Show' where he talked about, he talked about--they were discussing whether methadone just prolongs--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it does.  But it worked.
Speaker 1: --addiction.
Speaker 2: It worked.  I, again, young, naive, power to the people, you know.  And my friends somehow--I don't know how they did it.  Two guys were recruited by the black doctor in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] who was like the leader of all of this, and went over to a part of Pittsburgh.  They called me and said, "Toni, we need our counselors trained because they're all ex-addicts and they really don't know how to create rapport in this."  I said, "What do I know about training?"  You know, but we all thought we can do anything, right?  So that's how I got involved.  I went over there and started working with them, learned about methadone and, and found that the population on methadone--at least in those days--we're talking '73 [1973], '74 [1974].  We're talking about old-time heroin addicts, musicians, I mean smart people.  And the methadone had them function.  If they could function on a level that didn't get them high, they were working, and they were teaching.  I mean we were, I was stunned at the number of people I knew who were coming for their methadone.  So this really, it was a blockage.  This allowed them, if they didn't boost it.  I mean, sure, you had people who abused it, who still needed to be addicts.  But--
Speaker 1: So they would take methadone and heroin?
Speaker 2: And something, pills, alcohol.  You know, that was the other outcomes of some of that.  They felt that it, it didn't provide a high.  It just didn't let them detox.  So, you know, but I thought it was very helpful for people who were ready to function and raise families and things of that sort.  So while I was there, I was encouraged to see what else I could do 'cause we were getting grants and my friends and I, as young students, you know, they would let us do anything.  We'd start writing proposals.  So I started a drug-free program, thinking that I could be, understand how to do that.  And I had mostly women clients who were graduates of the methadone program.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was the tendency in those days to separate the sexes in terms of treatment?
Speaker 2: No, they were co-ed, but the women many times had different needs than some of the men.  So I wanted to start with women because they had families and we were starting to see multi-generational issues with their kids having babies or, you know, getting exposed to drugs.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the--now, is this the Pittsburgh Drug Abuse Center (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right in 1972.
Story_ID: 156430
Speaker 1: And so now, and while you were director of social services for this organization, you went on to pursue, you were pursuing your master's in education?
Speaker 2: My second one.
Speaker 1: The second one, okay.  This is the masters in social work--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, this was the one--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Master's in education.
Speaker 2: --in education, rehab.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's at the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were you learning in those days that, about--
Speaker 2: I was learning about movements 'cause I wasn't in the counseling aspect of social work.  I was in something called group work and community organization.  So those were the days when community action programs and CAP, and, you know, what they called the maximum feasible participation.  I was, I was deeply involved in, in understanding the anti-poverty movement, understanding poverty.  And my, my thesis was around citizen participation.  So I was greatly engaged in just understanding how movements happen, you know, and understanding that citizen participation is basically volunteerism.  And so I looked at volunteer movements and things of that sort.  And it was a professor who, who trusted my work.  And so I got off kind of easy.  All I had to do was his literature review for his doctoral thesis.  But it put me a lot of sources to learn about [Saul] Alinsky.  It's funny that they talk about that in terms of [HM] Barack [Obama].  I said, that was our god.  Are you kidding me?  Really understanding how grassroots movements start and how you, you mobilize people around a cause and what collaboration is, things of that sort.
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So that was my expertise.  And that's what I thought my life's work would be.  The drug rehab thing was, was all of that because I felt I could help people, particularly, sisters, but at the same time, since we were really in the heart of the depressed, black community--I mean part of this was always organizing.  Part of this was always getting community acceptance, that you had all, all these, you know, drug-addicted people coming to this part of town.  And it was the part of town that housed Three Rivers Stadium [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] (laughter), you know, again, 'cause it was another black community where--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It was brand new then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was a new facility.
Speaker 2: Well, where it was coming, they wanted that property.  They wanted that land.  So I lasted--and I put this this way, I lasted about two years because I wasn't experiencing success.  And I guess I was somebody who understood that I wanna be successful.  I, I need, I need to feel like I'm making a difference.  I need to feel like I'm advancing.
Speaker 1: Now, were you working on an organizing campaign at the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was just working, right now, I was just working on this drug-free program, trying to get women off of drugs, trying to get them employed, trying to get them to manage their, their lives and their families better, kick the person out who got you on drugs, whatever it was.  Stop prostituting, I--thinking I could deal with all of this at my age.  You know, I didn't know anything about this life.  But I found over and over, I wasn't feeling the success I needed.  And when I felt my star client come in, my star, who I thought was my star, off drugs, employed with getting, getting ready to start school, to come in and say her daughter was pregnant and wanted to discontinue the pregnancy.  "And I told her that she had to have that baby, just like I had to have her."  And I said, "Oh, my God," you know.  It wasn't the issue of, you know, abortion or not.  It was the fact that she still felt that she had to punish this, this girl, that she had to have.  So I said, you know, I'm not gonna make it here.  I, I can't, I can't relate anymore.  And that's when I knew it was time to kinda get out of that environment.
Story_ID: 156431
Speaker 1: And I got--as I said, I think I've been blessed my whole career.  All of a sudden, there was a brand new agency being started by Governor Milton Shapp in Pennsylvania.  And it was to be the single-state agency for drug and alcohol abuse.  Again, this was a whole new wave in the whole health and mental health arena nationally.  So he started it, and the single-state agency was called the Governor's Council on Drug and Alcohol Abuse.  And for some reason, I was hired to be head of the whole region, which put me in charge of twenty-four counties in western Pennsylvania in allocating their drug and alcohol money for their county programs and other things.  It's the first time I'm managing a staff, first time I was traveling statewide to look at programs.  So I learned so much, and the first time I had to deal with administration, with panels.  So I was taken from a community-based activity, thinking about, you know, we're just gonna improve the lot of people, to an administrative position dealing with budgets and money and plans and, and more racism, which was easier because outside of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], if you know western Pennsylvania and you should coming from Dayton [Ohio], I mean it's Appalachia in some places.  I remember going to one of my counties and the, the county commissioner was blind.  And I'm walking in to introduce myself, and he said, "Oh, yeah, I heard this, this colored gal got that job."  I said, yes, and she's right here in front of you, you know (laughter).  And what, and, and you have a request before me, you know.  So, you know, I learned those--it was like the sum total of the things I had learned from Teaneck [New Jersey] (laughter), that I had to bring to that experience too.  But it was a great job.  I mean it propelled me totally out of traditional social work into now looking at this whole understanding of public health systems and administration and managing people.
Story_ID: 156432
Speaker 1: Now, were there any mentors along the way or role models--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --in terms of all this?
Speaker 2: You know, what's so interesting?  I've really, you know, when I look back on all of this, I never really had any, other than my mom [Allie Smith Fay] and her friends because there weren't people doing, you know, I was usually--
Speaker 1: Even in terms of the Alinsky's [Saul Alinsky] training, that it was--anybody that led that or had--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I mean there were professors I could talk to, but they then, you know, I kind of propelled past, a little past that because they were academics or case workers or, already, they said, "My God, you're running a state agency, and you're twenty-seven?"  So it was a time--that's why I tell a lot of people who are from New York [New York] or large cities, leave it because Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] was a ripe market.  It was a smaller town.  I think Dayton's [Dayton, Ohio] the--you wouldn't know 'cause you're from Dayton.  But coming from New York and going to a place like Pittsburgh, they loved my energy, which I didn't realize till later.  They, they liked the fact that you're educated and could speak English and write well.  And that's all you needed.  They were willing to take a chance.  And so I found that I really had opportunity to test things, to fail, and the jobs were plentiful.  So I never approached things like, I've gotta make a plan and I've gotta decide what I wanna be next.  I was like, just going along because my parents always said, we have your back.  And my father [George Fay] always on the side, and said, and if you're not happy, come home (laughter).  So I always felt I had that luxury.  And so I could approach any of this to say okay, I'll do this for the next two years or three years, and not knowing what, what would face me next.
Speaker 1: And so you always had a choice of either--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Always had a choice.
Speaker 1: --it and--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I always had a choice, 'cause if it didn't work, I'm out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I always supported myself, but I always knew if it wasn't gonna work, you know, and, and when I fell into the job with the state, you know, my marriage was falling apart, my first marriage.  And that was funny.  That was a first test, but I, I had decided that I was gonna stay in Pittsburgh.  I loved my job.  I said I'd never get this back home.  I'd have to wait ten years to get this kind of job at home 'cause of the, you know, just the deep, political and, and talent pool in New York.  So I stayed, and I remember my father saying, "What do you mean?  You're separating, you're leaving Bob?"  I said, "Oh, yeah."  He said, "Well, do you need me to do anything?"  I said, "Well, it'd be great if you could help me move."  So it was a whole, funny conversation that went on with he and his friends that I learned about later 'cause they all commiserated the night he had to get on the plane to come out.  "Man, you want us to come with you?  Do you think you need any protection?" (Laughter) You know.  And it wasn't any of that.  So he was so shocked to see that my ex-husband was helping me move.  But my father was there, you know, put up all my curtains, you know, set up everything like I always knew he did at home, stayed the weekend.  He liked where I was, and, you know, came back home.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156433
Speaker 1: So, so n- now, you stayed with the Governor's Council [on Drug and Alcohol Abuse] until 1976.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Any more stories about the Governor's Council before you, and why did you leave?
Speaker 2: Well, again, let's see.  Any more stories?  I mean it was just a total growth period.  Just think of someplace where you are, where every experience is new.  Here I was in a state office--the state office building in downtown Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  Here I was--my role--well, my role model, although she didn't mentor me, C. Delores Tucker, who I had worked with later on in life, was secretary of state of Pennsylvania then.  And so here there was this black woman voice, senior black woman out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], in the administration, and the other one in western Pennsylvania, although our age span was quite different.  I did know her and meet her and thought she was great.  But I was kind of doing my thing.  I got into the content of "How do you do this and how do you manage people?"  And so why I--why did I leave?  It was time.
Story_ID: 156434
Speaker 1: Well, I, I, I started dating someone else who was to become my second husband.  And, as I said, in those days, you never thought that you couldn't find a job.  And I never--I always felt that it, I could go type or teach or something.  So we decided to be a couple, and he was now, he was my exposure to the private sector.  So he was working in a corporation and had gotten a brand new job in Rochester [New York] in, at Xerox, and said, "Well, Toni, let's make a commitment and decide."  I said, "Okay."  Well, they didn't want me to leave my job until the election was over 'cause it was kind of an appointed position.  And I've commuted from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to Rochester, kind of every week, stayed with friends during the week while I was holding my job in Pittsburgh and then moved to Rochester for all of about two months 'cause by the time I got there, about two to three months later, Tim comes home and said, "Well, I quit today.  I'm not gonna be their Negro."  (Laughter)  and I said, huh?  And I'm saying, you know, "Right on."  And he said, you know, "They wanted somebody else.  They didn't want me."  He was an early Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] graduate who, you know, rightly or wrongly, this is what he felt, was just not the right fit.  So I said, "Well, what do we do now?"  I hadn't found a job yet.  I was actively searching.  He was a finance wiz, and said, "Well, look--we had already paid enough in taxes for the year," he's telling me.  And in those days, job search was tax deductible.  We put all our stuff in storage, and we traveled (laughter) and carried a couple suitcases, mostly play clothes and interview clothes if people called us in, which we weren't very happy about, and did a kind of schedule, wrote letters ahead of time.  And that would dictate our little travel schedule, and seeing and staying with friends.  And when they'd ask us to come in, we would.  We said, "Okay, that's great 'cause that's really a write-off (laughter)," you know, and wound up coming out of Mexico in San Francisco [California], out of L.A. [Los Angeles, California], up to San Francisco.  And, again, ran into some friends who, from Pittsburgh, who had just gotten a new job and had to move to Washington [D.C.] right away, and said, you know, "You two are crazy.  Why don't you just take over my apartment?"  He had this great apartment in Berkley [California] and was getting married that summer.  And the company he was working with wouldn't move his fiancee.  So he said, "If you all could just take over this apartment and, you know, get settled, see if you like it, and then I could move Diane, once we got married."  So we wound up in Berkeley, California.  I got a job in about three days because of my drug abuse experience as head of the San Francisco Drug Abuse Agency.  And we stayed there--I didn't care for San Francisco, but I used that experience to just know that part of the country.  It was so beautiful, so beautiful.
Speaker 2: This is 1977?
Speaker 1: This was '9 [1979]--yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was so beautiful.  But I found I was gonna be--I inherited this big staff, you know.  They liked that I knew the drug jargon and managing big grants.  And I was shocked they let me have this job, but, again, a lot of the people who were leaders in Pennsylvania, they knew some of the city people knew.  So I, I said, "How are hiring me?"  I'm not even a San Francisco--but I became head of the agency.  So I was used to working hard hours.  I would turn around at five o'clock to see who was here from my staff.  They'd gone to the hot tubs (laughter), you know.  I said, "This is different."  My boyfriend, at the time, he was, you know, interviewing, finally got a job at Bank of America.  But I found San Francisco to be so close-knit, and, you know, you fit in certain segments.  And I didn't see myself growing.  And at that point, that was important.  I said, yeah, it's a great place for fun.  I remember Chaka Khan was the hottest thing, and Rufus, you know, so the parties were still great.  But I, I didn't see a future for me.  So, you know, Tim wanted out of Rochester, I wanted out of San Francisco.  And we came back East.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We stayed there about a year.
Story_ID: 156435
Speaker 1: I should have asked you this before, but tell us a little bit about C. Delores Tucker 'cause she was, you know, has been kind of maligned in history.  But she was really an important person, iconic figure in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: I knew, I knew C. Delores as I said, as more of a role model because she was secretary of state.  She was politically--her husband [William Tucker], who I still see, Bill, is fabulous.  I mean she had a wife, you know, but also just a fabulous supportive man, who was in the real estate business in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and could keep her going.  They didn't have children.  But she was just on the issues.  She knew, she knew who she was.  She represented her community and her people, was proud to do so.  And we became friends.  It's so interesting, having met her as a young woman in Pennsylvania to years later, then have to be in rooms with her when she was boycotting Time-Warner on gangster rap (laughter) so we'll get to that, unless you want me to talk about it now.  But it's part of my Time Warner years.
Speaker 1: We'll get to it.  It's getting set up but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 156436
Speaker 1: So after leaving San Francisco [California], came back home.  My parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] at this point said, "What is going on?  (Laughter) yeah, we like for--we always said, do your thing, but I mean, you know, this is kind of getting crazy.  What are you guys gonna do now?"  So moved in with my boyfriend at my parents' house, you know.  Now, I'm really pushing progressive (laughter) for about two months until we found a place because we had nothing.  We had no furniture.  Fortunately, he got a, one of these corporate gigs.  I said, "Boy, one of these days I may have to do the corporate thing" 'cause it would move all our stuff out of storage from Rochester [New York], even though we were in California.  We didn't need furniture then, you know.  So I had my thirtieth--I'll never forget.  I had my thirtieth birthday party in San Francisco.  My mother came out for it.  So back home, and we started the job search again.  Somehow, I don't know how I hooked that up.  Somebody heard about me, and I--and Leon Sullivan, who was head of OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers]--yes, because of Pennsylvania, knew there was this black woman who knew how to write proposals well and used to give away money in Pennsylvania, and asked me to come help the OIC people in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] put together grants.  So in between job hunting, I was also then a short-term consultant for OIC, just in terms of grant development.  But I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now, what year is this?  Now, this is now--are we, I--
Speaker 1: This is right before I started working for [HM] Dorothy [Height] which would have been--when did I start working for Dorothy Height, seventy--
Speaker 2: We have a note here that you started in '77 [1977], but these--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --these dates are getting kind of jammed up 'cause if you were--
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: --with the, you left the Governor's Council on Drugs [Governor's Council on Drug and Alcohol Abuse] in '76 [1976], and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, that's right, and a year in San Francisco.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is true.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --it is '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Well, I was moving fast.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, all right.
Speaker 1: I was moving fast.
Story_ID: 156437
Speaker 1: That's what I said, by thirty--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) (unclear) in '77 [1977] too--
Speaker 1: --by thirty, I had had two master's degrees, several great jobs and working on my second husband.  So I was moving fast (laughter).  So, back in New York [New York], and said, "Okay, Toni, it's time to work for black people.  It's time to get involved in some movement.  It's time to figure it out."  And I had done homework on the National Council of Negro Women, more, I guess, on [HM] Dorothy Height because in New York, I said, well, if I was to get involved in civil rights, what platform do I have?  I didn't wanna get into the Urban League agency bit.  So I mean, I just had resumes flying around.  My mother [Allie Smith Fay] was very helpful then because she had talked to one of her girlfriends, and again, New Yorkers were quite surprised at thirty I had already done all of this and had these jobs 'cause in New York, you know, my resume looked more like a forty-something year old.  Well, Dorothy Height called the house 'cause I had to give out my parents' address.  I didn't really have a phone or (laughter).  And my mother calls me and says, I almost fell off my chair.  Dorothy Height called today, and she'd like for you to come in for an interview, only realizing later on that that interview probably came because my field placement, while I was in graduate school in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], was at the Pittsburgh YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], and that was Dorothy's heart, the YWCA, and the woman who was my supervisor was one of her best friends.  I did not know.  I did not know.  But it goes to show you about some of that senior network, but I'm sure that's why, of all the things on the top--and she told me later, when I saw you had a field placement at the YWCA, I called.  So, I went in for an interview.  I thought we hit--I was a nervous wreck, as you can imagine.  You know, I said, "Oh, my God, this is a very important woman and wouldn't this be great.  And I don't even know if she has a job.  What would I be doing?"  And we talked, and in those days, you even still put your sorority on your resumes and stuff like that.  And I remember we laughed.  We had a great conversation, and she said, "Well, Ms. Fay, you've had a great career thus far.  And you're a young woman, but you've really made one major mistake in your career."  Well, my heart sank.  I said, "What is this?"  And she starts giggling and said, "You pledged the wrong sorority."  Well, we both started laughing 'cause she was the national president of Delta Sigma Theta and always talked about the Deltas.  So two days later, she offered me this job.  I didn't know what it meant, director of planning and development at the National Council of Negro Women.  Well, I tell you, it was everything I wanted it to be, not only to be close to real leadership, black, that I could look up to, but also to start to learn and understand how to work nationally, which always comes in steads.  So again, I said, "God, am I blessed.  Everything I'm doing is building on experiences I've had before."
Story_ID: 156438
Speaker 1: So one of the first things [HM] Dorothy [Height] did is--'cause I--she liked me.  She hired--we went to Mississippi and drove--now, you talking about a New York [New York] child, ain't never been past (laughter) Washington, D.C., right.  From one end, Okolona [Mississippi], all the way, meeting all of the civil rights contacts she had through Mississippi 'cause she wanted me to see it, pig farms and Fannie Lou Hamer's husband [Perry "Pap" Hamer], 'cause Fannie Lou was dead, and some of the economic development things that were going on.  As a result of that, later I wrote all kind of proposals for--I started a factory in Doddsville [Mississippi], started rural programming in daycare, started a women's opportunity employment programs.  I developed and wrote the proposals for these, not realizing that, of course, I'd read so many proposals, I did have the skill and my Teaneck [New Jersey] education.  As my brother [George Fay, Jr.] always said, you know, we, we fought like hell about Teaneck, but at least we know how to read and write (laughter).  So, I was very successful at raising money.  So Dorothy, like kept me with her all the time.  I always said, well, I was the person writing all the stuff during the Carter [President Jimmy Carter] years that I worked for Dorothy.  It was during that Carter administration.  At the same time, I developed such a network of friends in the movement.  That's where I met [HM] Vernon Jordan [Jr.] and that's when I knew Ron Brown who was at the Urban League, and that--I had already worked for Leon Sullivan.  But that was my first time I even knew about going to corporate dinners and meeting people in foundations and so it was a very great and fun time.  I stayed there, developing many programs for her, and my rural programming was the most, I loved.  But I started national teenage pregnancy programs in cities throughout the country, started national immunization programs with the National Medical Association throughout the country and was in and out of Washington [D.C.] quite frequently.  She put me on a program with Rosalynn Carter and, and pushed me in that way.
Story_ID: 156439
Speaker 1: While I was at the [National] Council [of Negro Women], I, I met a woman by the name of Pat Gibson who is married to a man by the name of D. Parke Gibson.  D. Parke, who had many books out that I hope are online--I'm gonna look it up as a result of this interview because he was really the one that talked about the buying power of black people.  He wrote a book called the '$30 Million Negro' [sic, 'The $30 Billion Negro'].  And then a few years after that, he wrote a book about '70 Billion in the Black ['$70 Billion in the Black: America's Black Consumers'].  He was the first one to talk about the buying power or to put it in print, of the African American community and how to use that as a tool for good and started a PR firm called D. Parke Gibson Associates where he had then launched the whole notion of cause-related marketing and, and marketing related to, to doing well in communities.  You know, so he started the Ebony Fashion Fair and things of that sort.  Well, I started--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: How do you spell his first name?
Speaker 1: D period, Parke, P-A-R-K-E.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Gibson.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And the firm was in his name.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So D. Parke, I mean was a major force in the early years in terms of public relations, had all the tobacco companies and all those big promotions that we're too young to remember, they took advantage of in that time.  So Pat wanted me to join her--Parke died.  Pat wanted me to join her in running this firm again, because I knew how to write proposals.  But I said, you know, I've never done business proposals, and really don't understand this corporate arena.  I'm around these people, but they're a little different, and--"Oh, Toni, we'll be fine."  So working with her--I still was with [HM] Dorothy [Height], and, but after work, I'd go and Pat and I would sit.  And she gave me this title, executive vice president, and she took me with her on calls, you know, to do presentations and to write business proposals and things of that sort.  So I got to understand how small businesses operate, how to start pitching corporations.  And after working with Dorothy for a while, which many people who have options do when you're in these civil rights organizations, if you can move on, you do.  You never leave--I never left the Council [National Council of Negro Women], but it was time for me to move on.  I didn't know what I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 156440
Speaker 1: I'm, I'm sitting at my desk one day, and a friend of mine from a book club said, "Toni, I heard about some job at Time Inc.  They're starting a brand new job and the search is being conducted by the chairman of the company, Ralph Davis."  I said, "You're kidding.  No."  And this, this whole, I mean even though it became passe later on, but still, this was a new concept of community relations in those years.  So I wrote personnel.  I wrote personnel, and I said, well, this will be different 'cause I hadn't interviewed for a job in so long that I just wanted an interview.  Well, lo and behold, they called me in for an interview.  They had already taken the job off the list, so many insiders in the company and people throughout New York [New York] and the East Coast had applied for the job.  They were feeling pressured politically, but the guy, Abe--I'll never forget it, Abe Engelmann [ph.], Abe and I hit it off.  I was as loose as a goose 'cause I never thought I'd get the job anyway.  I just wanted the (laughter) interview to see how to practice my skills and what kind of questions they would be asking so I could prepare myself for a real search.  Well, four interviews later, they offered me the job.  And I'll never forget calling my dad [George Fay] and I said, "You know what?  This is the only job I looked for since [HM] Dorothy [Height] and who I haven't told yet.  And I said, they're offering me this job.  Maybe I shouldn't take it.  Maybe I should keep looking."  And he said to me, "Toni"--he asked--well, first he said, "How much are they going to pay you?"  And I told him.  I could hear, I could hear him reaching for a drink.  He said, "They're gonna pay you (laughter)."  I said, "Yes."  He said, "Well, why is it that you would think you'd say no?"  I said, "Well, I really don't know what I'm getting into.  This is the first job I've interviewed for.  Maybe there's something else."  He said, "Let me say something to you that I've learned over the years."  He said, "Black people are the only people who feel they have to know the whole job before they say yes."  He said, "You are smart enough to be able to catch on, and, and understand your environment and we'll provide a support base around you.  Take that job.  Does it mean you have to stop looking?"  That's the first time I heard that, you know, 'cause we all thought, you go, you stay places for life, even though I had been moving around every three years, but this was now--'cause my mother [Allie Smith Fay] had another message: "You're getting too god damn old to not think about a pension (laughter)."  You keep taking jobs and quitting jobs, but my father was the, "Go see what this is.  It doesn't mean you have to stay.  We prepared you for risks."  And so I took the job.  Telling Dorothy was the hardest thing, but she wrote me the best letter.  I then moved from staff--she said she promoted me.  I then moved from staff to life-time volunteer.  And she became really the only professional mentor that I had.
Story_ID: 156441
Speaker 1: One story that, that connects the dots, when I came to Time [Inc.], I nev- it, it was almost moving to Teaneck [New Jersey] again, very isolated, lots of jealousy towards me because even the few internal black people who had all applied for the job and weren't accepted were saying, "How did she get here?  Who does she know?"  You know, and when I tell the story of going through personnel, nobody really (laughter) believes it, you know.  But I said, that's what happened.  But then they started asking me a question about, did Bill Trent [William J. Trent, Jr.] get you, I mean people who I'd meet, did Bill--"Do you know Bill Trent?"  I'm not doing this.  And I said, you know, "A matter of fact, I do know Mr. Trent.  Why do you ask?"  "Well, that must have been how you got this job."  Well, I went back, and I looked up, and I said, "What?"  Bill Trent.  Now, Bill Trent, when I started working for [HM] Dorothy [Height], Bill Trent was an elder--older, black gentleman who started the United Negro College Fund.  He went to college with [President] George [H.W.] Bush at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], George, Daddy Bush, and his whole life was how to build philanthropy.  When I started working for Dorothy, she said to me, "There's somebody I want you to spend a day with.  I'm gonna call Bill Trent, whose now living in North Carolina, and tell him to come spend a day with you to teach you the intricacies of fundraising so you could pick up the phone and call and ask him questions at any time."  Well, I find out Bill Trent had worked at Time after retiring from the United Negro College Fund for Andrew Heiskell.  Andrew Heiskell was the famous CEO of Time Inc. who had started the Urban Coalition.  He followed [Henry] Luce.  And I mean he was huge, started the New York Public Library [sic, donated to the New York Public Library].  I mean he was a major figure in New York [New York].  I got to know him even though he had long left the company.  And I said, Bill Trent worked for Andrew, 'cause they brought, they brought Bill in when cities were burning and stuff.  Well, I run to my office and I get on the phone, and I said, "Mr. Trent," and I'm saying, "This is Toni Fay.  Do you remember--" "--Toni, honey, how are you?"  He's now trying to save Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina] down there in North Carolina.  "How are you?"  I said, "Fine, but you'll never believe where I'm calling you from."  And he said, "Where?"  I said, I said, "Dr. Height didn't tell me and I didn't know, but I was just hired by Time Inc., and I'm here, and I'm feeling so lonely and out of it, and nobody telling me how to get things done."  He said, "You're at Time?"  I said, "Yes."  And he giggled for a minute.  He said, "You know, I'm due to be in New York in two weeks."  He said, "I'm a call you back with a date."  Do you know he came up to New York in the Time and Life Building, walked me through the building, took me to the chairman's office again who I had already interviewed with, took me to all those people he had helped manage their relationships when all this urban tension was going on.  And so that was my introduction to people at least giving me a shot, you know, she knows folk.  But that was all happenstance.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's really--
Speaker 1: Is that incredible?
Speaker 2: --amazing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Had you--are you familiar with Bill Trent?
Speaker 2: I'm not, but I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He is incredible because that's--
Speaker 2: I had never--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --what got Bush's involvement in the United Negro College Fund because they were Yale.  Bill was one of the few black men at Yale, as you can imagine, 'cause that had to be the, what '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s].
Story_ID: 156442
Speaker 1: And [HM] Dorothy [Height], Dorothy knew everybody, and Dorothy brought--here I am, Mr. Trent [William J. Trent, Jr.], here, tell me, how do I do that, you know (laughter).  He just came up there--everybody came in for Dorothy.  [HM] Jesse [Jackson] used to come in and contribute to the Council [National Council of Negro Women].  But that's, those were the years I met all of these people and being exposed to these people.  And one of the things Dorothy did for me too when I went to Time [Inc.], there was afoot a group called the Black Leadership Family that had started meeting twice a year, that was put together by Arthur Ashe, and some of the black independent business owners, some of the publishers, Beat, Black Enterprise and Essence and people who had independent money, where the leaders would meet, not for a project, just to get to know each other, just to get to cool out, to debrief, to relax.  And I had missed the first few.  Tom Skinner was the convener of this.  He had been someone who had worked as a counselor in the NFL [National Football League], and [HM] Barbara Williams Skinner, who was the first executive of the Congressional Black Caucus.  Well, they had gotten to a point when they needed some of this financed and they said, who do we know and trust that may have access to money in these companies or what not where we could still get some of these things funded?  And people like Dorothy and [HM] Marian [Wright] Edelman and who else?  [Robert] Bob Brown from North Carolina, all knew people or their people who had the flexibility.  And so I was one of those people.  Dorothy brought me into this group 'cause you had to be brought in by one of them.  And that's how I got to know Betty Shabazz.  That's how I got to know C--got to know C. Delores Tucker.  That's how I got to know Mrs. [Coretta Scott] King.  In fact, one of my incredible experiences was to stay up all night having drinks with Betty Shabazz and Coretta King when they were cementing their relationship about how they've had to manage being the widows, even on different footing, but to just be witness to that conversation.  And that's how Betty even said to me, if anything ever happens, how she wanted me to help and look out for her girls.  But it was that kind of environment that people didn't realize was going on.  We met twice a year.  That became my sanity check because I didn't have it in the workplace.  None of the people there really could help me in terms of how to manage relationships or how to get things done.  But it certainly was wonderful having that network.
Speaker 2: Would they meet in the same place every year or--
Speaker 1: Oh, no.  No, we'd move around, Hilton Head [South Carolina], oh, it had to be the sun (laughter), you know, a lot in Hilton Head, Florida, different places where it was sunshine.
Speaker 2: And the meeting would be like a weekend?
Speaker 1: Yes, a whole weekend.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'll never forget, one of my first, maybe, let's say among one of the first meetings I went to, I remember it being so funny.  It was when, oh, gosh, who was the first black governor in Virginia?
Speaker 2: [HM] Doug Wilder.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Doug was in the state legislature and was just getting ready to announce for governor.  And he was talking about his campaign 'cause we had all of the politicians.  There weren't as many then, you know, so we had all the--we had the mayor of Gary [Indiana] [HM Richard Hatcher], and we had [HM] Marion Barry.  I mean it was an impressive, you know, group.  And of the corporate folk, it--well, it's only maybe five.  And all of us were people who had kind of grown up in the movement with them, you know, and mine was through Dorothy.  So Doug was telling us how he was gonna be governor of Virginia.  We're saying, you know, how is this gonna happen?  And everybody wanted to know, okay, we'll organize buses and come in.  "You all stay home.  Just send money."  (Laughter) But it was, it was a wonderful support base.
Speaker 2: Was Reggie Lewis a part, and--
Speaker 1: He was, yeah, he had, he was, but, you know, he had died.
Speaker 2: Well, I know he's dead now, yeah, he's--he died a long time ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I wondered if he was a part of it at--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --and, Ann Fudge?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: Well, Ann wasn't through the movement.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ann was totally a corporate person.  Ann and I are very good friends.  I brought Ann into Executive Leadership Council, but, no, she wasn't part of the civil rights crew.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so this was--
Speaker 1: This was a trusted network of black people who, where the business stayed right there.
Story_ID: 156443
Speaker 1: So the criteria would be that you would--
Speaker 2: You had to be sponsored or be one of the leaders who were part of the Black Leadership Forum, a business leader, owner of one of the business--black, major black businesses, black elected, senior black elected official.  I think the only state official we had was [HM] Clarence [Mitchell] because people knew his family, Clarence Mitchell, you know, and because his dad [Clarence Mitchell, Sr.] was NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and his mother [Elsie Davis Mitchell].  So he was even the only state official then.  But it was, it was, as I said, it was the brainchild of Arthur's [Arthur Ashe], that said, you know, people don't know each other, and everybody has so many projects that we wanna make sure this is not a element of projects.  Nobody here needs a project.  It was to relax, get to know each other, know how to pick up the phone.  So, and, as I said, the only way I got there was because, okay, we now--our job was to get some of the people we know and trust into some of these places in corporate America, and we have a few.  So the--we were there.
Speaker 1: So basically, the purpose was just to get people to understand what other people were working on and what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: To know each other--
Speaker 1: --kind of--to know each other.
Speaker 2: --and to trust each other.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: To trust each other.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: To understand that it's, they now have to do this.  I've done it.  Let's talk.  That's why I brought up the example of [HM] Doug Wilder.  So we heard about all kind of different campaigns and things going on, just--Jesse's [HM  Reverend Jesse Jackson] campaign, I mean everybody was so involved in that, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is--now, this is happening around 1983 or what, late '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: This is happening in--
Speaker 1: So Jesse ran--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: When did I go to Time [Inc.]?
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is just leading up to Jesse's campaign, the "Run, Jesse, Run" campaign of '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: Well, no, and maybe I came a little after, but I mean it's all in there.  It's all part of that, you know, but it's all the things that, again, none of us--it was very hard for all these wired people to not wanna do projects.  We said, nobody needs projects, you know.  It was, we were all black then.  I remember we had a whole weekend when Gene Jackson [ph.], who used to run also another radio outlet, wanted to start making sure we were called African Americans.  That emerged out of that group (laughter), you know.  So it was just a forum for people to know each other, to trust each other, to not feel as competitive when you had to lead--when you have the leaders of the Urban League and the NAACP and the--so it was just marvelous for me.  And I, I remember once, when they said, you know, we have to start listening to some of our corporate children and, and have them tell us about what these corporations are thinking about because that's just when they were starting to look at the whole notion of blacks on boards and things of that sort.  So that, it was just great, great and long-lasting relationships.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So have you continued to be a part of this?
Speaker 2: Well, when Tom died, it kind of fell apart, Tom, Tom Skinner.  But many of us meet, not as many--and every aged, kind of aged out.  But that's why--how I see Bill [William Tucker].  So we'll get together every now and then, a lot of Washington [D.C.] more so than any place, but not as formal--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Is Bill still around--
Speaker 2: Bill is still in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, and you should recommend him if he's not--
Speaker 2: Really, oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --if he's not on Julieanna's radar, make sure you--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, Bill Tucker.
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Oh, he's fabulous.  Oh, you would love Bill.  Bill is--you talk about power behind the throne.
Speaker 1: Yep, yeah, we definitely would wanna talk to him.
Story_ID: 156444
Speaker 1: So Time Warner now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, now, I'm at Time Warner now (laughter), we're at Time Warner, Time Inc.  I started at Time Inc.  I started at Time Inc.  Time Inc. was the, then the largest publishing company.  It was my first foray at corporate America.  I didn't know what I was into.  I was putting in hours like crazy 'cause I just felt totally, you know, not in my element.  I had no friends 'cause the black people who had applied for the job were mad they didn't get it and who's this outsider?  I said, now, this is when I learned the concept of "find a paperclip" 'cause it's the only way I'm gonna survive.  What's gonna be those things I'm a take the risk of to develop, put my stamp on it, get the ownership of the chairman so nobody messes with me anymore (laughter).  And it takes a while to, to gain that trust for people to sign up and do that.  At the same time--how did this happen?  Maybe [HM] Dorothy [Height] did it.  I don't know.  But I had a couple of great experiences around the '90s [1990s].  Maybe it was after my projects where I, I did a couple of stints in Scandinavia and all through Scandinavia talking about volunteerism in the United States and corporate social responsibility.  And then also I was invited to Japan, the Japan economic club because I became chairman of a center in Boston [Massachusetts] on community involvement and social responsibility.  But this all happened as a result of my programs that I developed at Time, being so successful.  By the time I developed a literacy--I said, you know, we need to--it sounds like common sense, but corporations were just writing checks and not looking at how to use the resources of the company.  I said, now, we're the largest publishing company in the world.  Yet, it's true, there are no blacks, browns or anything else in this company, and it's full of wonderful, bright--the smartest people I've ever worked around.  I mean it just, you know, and it's a deadline.  You're putting out twenty-two magazines every month, you know.  So it's a frantic place.  We were HBO.  We were cable.  So I said, how do I start launching this.  And the first thing I did was to start this, saying literacy has to be in our cards, education 'cause [Henry] Luce was still actively saying, that's what we were founded for, to educate the public as a public service.  These magazines are supposed to educate the public.  And when you looked through our files and our archives, it was always something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: This is Clara Booth Luce--
Speaker 2: Henry.
Speaker 1: Henry, Henry (unclear), okay.
Speaker 2: It was one of those things that was always in the DNA.  So I said, well, let's figure out how we can do this.  So I started using our magazines as teaching tools around the country and just took the risks.  I mean some people didn't wanna get involved.  They said, "Toni, if this doesn't work, you're outta here."  I said, "No, shit."  Oh, I'm not supposed to--I said, but that has always been a part of how I've attached--I love start-up's, you know, as the first in my position at the State of Pennsylvania, as the first with Dorothy and I was the first person to hold this position at Time Inc.  And I said, to leave value, I wanna leave something behind, but I wanna be able to create.  And I'm good at that.  I'm an idea person, and I know how to execute.  So with that I said, I'm a come up with this leadership, this literacy program.  And if it wasn't for a woman who was then a group vice president, and I'm gonna come up with her name 'cause I wanna say it.  She's the only senior exec who stepped up and said, "Toni, I'm with you."  She was then chairman of Time-Life Books, Book-of-the-Month Club, Little Brown [and Company] Publishing.  In those days, we had something called group vice presidents, and they literally ran three and four corporations.  They were all holding companies of Time.  Joan Manley was her name.
Story_ID: 156445
Speaker 1: The literacy program [at Time Inc.] became so successful on two fronts.  One, it engaged our employees for the first time in, in literally being involved in communities through all of our businesses.  That program grew to about forty markets that our cable companies really drove.  In a short period of time, it became a model for how corporations should start utilizing their resources in attacking issues related to the public.  And as a result, it engaged my CEO at the time, whose name was [Richard] Dick Munro, and starting with David Rockefeller in New York [New York]], the whole idea of school-business partnerships.  So we were the first ones to look at how--what is the role of corporations with school improvement and involvement and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  What was it?  What was it?  What was the program?  What did it do?  What did you all do--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Which one?  The literacy program--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --or the larger--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The literacy program.
Speaker 1: Oh, what we did is utilize--I mean it sounds basic now, but we would take our tools, of which we had many, our magazines, primarily the ones that we could adapt for fourth-grade reading level.  That would have been Time, Sports Illustrated, People, SI--Sports Illustrated for Kids.  We had specially trained--we did a special curriculum to train volunteers coming from wherever community and our employees on tutoring twice a week in communities around the country.  The kids would get--and many of them for the first time, magazines sent to them at home.  They would be known as readers.  We targeted people who at least read at the fourth-grade reading level, and I mean our stats were incredible.  We, we got recognition throughout the country in all of this, and eventually, I mean after the third year of operating, I got a letter that Bush [President George H.W. Bush], who was establishing the Points of Light Foundation used us a one of the first awards in the White House--no, Bush did Points of Light.  [President Ronald] Reagan gave us the first corporate award for corporate involvement in the community at the White House, President Reagan, Ronald Reagan.  Well, I must say  lot of people at Time were Democrats, but when we were invited to the White House--and the only way we could get into the Reagan White House was through something I created, that was pretty cool.  And I was hoping I would be able to get the award, but my boss decided he was gonna come and accept it.  But it, it just took on a life of its own.  And Time to Read is, was institutionalized in the company with lots of success, with kids whose mentors that they got, even though our company, sent them to college, just lots of good things came out of that.  But it also centered my department as a place that's gonna work with all the operating divisions and come up with great ideas.  And that's how I also just got access to our leadership and really doing some joint marketing programs.  So it was wonderful.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 156446
Speaker 1: So, now, what else?  Now, this is one program [Time to Read], but you said there were others.
Speaker 2: Well, let me also say, during this time, I mean because learning corporate politics was not something I was used to.  When I started at Time [Inc.], my plan was the same as it had been before, oh, had not been in the private sector.  Let me do this for three years 'cause I don't know if I'm a corporate type.  I don't see myself making it, you know.  I'm gonna speak out.  I'm not, you know, I'm an integrity bird.  I don't have to ever worry about being repeated 'cause it's always gonna be the truth whether you wanna hear it or not.  And I was always gonna bring somebody with me, along and look at a successor and be the one to say, "I'm looking out for my people like you look out for yours."  And I was, I was very clear about that, while not wearing it on my sleeve.  So I didn't see myself lasting very long.  But then, all of a sudden, Time became this company that was in play all the time.  So the first thing I experienced was what I was going forth, away from my job was, we were being taken over by Paramount.  We survived that.  Then we merged with Warner Communications, and became Time Warner, the largest media and entertainment company in the world.
Speaker 1: Now, when was the merger?
Speaker 2: Was that '90 [l990], maybe, '92 [1992] [sic, 1990]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it doesn't (unclear) tell you in here, so.  Okay.  That sounds like it might be right.
Speaker 2: But I tell you, that was like the wild, wild west.  That is when, I mean I--that's when things really started to heat up.  I mean here we were now with this other, huge company that brought records and movies.  I mean we were this publishing company and lots of smart people who thought they were above it all, but enjoyed, you know--now, it was time to figure out what role do you play in this new company?  Quite frankly, most of us on the Time side felt like, oh, we'll be out of here, so what the hell?  Let's figure out how do you deal with change?  And my approach to always dealing with change is, let me find my paperclip, let me find something that's going to position what my department can do because there was two of everything.  We even had two chairmen.  We had two chairmen, we had two vice-chairmen, and we had two boards that they could not--'cause you're talking about entertainment people.  So I think some of these people were afraid they might go home and find other things they didn't wanna see if it wasn't done correctly (laughter).  So that's when--it was the strangest thing.  I said, here's how the entertainment company works--
Story_ID: 156447
Speaker 1: There were two things going on that propelled me in getting my officer's stripe, which was unbelievable.  First, I had this, "what the hell" attitude.  I'm just gonna keep my head down and not stay in the gossip, rumor mill about who's on first, who's on second.  My boss, who was then Jerry Levin [Gerald Levin], who became the chairman of Time Warner later on and did the AOL deal to our, our chagrin, Jerry said, call me only if you need me 'cause he was in his own political battle.  So, you know, we were all just holding on.  None of us were gonna put our hands up to say, "I'm leaving" 'cause they said, "Oh, at least let's get a package if we're gonna leave."  So that's when I was approached to take on this project called 'Songs of My People.'  I had gotten a call from a couple of the photographers that were looking at some way--quite frankly, they were a little outraged that this project around black women had traveled all around the United States and gotten such notoriety and there weren't any black photographers engaged in it.  So many of them had gotten together, who were the top photographers in many of the newspapers around the country to say, let's do a day-in-the-life kind of concept.  They brought it to me.  I said, this is fabulous.  Now, how am I gonna talk this company into it?  I went to our book company and said, you all got to do this.  They said, it sounds good.  I said, I want us to get into the exhibition thing.  We could travel this to all of our markets because in the newspaper--I'll never forget, when I went to the chairman, I said, "Look, Jerry, every paper is talking about records and synergy and movies and synergy.  Not one is mentioning books, not one is mentioning magazines, not one is mentioning--it's all about now, this new entertainment complex.  I have a book project that I wanna get all of our businesses engaged in."  And it's gonna propel our agenda in terms of saying to the black community, we are here and the white community too. And think about all these museums.  You like culture.  Well, I sold it to Jerry to say--he said, "Toni, I like your thought."  He said, but I don't even know how we're gonna pay for this.  If we have to commit to fund an exhibition, all our money's tied up in this deal.  Do you know how I got the exhibition funded?  There was a line that the banks had not attached that was the retirement gift for Dick Munro, who was the outgoing CEO.  That was the only line not attached in the deal we're paying for this merger (laughter).  So if you ever see any literature from 'Songs of My People,' 'cause it traveled in over a hundred countries, you know, through the State Department [U.S. Department of State].  I mean it's just great.  It always says, and "Is dedicated to Dick Munro through his retired," (laughter).  It went on for five years.  It was a major book, gangbusters exhibition.  And what I liked most about it, and I think why people remember me and always come up to me and all of our executives in the company and said, "I'm one of the 'Songs of My People' photographers.  They all got better jobs.  Some became the press secretaries for Clinton [President William "Bill" Clinton] and everybody got promoted at their newspapers.  And that's also how we got so much press 'cause when we would hit town, all of a sudden they could go to their publisher and say, look, I'm in this exhibition, and this is in our town.  So you're gonna get some play.  I mean it was just gangbusters.  It was a landmark thing for the craft of photography.  So that was one--
Story_ID: 156448
Speaker 1: Then the next call, I'm a take you through Time Warner quickly, but it was such great stuff that has been lasting impact on me.  I get a call one day from a woman by the name Courtney [Sale] Ross.  And we had gotten a--"we" being the people at Time Inc., had gotten this notice that the wives of the Warner people were involved in--Steve Ross was the chairman of Warner Communications.  Well, I said, I wonder if he's re--she's related to Steve.  Yeah, she was related.  That was his wife.  I picked up the phone and she's speaking to me like I've known her forever.  "Toni."  I said, "Yes."  "I'm Courtney Ross.  I'm Steve's wife.  I'm doing a documentary on [HM] Quincy Jones, and Steve and I want you to take the helicopter out to East Hampton [New York] to meet Quincy."  I said, "What?"  Now, you have to understand, we, you know, the Time, Inc. people didn't move as quickly as the entertainment folks about catching helicopters to come to East Hampton to meet Quincy Jones.  "Are you serious?"  Well, I hung up the phone, and all I could do is fan.  I'm saying, "How do I do this?  What am I supposed to do?  What am I expected to do?"  They had gotten my name from people who knew me at Warner, just when we were Time, to say, "Oh, this is a lady who could get that Time, that slow Time culture moving."  I said, "Oh?"  (Laughter)  Well, needless to say, I got on a plane--I got on the helicopter and went out to East Hampton to meet Quincy Jones, which became a life-time relationship.  We got through this, 'Listen Up: the Lives of Quincy Jones' project.  We started Quincy's foundation of which I became the secretary of Listen Up Foundation.  I mean needless to say, hanging with Quincy and his entourage, knowing his projects and family, I--that's how I got to Davos [Switzerland] for the first time.  That's how I met Oprah [Winfrey].  It was just, I mean it was just on and on and on from there.  It's marvelous.  Then the next--I was getting, you know, I was feeling my oats.  Then, let's see, what other successful thing did I have?  I was the one person again, who--to the surprise of so many, I have to say, white executives.  How is she getting these projects, bridging the cultures of these two companies 'cause nobody else could do it.
Speaker 2: Just a maintenance note.  What year was Listen Up and what year was 'Listen Up: the Lives of Quincy Jones?'
Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993], four [1994] [sic 1990].  See, I have to get you timetables.  You know, I'm not sure.  But it became, you know, it was all--and there were stories I can't tell, but hilarious, I mean just getting that all done.  We all had separate limos.  You know, we didn't know the movie business.  We opened in Toronto [Ontario, Canada] and would go in on private planes and when we'd get off the plane, there'd be a limo for everybody.  I said, "Is this how the movie people do it (laughter)," you know.  Journalists, we, we traveled like journalists and stuff.  So it was a whole new culture.  So then, in the midst of that too was in the company.  I said, "Well, you know, my job here is social responsibility," and I said, "How do I get to learn the Warner culture?"
Story_ID: 156449
Speaker 1: I had to really also focus internally because the internal struggles of who's gonna survive this new corporate behemoth and I said, "Now, how do I best find my paperclip inside for the two companies?"  So then, I published the first social responsibility report for the company [Time Warner].  In fact, it became--it even got written up in the Wall Street Journal because not many companies had done social responsibility reports and no media companies.  So I, you know, the practice I was developing at Time Warner became almost the leading company in this regard, particularly for the media and entertainment business.
Speaker 2: So you set the tone for it, the--
Speaker 1: I set the tone--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and the model for it.
Speaker 1: And the model for it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And all, you know, and the one thing about it, other comp--other media companies like to look at what their competition is doing.  So it was wonderful.  I could never get our press to cover us, but I can certainly get others.  So that became a hit.  Then, before I knew it, I'm called to a meeting, and they said, "Toni, we wanna make you an officer."  "I don't know why."  And as you know, that's a big deal.  You're elected by the board of directors to become an officer of the company.  I was the first black, and there were only maybe three women.
Speaker 2: Now, what year is this now?
Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993].
Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993], okay.
Speaker 1: So then I was feeling more of my oats.  I said, let me just start new projects.  With that, becomes a lot more responsibility and for me, I felt that was being able to nurture and move around and bring in as many--and I have to say, black executives, black and brown executives that I could.  I, I made myself available.  It was a lot of stress.  I felt like I had two jobs in terms of expectation.  I had what my day-to-day stuff was.  I had the expectations of external things that I was making happen.  And, of course, I wanted to be able to serve as a role model and mentor internally.
Story_ID: 156450
Speaker 1: So the other two projects I'm most proud of, I remember [Edward] Eddie Olmos just comes walking in the building one day and said, "Are you the lady who did 'Songs for My People?'  You've gotta do that for the Latino community."  So my, I then got 'Americanos' ['Americanos: Latino Life in the United States'] done throughout the company.  I mean it sounds easy, but everything is a negotiation because no one at the top says, "You will do this."  They have to spend their own budgets, but for Eddie, we got the HBO documentary.  We got a coffee-table book.  We got an exhibition, and I forget some other elements too.  So that became a major project that was under my wing, and unusual, again, for a social responsibility office to bring the marketing muscle and product muscle.
Speaker 2: This is Edward James Olmos.
Speaker 1: Edward James Olmos.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: And then my last, my swan song marketing, social project was for [HM] Gordon Parks [Sr.].  I remember seeing Gordon Parks, 'cause I was a late worker, come into the Time and Life Building at midnight.  Sometimes, that's when I'd be leaving because I just had to figure out how to catch up.  And I would, I went up to him the first time and said, "Mr. Parks, I've been hoping to run into you."  And he would always say, "Hey, baby."  I said, why do you come to work so late?  And he said, "We have the best lab in the world.  Don't you know that?  We're the biggest photo lab in the world, and here's where I develop my pictures."  I said, okay, you know, he was an old Life [Life Magazine] photographer.  But even having retired from Time, Inc. he still was given that status of coming and getting his work done and stored there.  So when a few of us got together and said, Gordon wants a--in fact, his publisher, his publisher became a very good friend of mine because she published all the projects I brought to her.  And she said, it's--Gordon's getting old.  It's now time to do a composite of all of his work.  We said, "Oh, my God.  How is that gonna happen?"  And it was called 'Half-Past Autumn'--'Gordon Parks, Half-Past Autumn' ['Half Past Autumn: The Life and Works of Gordon Parks'].  And it too, a major book, major exhibition, trying to get all of his films put together.  This was how we tried to organize his legacy.  And interestingly, it was one of the hardest sells I had internally.  Well, who's Gordon Parks?
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Isn't he too old for the market?  Who would be interested?  I mean it was heartbreaking to many of us.  And I had a friend who kind of saved it for me.  They were an ad-salesperson out of Detroit [Michigan], and they got Ford Motor Company to say, "Oh, this is what we're looking for.  We would do a project like this."  Well, when I went in and said, I have Ford Motor Company ready to partner with us.  Aren't they major advertisers?"  And that's when they stepped up.  But there was a lot of other politics behind it, but for so many, even people not to know who Gordon was, was a little heartbreaking.  But we did get the docu, we got the exhibition, and, of course, the book is just stellar.  And I'll never forget Gordon being at my retirement party where he wrote a poem, just for me, that I hang in my award, ego-room office (laughter).
Story_ID: 156451
Speaker 1: So, it's just amazing to me that they wouldn't know who [HM] Gordon Parks was, you know, at that juncture.
Speaker 2: When you're, when you're in a media company of deadline businesses, it's about what's new now, what's current now.  What have you done for me lately?  And, and think about a company that has stuff going on all the time.  I mean each week, I'd have a new controversy, you know, between movies and music and cable and, and magazines, and just the interests of the outside world in what we were doing.  It was a big place, but it worked.  I liked it that way.  But the pressure was tremendous.  I don't feel I had a life for a while.  And then there were external things that I took on that I needed to do to kind of keep me going, as I told, the Black Leadership group.  At that time, there were beginning to be a group of black executives who were meeting because every now and then you need to talk to colleagues to say, "How are you doing this?"  And in those days, in the early days, particularly--I was one of the few black women.  Mostly men were my counterparts in other companies.  And they were wonderful to me, the Joe Black's at Greyhound, the Fred Black's at General Electric, oh, who's the Tuskegee airman who was at General Foods, all these old guys who kind of really--LeBaron Taylor at CBS Records, they really said, let us be helpful in telling you and showing you some of the ropes of the external world.  And there was a group we had called the Business Policy Review Council.  It goes to show you again about the networking of, and partnering of civil rights groups with black corporate people.  We, particularly, were interested in how to advance the agendas of our national black organizations.  And because we all senior executives that had discretion in terms of spending--we didn't have to ask people to, can I write a check?  We could write a check, that we financed quite a few projects, through BPRC [Black Policy Review Council] to advance the agendas of many of our organizations.  Well, yours truly, I guess we were growing.  There were more and more people who were getting hired by companies.  You had to at least be a vice president to be a part, which limited the membership quite a bit.  In fact, many of the people who called themselves vice presidents, I probably was, probably one of the senior--because they weren't officers.  They might have been vice presidents of a division of a corporation or something like that.  But I'll never forget when they said, "Toni, it's time for you to be president," all the old guys.  I said, "Are you serious?"  So I became the first woman president of this Business Policy Review Council.  And I said, only if I have two guys as vice president, and they were the two most popular guys in corporate America at the time, LeBaron Taylor being one who was at CBS Sony, and [HM] Darwin Davis [Sr.], who was at the Equitable [Life Insurance, later AXA Financial].  And they were my vice presidents, so it was like I had my squad and at meetings, I'd have one on each side, so it was one of the most fun things.  But did we get things done.  So any time we started moving around, if we were at the Urban League Convention, we'd hold a meeting with that and figure out the agenda and see what we'd have to do.  And quietly operated to do joint projects that had really nothing to do with what our companies gave those groups directly.  BPRC is out of business now because, again, I think the whole notion of people thinking that that's things we should be thinking about, it's, it's unfortunate, you know.  But we were clear that we were beneficiaries of affirmative action.  We were clear that everybody in the room was comfortable with that, and we were clear that there are things that we could direct our dollars and effort to, to advance certain causes and campaigns.
Story_ID: 156452
Speaker 1: So, the fact that it's [Business Policy Review Council] out of business now, do you--is that due to a feeling on the part of young executives that they don't really need to have an organization like that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, they don't need that.  Who needs this?  Who wants affirmative action?  Who needs, you know--we're getting into diversity now, you know.  We don't, we don't need to just deal with those organizations.  And it wasn't about those organizations.  It was about our own little informal think tank of fueling the movement.  But, yeah, there was a, not wanting to be--oh, what's the word?  Pinpointed, what's the word?  [Pigeonholed?]
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Parochialized [ph.] or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They didn't want that label, was--they didn't want that label of just being on those projects.  We said, let me tell you.  One of the things I would, I would tell a lot of people.  Oh, they'd come and see me and said, oh, yes, I was in Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I was at this, and I was at that.  I said, you know, the fact that you're in this organization means you're smart and you can compete.  But be clear when you walk in the room, they know who the black person is in the room, and you're gonna now have to compete on what you bring to the table, not a lot of talk.  And the other thing people respect you for is that you are comfortable in your own skin, that you feel that you can articulate positions of black people or your personal experiences, not that you have to act like you know everyone else's.  You bring no difference to the table.  You bring no added value.  So be comfortable in your skin and stop trying to play the game of something you're not.  And that was the hardest thing to try to teach some of the younger people who were coming in.  Once you're in, you're--you don't have to sell being smart.  You wouldn't be here.  Now, now, what do you do?  Now, how do you get ahead?  Now, how do you, you show your, your importance and significance?  So, yes, that went away because they had a lot of people who just felt it wasn't necessary anymore.  And it's more necessary today than ever.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 156453
Speaker 1: So then I was the second woman to join this something, if you've heard of the Executive Leadership Council.  You mentioned Ann Fudge, who I'm crazy about.  The Executive Leadership Council became yet another layer of corporate executives, two levels down, no longer--no more than two levels down from the CEO of the company.  It has changed in recent years because, you know, they are still financed through dues.  But in the days we were starting, there had to be maybe about twenty-five or thirty of us and maybe about three or four women.  Wonderful, just having that network of people dealing with the same things.  I mean we were people who understood talking about deferred comp and benefits--just being able to have those conversations.  I remember when I first started at Time [Inc.], I didn't know I could take a car home.  My boss came in and said to me, "Toni, we see you work very late.  Why don't you take a car," meaning with a car voucher.  I thought they meant the Port Authority [of New York and New Jersey] to get to New Jersey, not to take a car all the way to New Jersey.  You know, it was those things nobody told you in terms of ability.  Negotiating a bonus.  I had a friend who finally said, "Oh, Toni, what kind of bonus did you get?"  I said, "I didn't get a bonus."  You know, so earn--learning about all of the nuances and entitlements that others were getting.  I just would always say, how about the practices equally applied.  I don't want anything special, but I don't wanna be left off the list.  And negotiating for those things your whole can wear you down.  So I think by the time the AOL deal came about, I was exhausted.  I had had two failed marriages because I needed a wife too.  I needed somebody who was gonna--you know, and I traveled a lot, got to see the world though at Time Warner, I really did, had a ball.  And I, and I did great things.  And I was very happy with, with, you know, what I was doing.  But I was exhausted.  But I said, you know, you have to look at, you don't leave anything on the table.  And I was young.  I wasn't able to leave.  I was too young because I started so fast, and I was shocked that I was in one environment--although it had changed, with me in one environment for so long to have started at a company in, whatever it was.  And, but it had been, you know, we did the Warner [Communications] deal.  Then we acquired Turner Broadcasting.  That was fun, getting to know [Robert Edward] Ted Turner.  And then the AOL deal, so I--it was, it was much.  So when the AOL--I got a call one night from a colleague that said, "Toni, AOL just bought Time Warner."  I said, you're kidding.  I couldn't go to sleep.  I was so excited.  I said, I could leave.  I was so excited.
Speaker 2: So you'd been there about eleven years at this point?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, I had been there about nineteen.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is 2003 then?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not 1993.
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  I'm saying, but since then, I had been through so much change.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was just change, change, change, change, change, more responsibility, more responsibility, more people taking potshots at you.  I mean the corporate environment is a--and the media corporate environment space is, is a unique animal.  And there're enough books certainly published on Time, then Time Warner and AOL Time Warner that, that bear that out.
Story_ID: 156454
Speaker 1: Okay, so 2003 is the--so you decided to leave [Time Warner Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I could.  I said, I'm gone, I'm gone.  I could leave, change of control.  It means I got a great execution in my contract, and my boss at the time said, "But wait a minute.  There's a couple things if you would just--" and when he said that [HM Charles] Charlie Rangel had approached the company to help save the Apollo Theatre [New York, New York], I said, "I'm in."  So I became the turn-around person for the new Apollo Theatre.  [HM Richard] Dick Parsons was now at the company and president.  He said, "Toni, let's see what we can do."  I organized a new board.  I gained enough trust with Charlie Rangel in the early days because I also for him had jump started his economic--his [Upper Manhattan] Empowerment Zone, his economic development corporation in Harlem [New York, New York].  He and one of his special people--he had passed the legislation but it wasn't off the ground in Harlem yet.  So we had put that board together and, and got that off the ground.  So he knew me.  He trusted me, and the Apollo was now being sued by the State of New York.  And, and the reporter for the [New York] Daily News was about to get the Pulitzer [Prize] because they felt they took the covers off the Apollo.
Story_ID: 156455
Speaker 1: All right, so we, we're finishing up, we're, we're talking about the Apollo Theatre [Harlem, New York, New York]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Foundation, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what was the toughest part of dealing with, you know, the revitalization of the Apollo?
Speaker 2: The toughest part was managing the politics of, I would call an entrenched board.  And the wonderful representative, [HM Charles] Charlie Rangel, who didn't quite understand that as a singing--sitting congressman, he should not be chairing the board of a not-for-profit.  And I think he became more outraged that they were accusing him of something by being sued by the State of New York.  And he was not going to be quitting this institution and thinking that the public would think that he did something wrong.  So I had asked his wife, Alma Rangel--she and I are in the same Links chapter in New York [New York].  So I said, Alma, I know, I'm agreeing with Charlie.  We don't want this to look like he's stepping down.  So it means you have to step up.  And she came on.  Ossie stayed--[HM] Ossie Davis stayed on and became chairman of the board.  So with that, it all looked to the papers like Charlie never left.  I didn't care.  But we could move forward.  And I became vice chairman of the board.  The first thing I brought there--I don't know if you remember but it was kind of a first.  They do it all now.  It was the time of the Gore [Al Gore] primary, Democratic Primary, and Bill Bradley was running against him for the Democratic Primary.  I brought those debates to the Apollo--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for CNN [Cable News Network].  It was the first time we really had a big thing happening in, in Harlem [New York, New York].  But see, now, they're doing those kind of things all over the country with, with different people and debates.  But that was fun.  So I stayed with the Apollo until it got stabilized in terms of leadership.  As you can tell, I'm someone who likes getting it started, having the leadership in place, getting good talented people in, and I'm gone.  And so I did, I moved on.
Story_ID: 156456
Speaker 1: Well, you know, we need people to set the tone so that's a--so, well, [HM] Ossie Davis.  Tell us about your interaction with him?
Speaker 2: Ossie Davis was just such a gentleman, artist, committed individual who would take the time to explain why things were so important.  And you can tell what institutions meant to him and his Harlem [New York, New York] was something that just was going to have an Apollo Theatre.  I mean just his stature, you know, when they talk of--they teach us about executive stature and how you--that the deal, you know, those lawyers will joke, the deal is really cut when you walk through the room or walk in the room.  Well, Ossie could walk in the room, and they'd say, "Oh, my goodness.  Who is that gentleman?"  And then the voice and the commitment and you're talking about being just so supportive of me.  I, you know, I would check with him, and how do you feel about this.  It's gonna help the Apollo, right?  I said, yes.  Let's, let's move it.  Let's go.  He was just, he was just a force and wonderful to work with.  And I must say I was just--he died during our watch of the Apollo.  So that was not a happy day.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was 2005, I guess?
Speaker 2: Around in there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 156457
Speaker 1: We didn't mention the [William "Bill"] Clinton--
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.
Speaker 1: --transition team--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in 1992.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you wanna tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: I mean there're--so many things I'm sure I'm leaving out.  I, my friend, again, the byproduct of working at the National Council of Negro Women, as I got to know Ron Brown 'cause he was at the Urban League at the time, Ron became--and ran a national campaign to become the first African American chairman of the Democratic Party, and basically, is the one that ran Clinton's campaign, but as chairman of the DNC [Democratic National Committee].  And he was very active.  And even at Ron's funeral, because he became secretary of commerce, Clinton said that if it wasn't for Ron Brown, he wouldn't be president.  And we all knew that to be true.  So when, when transition came, I had so many friends who were engaged in the campaign that said, look, how does somebody who doesn't wanna quit their day job (laughter) become part of this?  I had talked to my boss, and I said, you know, can I figure out how to, how to be part of this transition.  I just heard they're bringing on people.  So he said, yeah, your work's not going away.  If you can manage it, go for it.  So I got an appointment to be on the transition team.  I had a great assignment.  I should say plum assignment, which is like a pun, but, you know, you learn something new every day.  I had no idea.  I was assigned to the office of personnel practices.  And that's where all of the bureaucrats are looking for permanent positions.  You know, so you have all these people who were holding positions that were appointed positions.  And since most of them can't get full-time jobs elsewhere, they're looking to see how to get their, their appointed position reassigned as permanent positions, which is why the old budgets keeps going 'cause you have people who were appointees in so many administrations and just got to be--so I was there to make sure that we still had enough open--and there weren't congressmen filling up all of the appointed slots that Clinton could appoint other people to.  So it was just fascinating learning about all of that, appointments and how all these people just got these permanent jobs just because.  And so I was working in Washington [D.C.] two days a week on transition, and still doing my job because the work doesn't go away.  When you run a department and have the staff, you know, your boss doesn't care about where you are.  It's about, are you getting done what we agreed to.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, I could be in Timbuktu [Mali], but as long as I'm delivering, everybody's happy.
Story_ID: 156458
Speaker 1: Now, you were appointed to the, to the National Institute for Literacy and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was, I had two [President William "Bill"] Clinton appointments, one for the National Institute for Literacy because of the role our company was playing on the literacy front.  And then, because of my interests, again, going way back into citizen participation, had been a international spokesperson for volunteerism and corporate social responsibility, I really believed in AmeriCorps and Peace Corps and Job Corps, all of that became under the Corporation for National [and Community] Service.  So I was appointed to the Corporation for National Service.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is something that seemed to do well under the Clinton Administration--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now it seems to be on the back burner--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, sitting and waiting, yes.
Speaker 1: --these days.  Maybe it's had a little resurgence.  I know [HM Barack] Obama --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Maybe so, and VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America], VISTA was part of it too, but it really got a big push during the Clinton era because of AmeriCorps.
Speaker 1: Now, did Time-Warner play a role in literacy volunteers with, with VISTA?
Speaker 2: We funded them, you know.  Only, I mean I only say there were different ways to do that.  How do you apply your leadership?  How do you apply your resources of the company?  Or how do you just write checks?  I mean most people look at--the easiest philanthropy a company could do is just writing checks.  The hardest is how do you use, how do you make money?  Your products, your dollars, your investment, to help leverage other things to make money?  One of the things I was very proud we did--so when you say literacy volunteers, we wrote big checks all the time.  We co-sponsored some of their dinners 'cause they were based out of--they had a big one in New York [New York] that Liz Smith from the [New York] Daily News was always championing.  But that was a check-writing exercise for us.  More importantly, we were spending lots more money on getting those resources out in, in more communities and literacy volunteers and training lots and lots of people.  We got community colleges.  It brought together more businesses and more community folk.  I mean even in rural factories in North Carolina--I picked markets only where our businesses were, who could support it so that it just, it just was a multiplier.  So, no, literacy volunteers was a separate organization and they had--we didn't repli--we didn't duplicate.  The glory of literacy volunteers and Laubach [Way to Reading] was that they dealt with readers, zero to third-grade level.  We picked up at fourth [grade] 'cause we knew we could never train people fourth grade--zero to three.  That's a different kind of instructional level that you really need trained and efficient people to do.
Story_ID: 156459
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were also on the boards of Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, UNICEF--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute and [Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential] Library [and Museum, Hyde Park, New York]--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --NAACP Legal Defense Fund--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --Education Fund, Bethune Cookman College [Bethune Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida], the Coral Foundation, the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies and the U.S. Capitol Historical Society and the Quincy Jones Listen Up Foundation that we just talked about.  So I probably left some out.
Speaker 2: Yes, probably.  But I can't think either.  Some of those I'm still engaged with.  And I've worked with each one.  I made sure with each one I served, I always found a replacement for me, and I always found a paperclip of what value can I add to that organization where I served on the board.  I, I did not like being a paperclip--I mean a token on any of these things.  I stayed on the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation for a very long time.  I was, I was really engaged in helping them find their new headquarters in Washington [D.C.].  So that was fun, and, and trying to come up with raison d'etre?  What do we say the foundation does, that doesn't sound too political?  So, you know, now they're, they're a force.  It's grown considerably.  But that was a fun board to be on.  I liked that a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, do you have a favorite of any of these now?  I don't--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I would never say.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) right.
Speaker 2: Well, the one I've been involved with now still the longest is I stay on the NAACP Legal Defense Fund and Educational Board [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund].  That's the organization that--oh, no, I'm having a senior moment, that Thurgood Marshall founded.  You know, I still believe that most of our rights are gonna be sustained as we can see during this attack on voting, on school desegregation.  I mean it's like full circle again.  Those are the cases that the Legal Defense Fund took to court and are still fighting.  So I'm still on the board of the Legal Defense Fund.
Story_ID: 156460
Speaker 1: This is--it kind of segues into a question we always ask, and that's what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today, as we speak?
Speaker 2: That we can really look at our communities where we, we can support and develop nurtured economies, meaning, I see very few black communities where there're black businesses.  I mean black mom and pops.  I mean in all of our communities, even though there may be, you know, some--what do they call it?  You know, it's like all of a sudden, they become Jewish businesses, and then they're Korean businesses.  And there's very--there's very little room for a black merchant class.  We've gotta get a black merchant class.  We've gotta have our black youth being able to see people who go to work twenty-four hours.  When I grew up in New York [New York], there was somebody going to work all the time.  There were people 9:00 to 5:00.  There were people 5:00 to 12:00.  There were people 12:00 to 6:00.  You know what I'm saying?  So you always knew that you worked.  We don't see that in our communities anymore.  We don't see--I mean I don't know what's happening to the black family.  I don't know what, I don't know what's happening with a lot--I'm feeling a little out of touch, where education's not important.  I mean that was our ticket.  You, you get educated.  You understand English and the lexicon of your block or community.  But, so I'm hoping that we, we understand the economics of strong communities and buy from our own and develop a real black, merchant class like my Daddy Smith [James Perry Smith], you know, who had his, his dry cleaners and did well raising a family.  There're other ways to do it now, but to do that, that there's more of a connection between getting back and, and showing our young people the importance of education.
Story_ID: 156461
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my goodness, so many.
Speaker 1: --and change anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't think I managed my corporate career very well.  I mean I got so engaged and it was so much stress on just saying, okay, how do I get to the next thing, that there were lots of opportunities I left on the table.  There're some things I'm very proud about in terms of the number of people I brought in.  I've advanced, and projects have gotten done that have started careers.  But I, I  haven't--as people have said to me, maybe I didn't promote myself more, you know, or take advantage of many opportunities more.  You know, I should have been a little more self-assured about what I might want to do next.  I never was a goal setter, you know.  I just went for it, just always kind of just being self-assured it will be okay.  I like that part of it, but I think there were other things I could have probably settled in, focused on and just taken the time to do it.  I love being retired, and I love traveling.  And I love being able to say I'm a volunteer.
Story_ID: 156462
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: The number of people I've mentored and hoping they know how to pay forward.  The projects depicting cultures of people of color that have lasting legacies in terms of people who can research those and look at them and serve as examples, having parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] who were proud of me, and being trusted, being a good friend.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and throughout your career, you mentioned several projects where you were working to, I guess, establish in a legacy of other people, like [HM] Gordon Parks and the 'Songs of My People'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So I considered that in culture leaders--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and the black photographers and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --you know, cultural leaders.
Speaker 1: --[HM] Quincy Jones and others--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you were part of a visionary leadership project too--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --with Camille Cosby, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Which is very similar to what you were doing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But I always saw myself as this sort of, a strategist servant.  You know, I was always part of to say, how do we do it?  What's the best way to position this to get it financed?  How do we roll this out to national publics?  And being able to celebrate those people.  I like being that, that tool, that vehicle, that vessel.
Story_ID: 156463
Speaker 1: Now, now were your parents [Allie Smith Fay and George Fay] surprised at your success?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  My mo- well, my father wasn't here.  I remember my godfather saying one day--Alton [ph.]--(laughter), "Toni, God, do I wish your dad were here to see you, your success."  My father died in '84 [1984].  He was sixty-four years old.  You know, that's young.  And my mother who hung with me just, you know--I remember when I had to go to Japan to give a paper to the economic club, I said, "Hey, ma, you wanna go to Japan?"  She had just come back from Korea or some place.  She said, "I won't get on that plane for this long ride again."  I said, "Well, I have a first-class ticket, and I'm gonna be--" "--When did you say we go (laughter)?"  So, she was extremely precious--she was my press.  She would fuss at me to say, "Why don't you tell people what you're doing, what you're engaged in?"  You know, so she was very proud of me and would, she was, she was--so she saw my--she died six years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you don't have any children, do you?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It was not something I ever wanted to do.  I always felt I wanted to just be engaged in issues, primarily with my people or communities, and I've done that, so, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have an extended family that you kind of consider your family here?
Speaker 2: Extended family here?  I said I have a very close-knit family.  I have a brother [George Fay, Jr.].  I have a wonderful niece who's nine years old, and I have one cousin who's a physician practicing in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  He has three children.  So it's a very, very tight, close-knit kind of circle, and then some close friends.
Story_ID: 156464
Speaker 1: Now, what advice would you give young people going into the executive ranks today?
Speaker 2: Be yourself, stay on top of your skills.  Don't compromise your integrity, understand what you tell people is--it should be the same story everywhere.  Don't try to be so, so slick that you're not real with people.  And that's just it.  Just be yourself and get the work done.  You gotta put in the time.  There's nothing about, oh, it's who you know.  You know, that may help getting in, but in these places, unless you're gonna do the work and the time, you know, don't, don't even play the game.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything I haven't asked you we need to cover before I ask my last--
Speaker 2: I'll probably think of something once we tear down all the equipment.  Other than I really appreciated this exercise.  Julieanna [Richardson] was after me at least ten years ago on this one.  I was probably more engaged in things that I've talked about today.  But it helped me look back at my roots, you know.  I, I found my baby diary, I found my baptismal certificate.  I found pictures I had forgotten, things that I had done or places I had been.  So this has been a wonderful, wonderful time in just remembering and celebrating some of my contributions, so I thank you.
Story_ID: 156465
Speaker 1: And our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: A giving sister, committed to her people who did pay it forward, and was always straight with you and would help.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156466
Speaker 1: Toni Fay, [HM] Dorothy Irene Height, president of the National Council of Negro Women on the occasion of the inaugural of the national headquarters, the only building owned by a black women's organization.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: The only building owned by a black women's organization on Pennsylvania Avenue in the nation's capital [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: What was that occasion?  Look at me.  I'm a mess.  Who knows?  That could be any time.  Toni Fay and Hillary Clinton.
Speaker 2: This is my spa group, annually, a group of corporate women would go to the spa in Mexico, and then we would have to come back and, and have a party in San Diego [California].  And this one of the shots from there.
Speaker 1: Did you wanna name 'em?
Speaker 2: I can't remember their first--Shirley, oh, what's Shirley's last name?  Oh, I'll make it up, Shirley Jackson from Philip Morris, [HM] Ingrid Saunders Jones from Coca-Cola, Brenda Schofield from [Kraft] General Foods, Gerri Warren Merrick from Time, and that's Toni Fay.
Speaker 1: I don't know the people--oh, yeah, the lady in the black and white is Amelia Parker who was executive director of the Congressional Black Caucus.  That is [HM] Mayor Marion Barry in the white and Toni Fay, boogying (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Oh, gosh.   This is a family picture, I have to say, my extended family.  My godmother, the back row, my godmother, Helaine Wearrum [ph.], a very good friend and Links sister, Dr. Brenda, Dr. Brenda Bennett, Ivory McGee [ph.]--I don't have my glasses on, can't remember--Toni Fay.  This is [HM] Dr. Muriel Petioni who is a legend in Harlem [New York, New York] in terms of Harlem community and my best friend's mom.  He and I were in the eighth grade together.  My mother's best friend, Edna Bowens [ph.] and my mother [Allie Smith Fay].  And that had to be at least one Thanksgiving or Christmas of which I've had many dinners here.
Speaker 2: Oh, those are the counterparts to the previous picture.  Now, don't ask me to name everyone, but I will name my brother, George Fay [Jr.], my best friend, Muriel's son, Mel Woolfolk [ph.], my godfather, Dr. Alton Wearum [ph.].  This is Dr. Leon Merrick, Bervelle Nesbitt [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, so which one's your brother.  On the far left on the one in--
Speaker 2: Right here, right there in the center.  And who--I can't see that face.  Is that Jimmy?  My cousin, James Smith.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, on the far left.
Speaker 2: Why don't I get my glasses?  Oh, this is the occasion of another happening at my house.  Oh, I'm glad I have Jean.  Toni Fay, next to Toni is Dr. Jeanne Noble, a magnificent woman who was the first tenured prof--black woman professor at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] on leadership development.  And this was during a Thanksgiving occasion.  My mother Allie Fay, again, Dr. Muriel Petioni, Juanita Prince, which was a celebrity photographer at the time, and a friend who was working in an advertising firm, and I say, one of my little sisters--I'm going blank.  Isn't that terrible?  It'll come to me in a minute.
Speaker 1: Oh, do I know everybody here.  See, maybe I'd better cut it off.  This was getting an award with Betty Shabazz.  Now, sharing an award occasion with Betty who I, just crazy about is Toni Fay, that's Betty Shabazz, Ruth Clark, who at the time owned a major temporary agency business in New York.  And I'm sorry, I can't remember the lady to the far right.
Speaker 2: Oh, two of my She-roes.  They--we used to hang out and I used to help them with some of their productions.  That's [HM] Dionne Warwick, Toni Fay and Leslie Uggams.
Speaker 1: My immediate family, my brother, George Fay, Toni in the middle, my mother, Allie Fay.  Don't we all look alike?
Speaker 2: I was so glad this picture could happen.  It's on my mother's funeral program.  It's my mother, Allie Fay, and her only grandchild, Zoey Angelina Fay [ph.], my brother's daughter.
Speaker 1: That's my--that's me, Toni Fay, and my mother, Allie Fay, on the occasion of my father's [George Fay] retirement.  This had to be, gosh, in the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: That's me and dad.
Speaker 1: That is my grandmother.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What's her name?
Speaker 1: Ms. McKinsey, Joyce McKinsey.  Oh, great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is the occasion of Maya's eightieth, [HM] Maya Angelou's eightieth birthday, who I must say is probably--how did I leave out Maya.  She's become also a mentor.  That's a good friend of mine to the far left--(laughter) why am I blanking?  Oprah [Winfrey], who gave the party, Maya and Toni.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is my maternal grandmother, Lucille Walker Smith, my mother's mom.
Speaker 1: This is my parents.  Can't you tell these colorized photos?  It's their wedding picture, Allie and George Fay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  A lost art.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Oh, my.  It's me at a piano lesson, probably age five.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's me in the park.  Does that look like a two year old?
Speaker 1: Oh, that's a clip from when I was appointed at Time-Warner.  "Toni G. Fay position at Time" announced by the chairman.  And it hit a lot of press.
Speaker 2: Billy Dee Williams was nice enough to do a recording for, the promotion tape for Time to read the literacy the program we've talked about.
Speaker 1: This is me and my brother, George.  I'd say--we're five and a half years difference in age, so I won't go further than that.
Speaker 2: On the occasion of one of my visits to the White House during the Bush era.  Mrs. Bush [First Lady, Barbara Bush] was a major literacy advocate so I've had opportunities to work with her.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to remember where this was, but, of course, that's--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Al Gore.
Speaker 1: Al Gore.
Speaker 2: Oh, this, too, was part of the weekend of the inaugural of the new headquarters for the National Council of Negro Women.  The Clinton's [President William "Bill" Clinton and First Lady Hillary Clinton] had us at the White House, and they could only bring four people.  So Dorothy's guest, next to Bill Clinton.  Between Bill Clinton and Hillary is Dr. Height.  This is Dr. Height's sister.  That was the former secretary of labor, [HM] Alexis Herman.  That's Camille Cosby, that's Toni Fay, and I don't know who that is (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, that's me and [HM] Quincy Jones.
Speaker 2: Oh, again, it's one of my spa buddies with my mom.  That's me, my mother, Ingrid Saunders Jones and, hold on, 'cause this lady was great.  She was on the board of Turner Broadcasting Corporation.  Her husband was the first black coach at, for the Atlanta Braves, Ruby Lucas, and her daughter is now CEO of Channel One or New York One.  There was no Channel One.
Speaker 1: Oh, God, oooh, I'm gonna take this picture out of things.  This is Dr. Height with her male friend.  I bet very--I'd better give this to the archives.  This is Toni Fay, Mr. Robert Hall, who escorted Dr. Height everywhere until his death.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness.  I can't, I can't tell you who these people are.  These are theater people, getting CEBAs [Communications Excellence to Black Audiences awards] so I can't remember their--you remember him?  He's so much bigger now.  He used to be in all of Hoosey's [ph.] plays.  The one who went to jail--
Speaker 2: Oh, Charles Dutton.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Charles Dutton.  Now, who is this?  That's who finances a lot of theater in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] now, but who was on the Jeff--wasn't she the maid in 'The Jeffersons?'
Speaker 2: That's not [HM] Marla Gibbs, is it?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: That's her, okay.
Speaker 1: That's--say the name again?
Speaker 2: Marla Gibbs?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, Charles Dutton--
Speaker 1: Charles Dutton, Toni Fay and Marla Gibbs at a CEBA Awards.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, Freddie Jackson, my friend, the singer, Freddie Jackson--
Speaker 2: Oh, Freddie Jackson.
Speaker 1: --and Toni Fay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that is Marla Gibbs.  (unclear)
Speaker 1: I can't, I can't do that one, except that that's my hero--that's my, that's my good friend who held my hand in this corporate life in the middle, Mr. LeBaron Taylor who was a major force in the music industry.  He was at CBS and Sony Records.
Speaker 2: Oh, Malcolm Jamal Warner and, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's, you know, you know who I'm talking about.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Her and Geraldo [Rivera].
Speaker 1: Yes, and Geraldo Rivera.  We were giving, we were jointly, we were jointly giving Malcolm an award.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  We need to stop here--
Story_ID: 156467
Speaker 1: I don't know what'll happen once they consolidate with Hillary's [Hillary Clinton] stuff, if they'll even keep a house up here.  You know, they have a house in New York.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Toni Fay and President Bill Clinton.
Speaker 2: You're an easy interviewer.
Speaker 1: Am I?
Speaker 2: I could interview you.  See, you would be allowed to be interviewed yourself.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is Toni Fay, Linda Moran who was my best friend at the company.  We, after the Time-Warner merger, Linda was at the Warner Music Group, and she and I became buddies.  We traveled the world together, South Africa, all through Europe, on business for the company.  And she is now the CEO of the Songwriters Hall of Fame, and, then, of course, Bill Clinton.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, wait a minute.  I have to think of their names.  These are all corporate pioneers.  I--why don't we skip that one.  I can't think of their names.  That was the BPRC [Business Policy Review Council] group.
Speaker 1: One of 'em looks familiar too.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute.  I don't know what that is either.
Speaker 1: It's you and--
Speaker 2: Oh, and, and [HM Dr. Louis] Sullivan.  Well, this says in the picture who that is.  That's--I don't need--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I don't know who that is.  Let's see.  The caption's there.  But that was the secretary of HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, later U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] at the time, Sullivan.
Speaker 1: I don't know who that--you can skip that if you wanna. Lou Sullivan and, who is that first person?  You know, some people, we all look so young.
Speaker 2: U.S. social, my social engagement in, in Copenhagen [Demark].  I, for the U.S. Information Agency, I traveled to Norway, Denmark and Sweden to discuss American volunteerism and social responsibility.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: These were celebrations.  When I became an officer of the company, a lot of my friends--it was close to my birthday so it was a joint caricature that one of the artists at the magazines did for me.
Speaker 1: This was on the occasion of my retirement.  It was the invitation and in Time-Warner, doing caricatures was a big thing because that's how many of our covers were.  And what I'm holding and balancing in the air are all the different initiatives that I got started, turned around, made happen--oooh, I forgot about talking about 'It's US.'  Oh, how did I forget that?  And my party was called the Toast to Toni.  So this is 'Americanos,' ['Americanos: Latino Life in the United States']. That's the [HM] Gordon Parks project.  'It's US: A Celebration of Who We are Today.'  That was before its time.  I did a whole, a photo exhibition that we launched in [U.S.] Congress on American diversity and what it means to be an American.  This was 'Songs of My People,' literacy, and the Apollo Theatre.
