Story_ID: 261127
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, and I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Muriel [W.] Foster, M-U-R-I-E-L, Foster, F-O-S-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: W--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is the middle initial.  I hate my middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a middle name.
Speaker 1: You don't want to tell us what it is?
Speaker 2: I--can I keep it a secret?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am, if you like.
Speaker 2: But I'll tell it (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Willa, and I've never liked that name.  My dad was William [Burns].  They wanted a boy at the time, so my mom [Hattie Ellis Burns] compromised and named me Muriel Willa Burns--ugh.
Speaker 1: All right, so your maiden name is Burns, right?
Speaker 2: Burns, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right, now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Very, very--date of birth is January the 16th, 1931; Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Occupation right now is director at the Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre [Chicago, Illinois].  And I'm an H.R. coordinator for Merchandise Mart Properties [Inc., Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's human resources, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December, what is the day, the 14th?  December the 14th, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at The HistoryMakers on 1900 South Michigan [Avenue], Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 261128
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask, alright.  They only require a short answer, so--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --the first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Not really--macaroni and cheese, that I shouldn't have because of the cholesterol (laughter), but it is a favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, green.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: You know, I traveled so much when I was dancing and with my husband [Bobby Wilson], I don't travel much anymore.  No, I don't have--I hate traveling.  That's horrible, but I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in and out of bags so much.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Story_ID: 261129
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna now go to your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [William Burns] side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Hattie [Ellis Burns], H-A-T-T-I-E, Mae was middle name, and Ellis was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-four [1894], June 19th, Dayton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Dayton, Ohio, okay.  Now, what do you know about your ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I know my mother was an only child, very--we, our whole family, we're very small, small families.  Mother was an only child.  If you have four in my family, that's a big family; that's a large family.  I don't really know too much about my mother's--I remember her talking about an Uncle Al that I'd never, that I never met.  So there was no one living, you know, none of my mom's family.  We never met anyone other than my grandmother [Rose Ellis].
Speaker 1: Really?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Very--
Speaker 1: And your grandmother was from Toledo [Ohio], right, Ohi--
Speaker 2: No, my grandmother was from Akron [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Akron, oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Akron, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Akron, Ohio, okay.  So is there any stories in the family about how the family got to Ohio?  Because a lot of people we interviewed had, like, you'd see southern roots.  But you, your grandmother is from Akron.
Speaker 2: My grandmother was born in Akron, Ohio.  My grandfather, Joseph Ellis, he was born in West Virginia.  They migrated to, he migrated to Dayton--
Speaker 1: Akron--
Speaker 2: --with him, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't know how they met.
Speaker 1: So they, they went from West Virginia to Akron to--
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather was from West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And mother was born in Dayton, Ohio.  Grandmother was born in Akron, Ohio.  And in their later years they--well, my mom--well, they all did, 'cause my grandmother came to Chicago [Illinois] too; everyone migrated to Chicago in--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the early '20s [1920s].
Speaker 1: Okay, so but, but your family goes all the way back to the mid-19th century, being in Ohio--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --being in--
Speaker 2: Yes, from mom--
Speaker 1: --Akron.
Speaker 2: --from mom--
Speaker 1: Right, so--
Speaker 2: --and my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Were they, do, do you know if they were there, were they--
Speaker 2: They lived on a farm; I do know that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --my mom, and then they lived on a farm.  And in fact I was named after a young lady that mom went to school to, with back in Dayton.  And she said the night before, they were asking her what, when I was born, they were asking what she was gonna name me.  And she said she had had a dream about this young lady who had this fiery red hair.  And she's always liked her name.  She thought it was a pretty name, Muriel, and so she named me Muriel.  But they lived on a farm, until they, you know, migrated here to Chicago.
Speaker 1: So they lived on a farm in Dayton?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was it on the outskirts of Dayton or the, or I guess, I--
Speaker 2: I never got that specific.
Speaker 1: --I it would probably have to be--
Speaker 2: Now, well, I imagine it couldn't be inner if it's--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a farm, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, there are some parts of Dayton even that were sort of rural when I was coming up there.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, side of town they called Hog Bottom [Dayton, Ohio], and they--
Speaker 2: I was, I've been in, and then, Dayton, not with my parents, but I've been to Dayton before--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the city.
Speaker 1: All right, now, so, are there any stories handed down from the family about--do you have any tradition of any of your ancestors ever having been slaves?
Speaker 2: Probably, but I don't know about it.  It would have to be.  All we have--if we go way back, I guess we all have, but not that I know of, that I can tell you about.  And our historians or people who would know these things unfortunately are deceased, most of--I'm seventy-three, so the older people in my family have been gone quite some time ago.  In fact a lot of my relatives, I never knew, you know, especially on mom's.  I didn't really know anybody in mom's family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, your mother was born in Dayton during the time when Paul Laurence Dunbar was probably the most famous black person in the United States or one of the most famous--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and from Dayton.  And did she ever talk about Dunbar at all or--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --any of that?
Speaker 2: --she did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 261130
Speaker 1: --Did she [Foster's mother, Hattie Ellis Burns] talk about growing up in Dayton [Ohio] on the farm?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did do, somewhat.  Well, she didn't like the farm; I know that.  And she didn't have, well, she did really do too much.  Her life and all of her thing was here in Chicago [Illinois].  I mean, she left there as a young person.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a young girl when she left--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was young--
Speaker 1: --Dayton.
Speaker 2: --when she left, well, like twenty, but, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, she grew up in Dayton then?
Speaker 2: She grew up--
Speaker 1: Really, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she grew up.  Like I said, she did not like the farm.  And she came to Chicago because she had heard about job, you know, maybe getting jobs.  And she was a waitress in a--back then, where they had the little coffee shops?  And she did that.  And then she'd met, in fact she'd met my dad [William Burns] came into, that's where she met my dad when he came into this little coffee shop.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause my dad traveled.  And he'd traveled for--he was in show business for thirty-five years, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he traveled all over.
Story_ID: 261131
Speaker 1: What was your father's full name?
Speaker 2: William D. Burns.
Speaker 1: And okay, and he was born in Denver [Colorado], you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he was in--
Speaker 1: And, what's the date of his birth?
Speaker 2: Dad was in '89, 1889, 'cause he was--yeah, mom [Hattie Ellis Burns] was '94 [1894], so he had to be '89 [1889].
Speaker 1: Okay, what do you know about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I know quite a bit more about them, but then there were more of them.  He had three sisters, you know.  And his family, his mom [Matilyn Burns] and dad [Spencer Burns] migrated from Georgia.  They migrated from Georgia to Denver, but all of the children were born in Denver.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story that they tell about why they migrated or when they migrated?
Speaker 2: Not why they--no, not necessarily why.  They, I don't know what prompted them to go to Denver from Georgia.  And--
Speaker 1: Or did they just--or is there--do, do you think that maybe they just, or does anybody talk about them just leaving Georgia because it's a good place to leave after the civil--I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, it was very prejudiced, but then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --as my dad said, he didn't see where they did much better, at that time, back then, going to Denver, because it was very prejudiced  in Denver when their family migrated to Denver.  In fact, he said if you were walking on the street, and there was a white coming, you would have to cross the street.  Now, that's in Denver, so it was quite prejudice when they got there.  I think maybe they thought that they were going to better themselves, you know.  And maybe some other part or friends or what have you might have been in Denver.  But I can't see from, based on what they told me, I can't see where they did too much better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They had a good life though.
Story_ID: 261132
Speaker 1: I was asking about your father's [William Burns] side of the family.  You were telling us, me--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --about them migrating--
Speaker 2: I have--
Speaker 1: --from Georgia to Denver, Colorado, and him growing up in Denver (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  My dad and his sisters were born in Denver, but his mom [Matilyn Burns] and dad [Spencer Burns] migrated from Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, dad was born--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --and his sisters were born in Denver.
Speaker 1: What's--
Speaker 2: But he was saying that from, what he got from his mom and dad at the offset, they didn't see where they had, you know, really, how conditions were any better than they were before.  Maybe they had hoped for a little more.  They didn't think that Denver was going to be as prejudice as it was.  Now, that was the disappointment of his parents.  You know, they didn't think it was going to be.  But it was, and they made the best of it, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, what we can say about them safely and be sure is that they were the first generation born out of slavery in Georgia.  And they decided to get out of Georgia and go to someplace where they though it was better (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where they thought--right.  And because, the jobs, they were not plentiful.  And of course, my dad--
Speaker 1: Well, the racism in Georgia and so forth--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, is not good either.  So I would guess-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that they probably just decided to get out and find another place.
Speaker 2: Find another place, which became their home, and they loved it.  You know, they made the best--
Speaker 1: Okay, so your father was born in 1889 in Denver--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, in Denver.
Speaker 1: --so they were there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --there by then.  And did he talk about growing up in Denver, and what it was like when he grew up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you know, my dad, he didn't stay there too long, because dad started traveling at the age of seventeen.  He went into show business when he was seventeen years old, and so he wasn't there too long.
Speaker 1: Now, did he grow up in the Five Point area of Denver [Five Points, Denver, Colorado]?  That's, I think that's one of the oldest black communities in Denver.  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: There's a famous theater there too that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know that they were supposed to have been part of the, if you want to so call it, the little--the black society there.  They were, my grandmother and them were very social, and they were part of the, she was an Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star] and all, and she did a lot of club events and so forth.  And they all had a good education.  Everyone always thought my dad was a college graduate, which he was not, but he was so articulate.  His speech was flawless.  And I think that was from the traveling, and he read a lot.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --everyone always thought that he was a college grad, which he was not.  But then he said the education that he got--well, he would used to always tell, he says, "I got a better education as a high school student than you guys are getting as a college--" you know, he said the education was better, the curriculum and all.  But then he, he would have been fabulous college material, because he was so intelligent, not saying it because it's my dad, but he was very well-read, you know.  And he was--he would have been good in this kind of environment.  He was interested in history and knowing about things.  And he had a wonderful library, which my brother [Dennis Burns] inherited when he passed on, 'cause my brother, he loves reading and so forth.  But it was just amazing that he was so intelligent with only a grammar school, you know, education (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He sounds like a fascinating person now.
Story_ID: 261133
Speaker 1: When did he [Foster's father, William Burns] get started in show business again?
Speaker 2: Seventeen years old, he left home to start to traveling.  And, he did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventeen.  Did he talk about how he got involved in show business in the first place?
Speaker 2: He always liked to dance and sing.  He had a good voice.  He was a tenor.  And dad came up in a time, he came up in that vaudeville era.  He came up with the Sophie Tucker and the Eddie Cantor and when vaudeville was vaudeville.  Like he said, even the blacks had the black on their faces for the, you know, for the vaudeville.  Now, he could tell some stories about his times in show business.  He, they did--he was part of the Four Harmony Kings, and they did a command performance before the king and queen of England.  And he had a better--he had a more sophisticated (laughter)--his show biz life was really, really good, was really neat, very neat.  He had a wonderful time, and he only gave it up--when he stopped traveling, was because my mom [Hattie Ellis Burns] was sort of, wanted him to stay at home, you know, and he stopped.  And he felt that he had been in it long enough.  But, and then the show business, when he got out of it, jobs weren't as plentiful as they were when he first, you know, started.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he really, he was over in Europe for a number of years.  In fact, his second--dad was married three times--his second wife, he married over, and he married his booking agent over in Europe.  And he lived, between the traveling and so forth, he made his home there for about six or seven years--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where, where--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) before coming back to the U.S.A. [United States of America].  In England.
Speaker 1: England, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And he says it was really, you know, they had a wonderful career, just a wonderful career.
Speaker 1: Did he mention any of the--
Speaker 2: That picture that I showed you was taken in England, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  It is a picture, and he seems to be of the era as Bert Williams, and George Walker, and Florence Mills, and all of that group, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He would have to, yeah. Josephine Baker was a chorus girl when he was performing.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  So he performed in the same show where they--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Was he in the--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He met Sammy Dyer.  He met Sammy.  Sammy was a chorus boy.  He, Sammy danced with a line of all-male dancers.  They say they were fabulous.  They used to just stop the show.  And that's where my dad met Sammy.  And then years later, when he heard that opened up a dancing school here, that's how I got to go to Sammy Dyer [School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], was because of my dad having been in show business with him.  But dad was with Ethel Waters and all of them, with Thaddeus [Thaddeus and Slocum], Sophie Tucker, any of those kind of shows.  And he worked in the those real, real big shows, you know.  But then, they had more.  There were more theaters to perform in, and there was a little more of everything, you know, even coming back--well, what was that thing we were in, that WPA [Works Progress Administration] thing that they put on for--hee worked in that.  But he had a very exciting, really a good life.
Speaker 2: Do you know if, I'm sorry, do you know if he was in 'Shuffle Along,' the show that was on Broadway, Eubie Blake and--
Speaker 1: Yes, Eubie Blakely--
Speaker 2: --Noble Sissle.
Speaker 1: --yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think with words by Dunbar--I mean, the lyrics by Paul Laurence Dunbar again [sic.]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --you know.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he (laughter)--he was so cute.  They also performed at the Palace Theatre in New York [New York].  Well, that was like, way back when.  And then we performed--the Dyerettes performed at the Palace Theatre in the early '50s [1950s].  And my dad said he, bless his heart, he wasn't thinking, he says, "Well, now, if you look back in a certain dressing room," he says, "you probably will find a name."  I said, "Dad, I hope that they have decorated between when you were there and you know, when we came."  But he was just as, he was really serious.  No, he wanted me to look for his name.  You know, see, all the performers would write their names on the wall.  I said, "But, dad, surely they have decorated from when you were there--" and you know, and then we're there in the '50s [1950s].  But--
Speaker 2: So you didn't find it in the--
Speaker 1: I didn't look.  Well, I knew (laughter), you know, like, that was in the '30s [1930s], and this was in the '50s [1950s], about twenty years.  I would hope that they had slapped some paint--there were a lot of names on there, but I didn't see my dad's.  But we had a lot in common.  I was the only one of out of the family who followed in his footsteps.  And he really sort of wanted someone to, you know, follow in his footsteps.  I wasn't a singer, which we did sing in our act, but that was just an added thing.  I was not a singer, but just the fact that I was in show business made him very happy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so we had a lot in common.
Story_ID: 261134
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Hattie Ellis Burns] and father [William Burns] met?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he came into the--he was in this little coffee shop that my mom was working in.  And he came in, and they guess got friendly (laughter) and wasn't too long after that that they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He traveled a lot when they first got married, he traveled.
Speaker 1: So when were they married?
Speaker 2: They were married in the year--okay, let me see, I'm born in 1931, so they were married for--'cause he traveled four years from that, traveled four years prior to my being born--so that would be in '27 [1927].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, it was like shortly thereafter he got--I mean, a few years after he got married he stopped traveling, you said?
Speaker 2: Not--no, not a few years.  He's--well, it wasn't as much.  He, what he wouldn't stay on the road as long, and then he totally--oh, let me see, where was I?  'Cause I know he was still--when I was in grammar school--I must have been like in first grade when he stopped, just completely stopped.  And anything that he did was here in, you know, in the city [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: So about 1937 or so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he stopped?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I can remember I'd be so happy when I'd see him, you know: "Oh, my daddy's home."  But then when I was about in first grade, things that he did--they used to, and I don't know what station it was, 'cause I remember he and the guys [quartet, Four Harmony Kings], they used to do some background singing on one of the radio stations when, this is when he had stopped and was just trying to do things, you know, like in the city, and then he'd write music.  He loved to write music.  And, but there was a radio program that they used to sing on, and then things just went down and down.  And then when they did 'The Swing Mikado' [Gentry Warden] here, they wanted my dad to be Ko-Ko, 'cause my dad, sort of heavy, he was sort of short, and he had that oriental-type look, so they said he was just perfect.  It was very little makeup that was needed for him.  And he was in the first '[The] Mikado' [W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan], but and when they did 'The Swing Mikado' here in Chicago [Illinois], he wouldn't go with that.  They wanted him.  He would have gotten one of the lead parts, but they, you know, my mom--that would have meant going back on the road again, 'cause they, they did the show--where did they go?  They went out of Chicago to try it out.  Then they came back here, and it was at the Civic Opera House [Chicago, Illinois].  They had it at the Civic Opera House.  And Sammy Dyer did the choreography for it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, no, he stopped like when I was a small, you know, and before my brother [Dennis Burns] was born.  I'm four years older than my brother.  When my brother was born, he had stopped.
Speaker 1: What did he do to earn a living when he, once he stopped officially?
Speaker 2: He--salesman.  He says I'll use my talents, and he was a salesman for Standard Fuel Oil [Standard Oil Company], and he was good at it.  He was the first black that they had.  He just--he used to make us so nervous, 'cause you know, Chicago hasn't always been the cheery city.  He'd go all over, go every place and just the way he presented himself, very--he was neat as a pen, even to his dying day.  He'd have on a plaid shirt, but he'd have a tie on with it.  He just was that used to that proper dressing.  He was never really relaxed.  So, yeah, he was a good salesman, very good.  They were really, really fond of him.  He did well.
Story_ID: 261135
Speaker 1: Now, where did you live in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In Chicago, we lived--we were on [East] 49th [Street] and [South] Wabash [Avenue], we started off at.  Right across from DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois].  I can remember that so vividly, because my sisters [Bunny Burns and Roslyn Burns] used to run across to high school.  My sisters are nine and ten years my senior, and so they were in high school when we were living there.  And then we moved from there, from 49th we moved out, well, further south on [East] 57th [Street] and [South] Prairie [Avenue].  And then from 57th and Prairie, they bought--they didn't have condos [condominiums] then; they called them co-ops.  And my mom [Hattie Ellis Burns] and dad [William Burns] bought a co-op in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] on, on 5465 [South] Ellis [Avenue].  And then I stayed there until I was married [to Bobby Wilson].  Well, I was in and out of town, because by then I was dancing--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --professionally.
Story_ID: 261136
Speaker 1: All right, now, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory?  I can remember laying in the crib watching my dad [William Burns] write music, and I was only--I was in my crib.  I can just see him sitting and writing music.  I don't know how that--can't remember, halfway remember my name, but I can remember that.  I remember seeing him.  And I was a night owl, look like I couldn't go to sleep.  And he'd look over there and, "Shut your eyes."  And he'd just have on a dim light.  Everyone else was asleep, and I could see my dad sitting there writing music.  I can remember family members coming to visit.  He had some cousins who lived in Baltimore [Maryland], and I can remember them coming to visit.  I can remember my sisters [Bunny Burns and Roslyn Burns] putting me on the corner to dance, and they'd have the money.  I really remember that, 'cause I started taking first from Sadie Bruce [Glover].
Story_ID: 261137
Speaker 1: Sadie Bruce [Glover] was quite well known.  And--even then, and that was in the '30s [1930s] that I started with Sadie Bruce.
Speaker 2: And she and her sister [Mary Bruce Johnson], right, taught there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, yeah.  Well, her sister and her niece; it was a family thing.  And then she had converted her home there on [South] Calumet [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] to a dance studio, Sadie had.  And she had her two nieces and her sister.  It was a family thing.  It was like the four of 'em, and they ran the classes, because even then she was having her shows at the Civic Opera House [Chicago, Illinois].  She was the first black instructor to put on such a big show with a dancing school, Sadie Bruce was, 'cause Sadie preceded Sammy [Dyer].  Sammy had not--if he had opened his [Sammy Dyer] School [of Dance; Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], I didn't know about it, or we didn't know about it at the time.  This--'cause Sammy opened his school in 1933, and I did not come there until the early '40s [1940s].  But Sadie was sort of the top honcho at that time.  You only had Sadie Bruce.  And then, when Sammy opened his school, you had Sadie, and Sammy, and Leroy Edgington [ph.], who--Leroy was part of Nip and Tuck.  It was a dance team called Nip and Tuck, but Leroy was, Edgington, he was sort of the top person.  And there and again, they converted their place into a dancing school.  They, it was on like on [East] 56th [Street] or [East] 57th [Street] and [South] Wabash [Avenue] [sic.], something like.  They had their school up there.  But you only had about three schools to choose from, because back in that time, you couldn't go to a white school to take--you know, you couldn't study, or at least not here in Chicago [Illinois] they didn't have white schools wherein you could go, you know, and study.  So you had the three.  And that's during the--really during the [Great] Depression, so many parents couldn't afford--it was a struggle for my parents, you know, to send me to dancing school.  And dad [William Burns] even had the nerve to send me for voice lessons.  I was always, I got really harassed about that from the Dyerettes.  But he so wanted me to really to get really interested in singing, which I sang in the choirs at, you know, at school, in high school [Dusable High School, Chicago, Illinois] and in junior college [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois].  But it was certainly nothing that I ever wanted to pursue, you know, professionally.  But dad, they gave me, I had voice lessons.  I used to take voice right at the--what was the place on [East] 46th [Street] and [South] Michigan [Avenue].  They turned it into something else, but I know it was right, there's a big old gray cobblestone-like, big old gray--
Speaker 2: Credit--is it the building that became the Urban League?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but what was it be--it was called, it had the Bethel House [ph.], or it had another name.  It had the name--it had a name; the building had a name, and they rented out, like my teacher, who had been in show business with my dad and as a singer.  And she gave voice lessons there.
Story_ID: 261138
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up [in Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: The sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up--now that is a good one (laughter).  Hmm, sights, and sounds, and smells.  Sounds--guess you gonna say, "God, her dad [William Burns], her dad."  Sounds: listening to my dad playing his accordion and his guitar.  He entertained himself other than outside of, he liked to play cribbage, and he used to play that with some of the neighbors.  But dad used to sit in his room and play his guitar and play his accordion, and he'd be maybe composing music.  That was his hobby that kept him, you know, that enter--that was his--'cause he wasn't a person--because I guess after show business, and when you've been used to being in and out of clubs and out, once you settle down, you sort of stay home.  I mean, this is sort of true.  I know with myself, I don't like to go out too much, because I feel as though I was out so much when I was dancing and in and out of many, many nightclubs and so forth, so it never held any interest, you know, for me once I got married [to Bobby Wilson] and settled down, quote-unquote.  But my dad was sort of the same thing.  He never really went out much once he really stopped it, but he entertained himself.  But then his partners [in the Four Harmony Kings] used to come over, and they'd have their little singing sessions and so forth, which was nice.  And then, of course, I'd always have to, "Show them, [HistoryMaker] Muriel [W. Foster], sing 'Trees' [Joyce Kilmer]."  I always had to sing 'Trees,' (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, what is 'Trees' now?
Speaker 2: You know, I--
Speaker 1: How's it go?
Speaker 2: "I think that I shall never see"--that's the, you know--"a poem as lovely as a tree," dah-dah, dah-dah--
Speaker 1: Oh, Joyce [Kilmer]--
Speaker 2: --you know, that one, yeah, right--
Speaker 1: Well, the--
Speaker 2: --and then, "Watch her hit that note; watch how clear she's gonna hit that note," you know.  And I used to just tell my mother [Hattie Ellis Burns], "Please tell him, don't do that when company--why do I always have to sing?"  You know how, the proud parent, you know.  He wouldn't have me to dance.  I'd have to sing, because that was what he did.  But I can just remember, when you say sounds, it was a busy, busy area where we lived, quite a few children living on the block.  We're, as I say, we're a small family.  It was just--well, my brother [Dennis Burns], as I say, he's four years my junior.  And my sisters [Bunny Burns and Roslyn Burns] are nine and ten years my senior, so, don't so much remember them.  The noise came from the, you know, the smaller kids.  It was a busy block but a nice block, and we were, all the neighbors, unlike you have now, you were closer.  I mean your neighbors were--they just weren't neighbors; they were closer.  They could reprimand you if you, they saw you doing something that you shouldn't do.  They could scold you, you know, and you didn't get angry.  You just knew any adult could scold you or reprimand you, and that was acceptable, you know.  Well, it was a different era, different time.  Smells: smelling my mom's good cooking (laughter); my mother was an excellent, excellent, excellent cook.  And only one of us took her skills and that was my eldest sister.  She's an excellent cook.  She cooks well like my mom--well, not as good but closer to her than anyone else.  That's about what I can think of.
Story_ID: 261139
Speaker 1: Are you your father's [William Burns] only daughter--
Speaker 2: Oh no, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'cause you said your brothers and sisters are nine, ten years older--
Speaker 2: My father's first--I have two half-sisters.  First--second marriage, yeah, 'cause the first--second marriage I have two sisters, who are deceased, Emma Jean [ph.] and Margaret [ph.].  Then, there were two--there are four girls and one boy, my brother [Dennis Burns] being the last.  He finally hit the boy.  He had four girls.  And my two sisters lived in Denver [Colorado].  The one came and lived with my mom [Hattie Ellis Burns] and dad for a while.  But Margaret never came to, other than to visit us, she never came to live here.  She stayed in Denver the whole time.  So, I have two sisters who were in Denver, and then my two sisters here, and then my brother and myself, so it was four of us here, and then the two in Denver--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as far as for my father, his children.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, all right, so all right, so, you're, so where do you fall again in the lineup--
Speaker 2: I'm the--
Speaker 1: --with your sisters?
Speaker 2: --youngest of the girls.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my brother is the youngest period.  He was the last born.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But I'm the youngest girl.
Story_ID: 261140
Speaker 1: Now, how would you describe yourself as a little girl?  What were you interested in, and--
Speaker 2: School.  I loved school.  I loved learning.  I was a good student, very--well, most kids.  You had to sit with your hands folded and your, and no hunch, no slouching.  I think about that.  I don't know if teachers do that anymore.  But as a little girl, I could remember just as well: sit up, sit straight, don't slouch, and fold your hands.  You were not allowed to sit and slouch, you know.  And so with the schooling and with hum-drum that you got at school, and then that which I got taking ballet and in dance, then I always had good posture, you know.  And they used to tease me, the way I would sit when I would eat, said, "You sit so erect."  And they would take and take my shoulders and do like that, you know, teasing.  I said uh-uh, the ballet teacher [Sadie Bruce Glover], between ballet and in school, you know, with that constant sit up and throw your shoulders back and no slouching, which was really good, you know, it's good for, 'cause I know a number of dancers.  And of these younger dancers that are coming up now, they have beautiful posture when they hit that stage, but the minute that they step off that stage they would round those shoulders, just a relaxed, slouch-type; they won't carry that off.  And we were always taught: this is why your parents are sending you to take your dancing, so that when you walk into a room you'll be noticed, and you'll, your clothes are gonna look better on you, because of the way you carry yourself.  So I think a little more emphasis was put on, because obviously everyone who's taken dancing doesn't turn out to be a professional, but it's: "Your parents are sending you here for the elegance and grace and this is--" you know, the long shmear.  And, we sort of carried that on, even now, how much of a (unclear) but we do sort of go that same route, as we were taught.  A very small percentage goes into it professionally, but we try to let 'em know, "Don't waste your parents' money.  This is why you're, you know, taking ballet, to be graceful, and to look ladylike, et cetera, and so forth."
Speaker 1: I mean, you're, you're involved in business now for a living, but I'm--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I'm involved with business and dance.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm not trying to leave--but, do you find that instruction about posture and carriage benefits you in business today?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  I always get complimented on it at least, so I figured it's noticed, you know, I figure it's noticed, yes.
Story_ID: 261141
Speaker 1: So what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: In--subjects in school, I loved--business was my--even back then, I've always had a good head for business.  And, but as a younger person, even prior, prior to that, I liked writing, and I know I got that from my dad [William Burns].  And I never will forget we had to write this essay, and, and it was homework.  And when I brought mine back, the teacher didn't think that I had written it; oh, and I was crushed; I was so crushed.  So she made me sit and write another in class.  And it was better than the one that I had done at home, and she said, "This is really nice."  But, my feelings, I went home, and I told my mom [Hattie Ellis Burns].  I was really crushed.  I said she didn't believe, you know, that I had written this.  She thought I'd gotten it or copied it from some place.  But I definitely got that from my dad 'cause my dad wrote, you know.  So I have to give him credit for giving me, you know.  I got those skills from him, the writing.  But, I liked writing.  I had a good imagination, and I guess she thought it was a big vivid or maybe a bit matured for--we must--I was about ten or eleven, and I guess she thought that was just, I guess it was a little too much imagination.  I remember very vividly I wrote, I pictured myself as a spoon.  She said picture yourself as something else other than a human being.  And I made myself a spoon, and I wrote this essay about a spoon.  And I guess she just thought that it was a little too much imagination for a ten year old, you know.  But, anyway, writing was something that I liked.  English, I liked that because my dad made such a to-do about, "You can't through life dis, dattin' and dosin'"; that was his favorite thing.  "So, you must learn how to speak."  And so I, English was, you know, something that my dad pushed.  And I felt that it was important, and I enjoyed it.  What I wasn't too good in--but I got good grades, because I always wanted to get good grades--was history.  History was not my strong point, but I always managed to get excellent grades because.  But I had to study harder.  Anything that wasn't my total favorite, I had to study so much hard in order to get that grade that I wanted, you know.  Because you don't retain anything as well if it's not your, you know, your favorite, so I couldn't have ever come to be a HistoryMaker (laughter), my knack for history.  My brother [Dennis Burns], though, just the opposite, he just loves history, just, that's his thing.  Shirley Hall Bass, she loved, that was her favorite; history was her favorite.  She would have loved being here.  And she would have loved reminiscing and going all the way back to the, you know, year when she had excellent memory.  And history, I know for a fact was her favorite.  The business courses as I got into high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois], all of that was my, those were my favorite subjects.  And I didn't think about going into business or anything.  It's just that I enjoyed those subjects more, you know, than the others, accounting and all like that--
Story_ID: 261142
Speaker 1: I graduated from [William W.] Carter [Elementary School; Carter School of Excellence, Chicago, Illinois] grammar school.  That's on [East] 58th [Street] and [South] Wabash [Avenue].  And we were the only grammar school on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] with a swimming pool, I might add (laughter).  Some philanthropist who had a relative who was affiliated with the school saw that we got this swimming pool, and it was nice.  And we had to go; it was mandatory that we take swimming.  So, I graduated from there, and then from there I went to DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  That was when DuSable was new and nice and not like it got in later years.  But I graduated from DuSable--
Speaker 2: So when did DuSable open?  Was it--
Speaker 1: DuSable High?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know exactly when it opened (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it was new then?  It was pretty--
Speaker 1: It was newer.  It was, well, it wasn't torn down.  It was new; it was new then.  My sisters [Bunny Burns and Roslyn Burns] graduated from there so, and they're ten, nine and ten years my, you know, senior, so I guess in the--I went there from '44 [1944] to '48 [1948]--so I guess in the early '30s [1930s].  But at that time, when you have a structure, that was a well-built school.  It's not like the way they're throwing 'em up now.  It stayed looking new for a long time.  I told you, it's the difference in kids.  I don't what, what happened, where, you know, they just sort of tore it down, tore it up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it was very nice.  I can remember the assistant principal, Mr. French [ph.], and Meagan, John [E.] Meegan was principal.  I can remember my principal and assistant principal.  I understand some of our--of my classmates have gone back in later life to, you know, teacher there and even become a principal.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, are, are there any teachers at Carter or DuSable that kind of stand out that, to you
Speaker 1: Yeah, Mrs. Vanderbilt [ph.].  And then there was one teacher who came from Denver [Colorado] who know my dad [William Burns].  And she taught, she was the eighth grade teacher, Mrs. Robinson [ph.].  And boy, I had to thank goodness I was a good student, because the minute that she found out that I was Bill--(unclear)--his name, given name is Wood, but the call him Bill--Bill Burns' daughter, boy.  "I'm expecting high things from you."  And she had a great regard for my dad, and so she really put a lot of pressure.  She was never my classroom teacher, but she was my math teacher.  So, Mrs. Robinson and then Mrs. Vanderbilt, who was--she was, she didn't have to work.  She came from a very rich family, and, but teaching was her love.  She loved teaching, and she was just so elegant.  I just, I thought she was a very elegant, nice, kind--she gave, and not, she gave me a double.  And that isn't because I like her (laughter) that she's my favorite, but she gave me a double, back then they were allowing doubles.  And--
Speaker 2: Now what does a double mean?  That's--
Speaker 1: Skip a class.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but seriously though, she was just someone--she was so ladylike, and she was, oh God, her clothes.  She looked like she stepped out of Vogue all the time, you know.  And like I say, she could afford to dress like that.  It certainly wasn't on the teacher's salary, but you know, she came from a rich background.  And I liked her because, as my mom [Hattie Ellis Burns] made me understand, she said she doesn't have to be as dedicated as she is, because she really doesn't have to teacher.  My parents liked her because she was such a good teacher, you know.  And that made me, you know, look at her in a different light.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was--let me say, I was an excellent student.  I loved school, just truly loved.  But that has to do with your family too, when my, you know, dad taught us the importance of learning and how important it was, you know, to get an education.  And well, my brother [Dennis Burns] is the same way.  You could, when he and his wife first got married, you could go over to their house and see them, and they might be sitting up reading a dictionary.  And I'd tell him, "You guys are weird," you know.  And he'd say, "We're learning our words for the day," you know, but he also liked to learn.  And then my sister-in-law's whole family just about, sister-in-laws, brother-in-laws and whatever, in education.  Her brother's McNair Grant [Sr.], who was one of our first deputy superintendents [sic. associate superintendent] of schools, and so he's mixed in with a family educators.  And their kids have all, much into education, and he has one daughter who's a schoolteacher.  So, yeah, we, that's something that we totally have in common.  We both like learning.
Story_ID: 261143
Speaker 1: So, were you involved in high school activities when you were in school [at DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois]?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was.
Speaker 1: --did you run for office and all that sort of thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was cheerleader, gym leader, danced in all the shows.  I was, worked in the office, principal's [John E. Meegan] office.  They used to have, if you did well and if you were making good grades, you could come down and hold a little post in the office.  And you'd run errands from the office for the principal and so forth.  So, and I worked for my adjustment teacher.  Yeah, I was popular, very active.  I was on the who's who committee and all that stuff, yeah.  I was very active; in the choir, sang in the choir the whole four years.  We did competitions.  We had an excellent choir, very, very, very active.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you were on the verge of graduating from high school, did you know what you wanted to be, you know, or what you wanted to do as a career?
Speaker 2: I started dancing professionally when I was in my second year of high, so yeah, I knew.  I--
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that now.  Who were you dancing with, and what was the scope of it?
Speaker 2: With the Dyerettes, but at that point, he [Sammy Dyer] hadn't dumped--'cause we were dancing with a few other girls from the school in our class, and he hadn't officially given us the name, Dyerettes--
Speaker 1: Now, what, what, what, when, when--
Speaker 2: --at that point.
Speaker 1: --did you start dancing with Sammy Dyer's school [Sammy Dyer School of Dance; Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], Sammy dance school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I start in 1941--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as a student, and--
Speaker 1: So you were, you were about ten years old?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and then he put me with the advanced group in less than a year's time, 'cause I came from Sadie Bruce [Glover] to him.  And I used to just sit and watch, and their dancing was so advanced.  And I was just--I couldn't leave there.  I would just sit and watch all the classes after my class was over.  And so, he tried me out with the kids who did the dancing out, because then there were a lot of things for kids from dancing school to do around the city.  There was always a tea or some kind of function.  And then, of course, the war [World War II, WWII] was still, you know, going on, and so the servicemen, we entertained the servicemen.  They used to have the serviceman center right there on where the old Bacon's Casino [Chicago, Illinois]--well, you wouldn't know; you're too young--but anyway, there on forty--that was on [East] 49th [Street] and off of [South] Wabash [Avenue].  And they had a serviceman center there, and we used to entertain the guys all the time.  And the bond rallies, all that kind of stuff, you know, all that was going on then.  And Mr. Dyer was very good about, he didn't like people to use us, as he so would quote at people: we're gonna give 'em a chance to show what they can do.  But he liked doing it for like someone from NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] who'd come and want you to perform or, you know, for civic functions and so forth.  He just didn't want them to exploit us or just to have us dancing because they didn't want to pay, you know, so we'll get them.  And we knew we could dance, you know.  But we were always dancing, and we started the dancing for money.  My mom [Hattie Ellis Burns] had to buy very few clothes for me.  From fourteen up I always had, from dancing around, and that money had to be used.  I mean they had to, you know, govern it and all, but they had to buy very few clothes for me from the age of fourteen on, because we were always dancing some place and making money.  And we danced with Sammy Davis [Jr.] when I was still in high school.  There's a theater, I don't know if it's still there, but there was a theater called the Palace Theatre in Rockford, Illinois.  And that's where we met--Sammy was then with his uncle [Will Mastin] and his father [Sammy Davis, Sr.], Sammy Davis and Will Mastin Trio.  That's when we first met Sammy.  And it was through Mr. Dyer, that he contacted them and to ask them to, you know, come and look at us and see if they couldn't use us some time.  And so, the uncle and the father did when they were here in Chicago [Illinois].  And then they said, "Well, the next time we get something that we can use 'em, we will."  And so they called for us to work with them in Rockford and then, from Rockford all through high school and afterwards, while we were dancing professionally, we did a lot of shows with Sammy.  And yeah, so, like I say, I started, and then I did, while I was in [Woodrow] Wilson Junior College [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] the professors there were very nice, because when we would got a show, and I'd have to leave out of town, I'd save all of my cuts.  So, in the event that we needed to go someplace, then I'd have a cut that I could utilize.  I never just cut a class to cut a class.
Story_ID: 261144
Speaker 1: Is there a story about Sammy Davis, Jr. you can tell us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.  He was brat (laughter).  He was a brat, but a lovable brat.  We would stand in the wing.  I would stand in the wing, and I'd watch.  I never missed a show.  I'd hurry up and change my costume and then come back and sit in the wing so I could watch him perform, you know.  And this was like I hardly missed a show, 'cause he was such a fabulous performer.  But then after the show, in between shows, I'd go and sit in with his dad [Sammy Davis, Sr.] and his uncle [Will Mastin].  And his dad's wife [Elvera Sanchez] was traveling with them, and I became good friends with her.  They always said I am the product of older parents, and they say sometimes when children are the product of older parents you tend to be a little more matured or quiet or whatever.  I thought--it was the way I felt.  And so I became friends.  And then I saw the girls were going in Sammy's dressing room to listen to--he carried, oh, gobs of just records and so forth, and they could go in to listen to music.  And I'd say well, nobody's going into the dad and the uncle's, so I would go in with them and talk, you know, with the wife and so forth.  And he'd sometimes come to me, and he'd say, "Why is it you never come into the room?  All the other girls do."  I said, "Well, that's just it, they come in; you don't need everyone."  I said, "I sit and watch your shows, every show; I never miss a show, you know."  I said, "Why do you just have to have everyone adoring you?"  You know, and I would do it jokingly, but we were always fussing with one another, only nicely, you know.  And I'd call him a brat, because they just, he was spoiled, you know, and he liked having his way.  But we [Dyerettes] sort of became his sisters.  He has a sister [Ramona Sanchez], but on the road, we became his sister and became very close.  We sometimes traveled with him.  He has--had a fleet of cars, and we have traveled with him on, going from city to city and doing some one-nighters in his cars, which was a nice experience.  You know, we felt pretty special, and he was a nice person.  When he came here in later years after I had remarried, I had inherited a lovely daughter.  And I took my daughter and my son-in-law, and my husband and I, we went to see him, and he was quite ill.  He was playing at the McCormick Place [Arie Crown Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] with 'Stop the World - I want to Get Off,' I think, or something like that.  And he was quite ill, and his age--his road manager had said that, you know, he was too ill to see us.  But when he--then I guess he decided, well, let me let him know.  And when he told him that it was us, and said, "No, I'll see them."  And we went in the green room, and he must have talked, reminiscing, for about an hour or two.  But he was a gracious, nice, you know, person.  It's just that I used to like to get his goat, just teasing, because he was--people were just bowing and scraping, you know, and I just didn't feel that was necessary.  A talent that I just, I could have watched over and over and over and over again; his voice, the man could--and dance, he was so talented, so very talented.  So, it was an honor.  I enjoyed--
Speaker 1: Was he doing--
Speaker 2: --working--
Speaker 1: --impersonations in those days?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was doing, oh yeah, he did.  In later years he stopped doing the impersonations.  But during the era in which we worked with him, yeah, definitely the impersonations, the singing, the dancing--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was doing it all, yeah.
Speaker 1: He pretty, pretty much could do it all in show business (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, he did it all well, very well, very well.  Yeah, he was somebody that I really idolized as a performer, 'cause just could do everything, you know, and to do everything well, not--you sort of have to think, well, which is the better?  But he was an excellent tap dancer; he was an excellent singer; a mimic, you know.  So yeah, I admired him, and he was nice to be around.  And he sort of liked the fussing.  He liked the fact that you just didn't agree with everything, you know.  He pretended like he wanted that, but then he liked it also.
Speaker 1: So you kept some tension going with him all the time.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (laughter), just, but he knew I was, you know, just teasing.  I liked to do it, because he expected, you know, the, the bowing and scraping.  And then he'd tell everybody, "She's a brat," you know, but--
Speaker 1: So you were the mean Dyerette [of the Dyerettes] (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I was the mean Dyerette, yes.  But I, he knew, he knew.  He'd sit back there.  I would be the one that was sitting and watching him in all those shows.  I'd break my neck, because I just never tired of, you know, seeing him or hearing him, you know, excellent.
Story_ID: 261145
Speaker 1: Now, when you were a teenage performer, were you, I mean, had you met a number of the black stars already?  I mean, since your father's [William Burns] in show business, did you know a lot of 'em already, or were you kind of in awe of some of the people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But see, the--my dad didn't know the era that I came into.  I can--when you were saying things that you remember as a child, I remember my dad, and I don't know what the theater was, but I remember my dad taking me to meet Ethel Waters.  And they were doing this show.  And it was all these people, and the girls were going around, and I was just in awe.  And I remember I was a little girl.  I can remember that just as vividly.  And when he was in show business, each, they addressed each other by last name, and so they all called him Burns.  And so I remember Ethel Waters called him--"We're gonna call you Little Burns," and so I was Little Burns.  And I can remember him--and this is after he had gotten out of, you know, the traveling and so forth--and he took me, and he let them know that I was studying with Sammy [Dyer].  And they would say, "Oh, that's good.  She'll be good," you know, so--
Speaker 1: Now, did your other sisters go around with your father to his many--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They had no interest, no.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems like you're like the daddy's girl of the situation (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we had a lot, yeah, we had so much in common, so much in common, yeah.  And he knew that I didn't tire of hearing his many stories, you know, of when I--and the rest of 'em, they would listen politely, but after a while, "Yeah," they could almost tell the story, you know.
Story_ID: 261146
Speaker 1: Tell us about Sammy Dyer as a director and a mentor.  I mean, what was he like, and--
Speaker 2: Fabulous.  He saw that we were--he was lucky enough to have, well, it started off with six and then wound up with five girls [in the Dyerettes], who all had the same interests.  And that doesn't happen too often in a dancing school where you've got five girls they all want to go into show business, and they have the ability to go and be professionals.  But he didn't get greedy.  I don't know if greedy is a word that I wanted to say.  But so many young ladies had been exploited by different people.  He was as strict with us as our parents.  And when they saw how he was and how he reinforced all of their values, such as always being a lady, just the whole shebang, then this just made them really not give us any static about going into show--well, my dad [William Burns], he was happy, but he was the only one of the five of us who had been in show business, so he was happy.  And he knew how I had been reared and what he had instilled in me.  So he had total confidence that I would, you know, conduct myself properly.  Because Mr. Dyer--and in fact, when we very first started we had a chaperone, and one of the girl's mother used to travel with us until I guess they felt comfortable enough for us to be out, you know, on our own.  And if one, when we first started the youngest girl was seventeen, yeah, 'cause she graduated from high school at seventeen.  She was seventeen, and that meant that we needed, you know, a chaperone.  And Sammy would travel with us sometimes, but he could not stay.  He could like come on weekends or if he could get someone to take over at the school [Sammy Dyer School of Dance; Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] for him.  He couldn't stay for any length of time, because he had the dancing school, and he was producing the shows at the Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois].  But he would, like he went to us, went with us when we went, when we first went with Sammy Davis [Jr.] at, down at the Palace [Theatre] in Rockford [Illinois].  He went with us the first time that we went to New York [New York].  Now, let me see, we were, in the first time that we went to New York at the--where we appeared at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York], I was graduating from [DuSable] High School [Chicago, Illinois].  That was the summer after I had graduated.  I had just gotten out of high school.
Story_ID: 261147
Speaker 1: What was your first professional job, and how did it come about?
Speaker 2: Just someone--it was right here in Chicago [Illinois]--someone, which they always did, called to the school [Sammy Dyer School of Dance; Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] to ask him if he had an act or a group of girls to do a certain show.  And then he started sending us [Dyerettes] out.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you remember how you felt about being in a real show (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And--oh, we would have done it for free.  We didn't want--well, it didn't even seem like right.  Well, figure, you're fourteen years old, and someone is gonna pay you for doing something that you love.  And we wanted to do a lot of things that he wouldn't let us do, because he said these people are just using you.  They said, "Well, this is a chance for your girls can show what they can do."  He says, "I know what you can do, and I know that they have money to pay you."  We weren't paying him a commission at that time, 'cause we weren't making enough, but it was good money for us.  You know, he didn't start to collecting commission from us--and commission only if we had it to give.  He always wanted us to be able to pay our own rent, make sure we had food money, make sure you have money to come back home; you know, always put up money to get back home; never get stranded.  So, all we had to do was to call him once we left Chicago and say, "The money is a little short right now."  "That's okay, don't bother."  He never wanted us to be on the short end, you know.  And then, plus, we had a agent in New York [New York] as well as we, you know, gave him his.  So, the way we did it and the way he instructed, if he got us the job, we gave him the commission.  If the guy in New York got it, then we did it that way, so that we weren't just handing out, you know, commissions.  But he, like I said, he did not exploit us.  He was constantly reminding us of the importance of how to, you know, to conduct, be careful of who you get real close with.  You know, he was like a second parent, you know.  And he, he knew our potential as far as dancing.  He knew when you were not dancing full out, when you were being lazy, when you could do better, you know.  And he was very kind, though, and he's very gentle, and I know that we could be bratty sometimes, I will admit to that.  I know we used to give him the flux sometimes, but like he said, have he have ever gotten married, he would have like to have had daughters just like us.  And the first time he said this, we were so--"You mean you would want to have daughters like us?"  And he said, "Ah, that's enough, that's enough."  He says, "But no, you girls have brought me a lot of happiness," 'cause we never gave him any trouble, nor did we give our parents any trouble while we were on the road, you know.  And the hotel, we used to stay at the Schuyler Hotel [Hotel Schuyler, New York, New York] in New York, which is a residential hotel.  And we became very close with owner and his wife.  And whenever we were out of work, and would never be any more than a few weeks, and I'd let, we'd let our parents know, "Well, we're not gonna be working for a few weeks."  But then we would rent rehearsal halls and you know, keep rehearsing while we were out of work.  We'd start getting care, well, they called it care packages.  They'd start to sending us hams, and my mother [Hattie Ellis Burns] made the world's greatest pineapple upside down cakes.  What they were doing is they wanted to make sure that we were always good girls and that we never had to compromise ourselves.  So they wanted to make sure we had plenty to eat, you know, and, "Are you putting up your money?"  Back then, to tell you how disciplined we were--I don't when they stopped this, but years ago, when we first started out, like when I was a teenager, you could save; you could have a saving account at the post office.  And so Shirley [Hall Bass] and I, we opened up a savings account at the post office right downtown so that, and we wanted to race with each other to see who would save the most money, 'cause we were at home, like we're kids, you know, and we were at home.  We bought, we--let's see, fourteen, and what, how old was I when we did the Swing?  We were, we were in 'The Swing Mikado' [Gentry Warden], which is an opera.  That's was our one and only opera, which Mr. [Sammy] Dyer, he was the choreographer.  And we got permission from, all of us got permissions from our schools to go to--and I'll be darn, I can't think--it was out, it was--was it in Ohio?  Where the devil did we go?  We tried the show--and it'll come.  I'm having a senior moment.  But we tried the show outside of Chicago [Illinois], and it was during the school year.  But it was such good publicity for the schools--I was at DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois]; one of the girls was at [Wendell] Phillips [High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago Illinois]; Jeannie [Jean Cornell Robinson] and Clarice [White Pruitt] were at St. Elizabeth [High School, Chicago, Illinois]; and Shirley was at Englewood [High School; Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And all of the schools, because they get got publicity, you know, that we were students, and that we were going to be in 'The Mikado,' which we were.  We did it--and it'll come to me--outside of Chicago.  Then, we appeared at the Civic Opera House [Chicago, Illinois], and it ran there.  And that was one of the ones that they tried to get my dad [William Burns] to come out of retirement.  They said it would be so nice to have, you know, father and daughter.  And he was tempted, but then he decided not to.  And he would have had one of the lead roles had he have done it.
Story_ID: 261148
Speaker 1: That was the one and only opera that we [Dyerettes] did.  And we had to just mouth.  We did a Willie Nilly there, Willie, what do you call it, Willie Manilli, the one that did the mouth--
Speaker 2: Villi Manilli--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Milli Vanilli, yeah, Milli Vanilli. Right.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We, when they was, those opera singers were hitting those high notes, you could not stand on the stage and just standing, because you were a dancer.  You were supposed to be singing.  Well, of course, what we did, we would just, we knew that--we learned the words, but we were just doing our mouth.  And, of course, we did not know anything about, you know, opera singing.  And we would just laugh so because when they would hit these high notes, when the singing group would hit these high notes, no way were we even, could we even have thought of.  I was able to make some, because I had had some voice lessons, but on the whole we were mouthing it.  But that was the one and only opera, which how many people do operas, but anyway, in our many things that we did, we did do an opera and which was very nice.  And that's where we met Finis Henderson, which I'm sure you have--I don't know if you've ever done an archive, but Finis Henderson was one of our great tap dancers.  And he has a son who is in show business who is an excellent mimic, excellent singer, just, where is--well, they're staying out on the coast.  In fact, he's been out on the coast for a long time, and especially now that his dad has passed away.  But Finis Henderson, that's where we met he and Bobby Murphy, who were two excellent male dancers.  And we were paired up with them in a dance number, two of us, Shirley [Hall Bass] and I were paired up with them in a dance number.  But, like I say, we did that one opera, and then we would just do a lot of things around the city [Chicago, Illinois] and which we were paid for.  And then we would use that to buy clothes and things so that our parents didn't have to, you know, give us--
Speaker 2: Now, how old were you when you first started dancing professionally (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fourteen.
Speaker 2: Fourteen?  Okay.
Speaker 1: But trust me, we had a chaperone the whole time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was by--well, to do the '[The Swing] Mikado,' [Gentry Warden] we had to go down to the board of ed [board of education]; we all did.  And we had to get work permits because we were under age and then confirmation that there would be a chaperone.  But we also had to have work permits, 'cause we were under age.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, and in fact, and we had to have a letter from the school giving us permission to--because I think we were gone like two weeks, but we had to take homework and all that stuff with us, you know.  And we were all good students, so, you know, we didn't miss out on anything.  But no, that was an experience that was a fun--that I remember, and it was nice, because it was a help, you know, help to our parents.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No burden at all, if you want to call it a burden.
Story_ID: 261149
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I was remiss in not having you name all the Dyerettes and stuff when you named their first names, 'cause you didn't, we didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Dyerettes?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you describe 'em and name 'em for us, that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Gloria Broussard [Wilkes], B-R-O-U-S-S-A-R-D, and Gloria, spelling, common spelling.  She was one of the younger ones.  Gloria was bubbly, full of energy.  What can I say about Gloria?  She was like a baby.  I mean, she, we all babied her.  You know, there are some people that you just baby.  And she was sort of like the little sister, but not that she was that much younger than us, but she always seemed that much younger.  She was just sort of like the baby, really the baby, you know, and beautiful personality, full of energy, pretty even-tempered, pretty even-tempered.  And as the Dyerettes, we all had jobs.  And Gloria's job was helping with the costumes.  The success of the Dyerettes was the fact that there was no captain, and there was no leader.  And people always say, "Well, how did you guys manage to stay together and to get along so well?"  Said, "Because there's no boss; there's no leader."  And we suggested this to Sammy [Dyer] when we were getting ready to really go into traveling.  "We don't want to have--" 'cause he was gonna put either Shirley [Hall Bass] or myself, you know, as, and that--I don't know, sometimes with a bunch of girls, it can cause a little tension.  So we decided that we would all have jobs.  I handled rehearsing the music.  Sometimes I'd have to fly ahead to a different job to rehearse the music with the band, and then they would come in maybe a day later or something, you know.  But that was my job.  Shirley and Gloria did the costumes.  But you want by name.  We had Gloria Broussard.  We have Shirley Hall Bass, S-H-I-R-L-E-Y, Shirley regular spelling, Hall, and then Bass.  Bass is her married name.  At that time it was just Shirley Hall.  Shirley became, well, she was a fabulous--was a fabulous person.  She passed in 1998, August of '98 [1998].  Sammy could see some--well, we all saw her creativity, and we never squashed it.  Like I say, we were, there was never any jealousy.  We all recognized each other's strengths and weaknesses, and we embraced them both.  And we recognized that Shirley had something that we didn't have.  There was a creativity that she had that was just greater than what, you know, we had, and we embraced her changing things around as you would so say.  And we'd have our number choreographed, and then she'd say, "Well, this might look a little better if we did it this way," 'cause we were always rehearsing, always practicing.  And we never gave her any guff.  You know, there was never any argument except the only time we would, it wasn't--if you left it to her, she would rehearse all day.  She would never stop.  After we got tired we'd say, "That's it.  We paid for X number of hours with the rehearsal hall; let's go," you know.  But we always admired her creativity.  And she, the girl was great.  She was really, really, really, really good.  For creativity, she was definitely the most--I guess you would say that the two of us as far as dancing skills, we probably were the top dancers I would say, and the girls would agree.  So, we were the top dancers.  But Shirley, on creativity, she was really, where the word creative director, she was that.  She could think of--sometimes you'd wonder, where did she get all these ideas from, you know?  And she did that from a young girl.  Her dad was a carpenter and a contractor and a successful one.  And he built her a little dancing school outside of his office, and she was in high school [Englewood High School; Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And of course, I liked her, because she used to let me star in all (laughter) star in all the shows.  See, we were already dancing professionally, and I'd--so I'd always dance in the show with her, so--dance for her, and so she started out real, real young.  Shirley was the creative one--
Story_ID: 261150
Speaker 1: Clarice White [Pruitt], and Pruitt is her married name, Clarice, the regular spelling and White.  Clarice was the comedian of our [Dyerettes] act.  She didn't realize that--well, she did know that she couldn't sing, but when we threw in singing into our act, we found out that she was a monotone.  And so the guy who was teaching us the song was saying, "Well, just mouth it.  Don't sing it, 'cause you're gonna throw 'em off."  So when we were at the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York], and she was mouthing.  And she, just the little devil in her decided to started to clowning.  And she started to talking while we were singing and said, "They say I can't sing, and I don't know why they're saying that."  And then she'd just started--well, the audience just started to roaring.  They loved it, you know.  And she starts, "That [HistoryMaker] Muriel [W. Foster], she thinks she's cute--uh-uh!"  And then, and then she just started to, you know.  And so we would straight man to her comedy, and it became a part.  So [Frank] Schiffman, who was the owner of the theater, he'd--"Leave it in, leave it in; it's great, you know; you girls have got to leave it in."  And from then on, she left in the comedy.  And she was always the fun person, you know, in all the parties and what have you, but we didn't know she would have the nerve to get up in public, you know, and do it.  And so, and it added; it added to what we were about.  We were what we were because we were the only group of its kind, and they never had one since.  We were the only black group of girls who did gymnastics with their act, the only.  And they still, you have black gymnasts and strictly that, but never and all around dancer or an act where you incorporate gymnastics, and we did it to music.  It wasn't just do it as you will, go and flip, oh and there's some music.  Every trick was done at the same time with the same, on the same spot in the music.  Even the European acts used to love to watch us--which, their gymnastics, we couldn't even begin to--but we were very commercial, and the fact that they had never seen any black girls doing, you know, gymnastics.  So this is how we worked all the time, because we did tap, jazz, we sang, and we closed our act with gymnastics.  And this is why we worked all the time.  We had good wardrobe; we had good music; and we never missed any shows.  We, we imposed our own rules, you know, like--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --no missing shows.
Speaker 2: Now, there is one more Dyerette, right?
Speaker 1: We did Shirley [Hall Bass], Clarice, Jeannie.  I'm sorry, Jeannie--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Jeannie Cornell [Jean Cornell Robinson], now she's Robinson.  Jeannie Cornell was the--she was the tallest, and she was the best gymnast.  She--Jeannie is five [feet] eight and a half [inches].  Back then they're looking, of course for long lines.  Jeannie is probably five nine, 'cause I'm five seven and half.  So Jeannie is between five eight and a half and five nine.  And she could do a flip and land, and you wouldn't even hear her, it was so light.  And you'd see all this long body.  As you know, when you see these European acts, most of 'em are short.  You don't really see real tall gymnasts, if you've noticed or start to think back.
Speaker 2: That's--that is correct.
Speaker 1: Most of, you know--
Speaker 2: In the Olympics all your gymnasts are very little women (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  Yes, right, because you know why, when you stop and think about it, you don't have as much body to flip.  But when you've got this tall--and she's landing, and you can't even hear her.  Just, it's like a feather and so graceful.  And then what we did, we incorporated ballet with our gymnastics.  We used all of the tricks of the trade, but we incorporated ballet.  And when we would come out of a trick, maybe we would do a fast turn or something, then land very, you know, elegant.  Of course, we would ham it up.  We would really, you know, overdo it, but you know, the audience liked it.  And this is what made us different.  And like I say, we imposed discipline as far as always being on time, never being late for a show, no drinking.  No drinking, because of the fact that we were doing double tricks and so forth, and your life was in that other person's hand, you know.  So, like I say, we had our own little penalties and our little rules of--that we did.  And so like I say, Mr. [Sammy] Dyer, he liked this, but he also liked it that he never had to get a call about one complaining about the other because there was none of that.   We had our little jobs, and we had our common and mutual respect for one another.  In fact, we were really like sisters.  We were probably closer than a lot of sisters.  And it made it nice though, being on the road, because even if you didn't meet anybody that you liked or cared to deal with, we had each other, you know.  So, and then to be on safety, we always learned about safety in numbers.  We used to have these guys taking all five of us out, you know.  We said, "Oh well, we're safe now.  He's got to take all five of us to dinner," you know, and what have you.  But we were extremely, extremely close and extremely--what should I say?  Supportive of each other, of one another, you know, each other, like when we found out that Clarice was a comic, then we, you know, we embraced this, and, and it was fine; it was fine.  We did, we played straight man for her, you know.
Story_ID: 261151
Speaker 1: Jeannie [Jean Cornell Robinson] was the first one.  She was one of the younger.  She is the next, she's under Gloria [Broussard Wilkes].  Jeannie got married first.  Well, Florence [Jones (ph.)] was six, but she really didn't get a chance to travel with us that much.  But Jeannie got married first, and so she left the group [Dyerettes].  She missed out on a lot of traveling (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How old was she? I mean, how long had you all been performing when she left?
Speaker 1: Only about--let me see, '51 [1951], and she went to the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York], and she went to Canada--I would say maybe, when we started to traveling as a job, like this is our nine to five, in '51 [1951] when I graduated from [Woodrow] Wilson [Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois].  I'd asked them if they could wait until I finished.  And Clarice [White Pruitt] and I were going to Wilson, because my dad [William Burns] impressed on me about you don't want to have to be on stage with a pound of makeup on just because you don't know how to do anything else.  So he said at least get a junior college, you know, education.  And at that time, back in the '50s [1950s], if you had that, unless you wanted to be a teacher, a doctor, or lawyer, that was enough.  You could get a good, you know, you could get a good job.  You didn't have the number of blacks who were attending college, you know, you just didn't.  We knew--we all knew each other at Wilson, even though you weren't friends.  And most of the time you would be the only one in your class, you know.  And that's amazing how times have changed.  And in fact, when I was going to Wilson, when you graduated you got a diploma, because you had to take all of the prerequisites.  And you had very little left in electives, because after you had to take all of your sciences, so sci [social science], phy sci [physical science], and bi sci [biological science], humanities, English, all of those prerequisites had to be taken in that two-year, you know, term before you could graduate.  And that was to prepare you for going on and completing your other two years of college.  But they found out, I guess it must have been in the '70s [1970s], that too many kids were not graduating.  And I guess they took a study of that, 'cause there weren't, a lot of kids were not graduating from Wilson, because they then gave you--during those years, you had a comprehensive exam.  And what, if you took SOC SCI 101, then the following semester you took 102.  Then when you had your exam, if the exam was on 101 and 102, well, most kids had forgotten what they had learned in 101, 'cause in many instances you didn't want to take it anyway.  But you took it because you were hoping that you would graduate, and so you didn't, you know, retain it.  So there weren't enough kids who were graduating.  Mine was a matter, I thought I was doing this for my dad.  It was so funny, my dad and my mom [Hattie Ellis Burns].  I'm doing this for them, so my mom used to always say, "Well, make sure we get your first paycheck then, when you get a regular job since you're doing it, you know, for us."  Make sure we get the pay.  But, I did, I seriously wanted to make them happy, and I knew that it would make them happy, you know, if I graduated.  But, Clarice and I both went.  She had gone to a Catholic school, and they were preparing them.  She went to St. Elizabeth [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And she says, basically, they were prepared for getting a job, so she took a lot of business courses in high school, she said, and she didn't have any emphasis on science.  So leaving, going through high school and not having a lot of science and then having to go to college, and you're stuck with a physical science and all of that, it was just a bit much.  So, she just said the heck with it, you know.  And I think, well, I don't know how many Catholic kids you had coming from there to there and where they had that problem.  But she said, that's basically were the subjects that she--that they put emphasis on, was the, preparing them for typing and shorthand and all of this, preparing them for a job.
Story_ID: 261152
Speaker 1: I think you've got all five girls now.  You've got Clarice [White Pruitt], Gloria [Broussard Wilkes], Jeannie [Jean Cornell Robinson], Shirley [Hall Bass], Shirley who was our, we call her the leader, the leader of the arts.  She was special--very special.
Speaker 2: All right, so you all started performing full time as a regular job in '51 [1951].
Speaker 1: In '51 [1951] when I got out of--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --in '51 [1951].
Speaker 2: So, how long did you perform altogether on the, as a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I stopped in--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) with the Dyerettes?
Speaker 1: --I stopped in--well, I got married in '55 [1955], but I danced a year, and I stopped in '56 [1956].  Then I had my first child in '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I met my husband while I was dancing.  I met him up in Canada.  In fact, their manager heard that he was dating a showgirl, and they do or did really take care of the guys.  I mean, they would--was concerned about who they were, you know, fraternizing with.  And so the--and plus, they were staying out after hours, which we didn't know anything about, being in a nightclub.  They should have--they had a curfew that they had while they would play (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, where were they--he was a baseball player--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was in Montreal [Quebec, Canada].  They were part of the Montreal Royals, and he was playing Triple-A ball, Triple-A ball for the Dodgers.  They were still the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers] then.
Speaker 2: What, what, what's his name, just--
Speaker 1: Bobby Wilson.  He's in two history books.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, two books.  He was an excellent player.
Speaker 2: What position did he play?
Speaker 1: He played outfield, centerfield, leftfield.  He came up as a--I always say, he came up in an era where he had real competition.  He came up with Jackie Robinson, [Russ] Snyder, [Carl] Furillo, [Roy] Campanella.  That, those are all of the people that he came up--he really up with the, with--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're right.
Speaker 1: --with the, the--
Speaker 2: Those are the, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, there was a lot of competition.  But he did play in two World Series.  And they called him up, and he played in two World Series, '58 [1958] and '59 [1959] or '57 [1957] and '58 [1958], one of those two.  He played in two World Series, which was a nice experience.  But--
Speaker 2: So he played his whole career in the Dodgers' organization?
Speaker 1: In the Dodgers and then they--he injured his left shoulder diving for a ball, and they had to put a pin in it.  Then they traded him to Toronto [Maple Leafs], which they're, Toronto is a Triple-A for the Cincinnati [Reds].
Story_ID: 260986
Speaker 1: All right, so you got married [to Bobby Wilson] in '55 [1955].  And--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what were some, between '51 [1951] and '55 [1955], what were some of your experiences on the road [as a member of the Dyerettes]?  Are there any stories you can tell us of being on the road?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And where did you go?  You went to--you did go to England, right?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Didn't--okay, I thought you did.
Speaker 2: They wanted us to come, but they wouldn't put the money up in escrow.  And Mr. [Sammy] Dyer wouldn't let us go.  We begged him.  We wanted to go, but he says, "No way are you gonna get over there and get stranded."  Because during that era, some of Larry Steele's girls had gotten stranded over there, and it was a very common thing for girls to get--just like we wanted to go.  You know, you get so excited, oh, going to perform in England and Paris [France]--Mr. Dyer said, "Put half of the money up in escrow or they cannot come."  And they wouldn't do it.  That, he said when they refuse to do it, then, you know, that rings a bell right there, no, you know.  And he says, "I'm not gonna have your parents have confidence in me--" and, "I wouldn't," you know, "do this," so.  And he said and I can't go over there, you know, with you.
Speaker 1: So did you travel overseas at all with--
Speaker 2: No, we didn't go overseas, Canada, Hawaii.  We did about ten weeks in Hawaii.  And during that period, we were entertaining the servicemen over there in the [U.S.] Air Force.  That, was that Hickam [Air Force Base; Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, Hawaii]?  I think Hickam air base is over there.  And we, then we did, went over to [Naval Base] Pearl Harbor [Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam, Hawaii] and did a show.  And all the guys, they would be so happy to see us.  Once they found out that we were at this nightclub in Hawaii, they'd all come over on their free time and to see--they had seen the show a thousand times, but just like to come and talk.  They were sort of homesick.  And a lot of the parents would not let their daughters date the American servicemen, because too many of 'em had left babies over there during the actual war [World War II, WWII].  So, they were happy to see some girls that they could talk to, you know.  And so, we had a lot of fun.  It was nice.  But I was ready to come home though when, you know, the sixth--that was a long time, very beautiful place.  I loved it.  We lived in a nice cottage.  And the weather was beautiful.  The beaches were so nice and clean, the pink sand and all.  It was really nice, but I was ready to come home though when we came home.  It was a good experience and very nice.  We came in on the tail end of Mel Torme.  He preceded us.  And he (laughter), he was so funny.  He couldn't understand why everyone was making so much over us, because he didn't know us and by him being Mel Torme, you know, and having made movies and all like that.  And after people, like, they met us at the airport, and they put the leis on us and all.  And he just couldn't understand what is all of this over--"Who are they?"  Then I mentioned, you know, that we were friends.  Oh, you're friends of Sammy [Davis, Jr.].  Then that sort of broke that.  Then we would go to parties together and all like that.  But you always, well, at least their custom was that the outgoing artist would welcome in the incoming artist, which was a nice gesture.  And you usually, the run for a show was like about a month, like, well, in the [United] States usually it's a month.  But, they held us--
Speaker 1: So, so did you play like the--that was like the--was the club for the officers or the enlisted men or were--
Speaker 2: No, this was a nightclub--
Speaker 1: --enlisted, okay, a nightclub, okay.  All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but they'd frequent it.  When they heard that there were American dancers from the States there, then they, you know, and girls, then, you know, then they started to coming.  And it was nice, because it was an open air, so whenever it rained we didn't have to do a show, you know, and that was nice.
Story_ID: 260987
Speaker 1: What was it like to travel in those days, for a black performer traveling around the United States?  I mean, what were the restrictions?  I mean, did you--were you ever booked to travel the South (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was okay if you weren't in the South, very strict--oh, yes, we--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, what happened?
Speaker 2: The guys, well, like when we [the Dyerettes] did this one tour that we did, the guys would have us, when we would stop at a place to eat, we would get out and get the food for the guys so that there would be no hassle, 'cause they could see.  And they could see that you're coming from the North.  They'd figure that, so many times, that the people coming from the North are troublemakers, you know.  And so, consequently, we would go in, you know, and get the food.  And it's a funny thing; human nature is so funny.  I'd always go to--go up, and I'd say, "Where is your back door?"  And that always threw 'em off.  And I'd say, "Don't we have to go in the back door?"  And they'd look, "What do you want?"  "Well, we're trying to get some food."  "Who are with?"  "Well, we've been with [Count] Basie.  We've been with all kinds of, you know, acts."  Four Tops we did a lot with them.  We had a lot fun, though, when we were traveling with the Four Tops, 'cause they, we're all the same age, you know.  And we had met them here in Chicago [Illinois], so we had fun with them.  And then we had just a--forgive me fellows--but not a unknown band but not a, with a leader that you would, you know, know, just some musicians.  And that was a lot of fun.  But there and again, we would do the--we would get off and do for the food and so forth.  And then we would have to make sure, more than making sure, we'd have to usually stay in a rooming house, because we didn't even stay in hotels.  We would stay in rooming houses, people who had their homes open for entertainers.  And they probably made a nice dollar, you know.  And boy, you'll get those good home cooked meals, so I had no complaints, you know.  But, it was an experience.  In Georgia, we had some experiences there.  I think we went downtown, and oh, it was blazing hot, and we had on shorts.  And they said, "Colored girls don't wear shorts downtown."  And we said--
Speaker 1: Colored girls don't wear shorts downtown?
Speaker 2: "Colored girls don't wear shorts downtown," and we said, "What?"  And we said, "Well, those--" "Well, no," he said, "You can't wear shorts.  Don't you girls know?"  And we said, "Well, look at those girls."  Then he said, "Colored girls."  It was a policeman.  "Colored girls can't wear shorts."
Speaker 1: Well, did he ever explain why colored girls couldn't wear--
Speaker 2: "I don't make the rules. " That's what we all, we'd always say, "Why?"  "I don't make the rules;" you know, "I don't make the rules."  So, that was quite an experience or the first experience.  We had heard about it but to experience having to go to find the black water fountain, and the black water fountain is here, and the white water fountain is there.  And you splashing water on each other, only but you're drinking out of here.  And that was, you know, it just seemed ridiculous, you know, and yet, their kids are playing together, and they're living in--it was, it was weird.  It was just really, really, really, really weird, that I couldn't understand.  And I--and yet, in the back of mind, I didn't want to be accused of being a troublemaker, you know, 'cause you could make trouble for--I said, these people have, they have--they're adjusted to this, you know--got on an empty bus.  Well, it was almost empty.  And I was wondering why all, all of the--then, 'cause they weren't using the word black--all of the colored were all back, and I was saying--so I flopped down.  When I got on, and I flopped, and the driver looked.  And he didn't say--he says, "Where are you gals from?"  And we said, "Chicago."  And he, so he said, "I'm sorry, but you have to go to the back."  And I said, "But all these seats are empty."  He said, "I don't make the rules."  I was always--that was always the thing: "I don't make the rules."  But we had to go to the back, and it was all these empty seats.  But we were not allowed to sit down.  We had to go to the back of the bus.  And you know, you've heard about 'em, but you didn't really realize how stupid it's in until--now why do we have to leave all of those empty seats, you know?  Or you go, went in a shoe store, and you couldn't try on the shoe, but you could buy them.  And I said, "But supposing they don't fit, are you gonna take 'em back?"  "No, you're supposed to know your size."  "I'll get some shoes when I get home," you know.  To me those things were just so, even in a segregated era, that just seems so way out.
Story_ID: 260988
Speaker 1: Went to a theater; most of the girls [the Dyerettes] are fair complected, okay.  We went to this theater.  Shirley [Hall Bass] went through; Clarice [White Pruitt] went through; Florence [Jones (ph.)] went through; and then here I come up, and she said, "Uh-oh," she says, "You have to go sit upstairs."  And I said, "Bring back those other three colored girls.  Let me, you know, we'd like to--we know each other."  And they turned around, "You're no fun; you're no fun.  Why'd you have to open your big mouth?"  I said, "Bring them back in."  She said, "They're colored?"  I said, "Yes, they are," I said, "now, what harm were they gonna do?  If you're thinking that it's because only the colored could sit in certain places, and you were about to let them go, what harm were they gonna do when they sat down?  None, none at all."  I said, "But you know, you can look at me and see that I'm colored, so you tell me I can't."  And I said, "This is so ridiculous."
Speaker 2: Now let, let me ask you this.  Now, did your parents give you any instruction on how to, what the South was like in those days?  It seem, it always seems incredible many people never talk about that or never instructed their children about that sort thing.
Speaker 1: Say, when we were operating from New York [New York] and our parents were here in Chicago [Illinois], and they didn't know where we were gonna be appearing or what have you, I guess they assumed that Sammy [Dyer]--but when we went on those, we went from our new--from our agent in New York.  And I guess they assumed that everybody knows about--you've heard and you've read about it, but I have never been confronted with it, you know.  And thank God we had intelligence enough not to get--I would just tell 'em this is stupid, you know.  We appeared at the W.C. Handy in Memphis, Tennessee, and we wanted to go down to the park, which really wasn't that far.  And they said, "Oh, the park for colored people is--" someplace.  And we couldn't even, we weren't even allowed in the park, and I said--
Speaker 2: In the W.C. Handy Park [Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: W.C. Handy, the--
Speaker 2: Named for a black trumpet player.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right--
Speaker 2: It was his statue there.
Speaker 1: --W. C. Handy, yeah.
Speaker 2: What--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --was the statue there in those days?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but what it was, they didn't even come to the theater together.  During that time, let me see, the white came on two days, and the blacks came on another, but they did not come together in the theater.  It wasn't even a matter of you sitting upstairs and downstairs.  It's different days, but they would come to see us perform.  So, when we would come on stage, they thought it was a mixed troop, because the girls are fair.  And it would be so funny.  And Shirley will say, "I never thought I'd have to be trying to prove that I'm colored," you know.  They would ask her, "You're not colored; you're not colored."  And you know, it was like, "What am I doing sitting up here trying to explain I'm colored?"  You know?  The--it was just wild.  Those things used to blow my mind.  It was actually funny to--it was so absurd to us that it was just, you know.  But those were some of the experiences that we had, and I think we handled them well.  It was like a shocker to not to be able to--even in a park, you know.  We sort of dealt with the water fountains, but, and the washrooms, but the park?  You down that area, you know.  It was an experience.
Story_ID: 260989
Speaker 1: In '55 [1955], well, the Civil Rights Movement starts heatin' up in the mid-'50s [1950s] with Brown v. the Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] first and then Little Rock [Arkansas] and Montgomery Bus Boycott and all that.  Were you keeping up with these events in the news?  And what was--
Speaker 2: Not really, not really, to make it apply to us, you know what I'm saying?  Yeah, you knew about, it was something that you weren't involved in.  I had never, we had no relatives to visit in the South, so I really had had no experience in the South.  In fact, well, if they did, I didn't know about it.  I had no experience in the South.  I guess none of us [in the Dyerettes] really did.  And we were all born right here [Chicago, Illinois].  And I don't--I'm trying to think where and I'm--oh, Clarice [White Pruitt]'s parents, they're from New Orleans [Louisiana], and, I don't know, we've appeared in New Orleans.  I don't know how--we didn't really experience any prejudice.  We didn't experience any problems when we were in New Orleans, and we were only there on a one-nighter.  We stayed two nights.  We did two shows there, but, so I can't, I don't know, but they were from New Orleans.  And you know, with all those people, the way they look there, you can't tell who's who a lot of times down in New Orleans.  Clarice is--Shirley [Hall Bass]'s parents, I'm not quite sure of their origin, where they're from.  Mrs. Broussard, Gloria [Broussard Wilkes]'s mother, she's from New Orleans.  Jean's [Jean Cornell Robinson] mom's from Illinois; she's from here.  So, we hadn't really had--we weren't really prepared for it.  And like you read things, but I guess it's because, I don't know, if you didn't have anyone that was real close to you that could talk to you or well, yes, you know, it was something that you were reading.  To me, it's like we've never really experienced war here.  The closest that we've come was 9/11 [September 11th, 2001] and that's the people in New York [New York], 'cause we still haven't seen it.  So, you know about it, and you certainly knew about wars and the killings and all, but you, I don't think you can really know about it until you have experience, you know what I'm saying, get the feel of what it's all about, like many people that I know in New York and how they were talking about it just changed their whole, just said it was really something, you know.  And people were traveling there to see it.  I didn't want to go and see that, you know.  But I think if that's a fair comparison, it was something--
Speaker 1: Well, even that, that, that was like--
Speaker 2: --you knew about it.
Speaker 1: --one, one incident, you know, and not followed up by a lot of it.  I mean, if you were actually fighting in a war, you'd see it every day, but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, if you're, but that's, yeah.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: So, so you really didn't, you know--
Speaker 2: We just had never, other than during our travels.
Story_ID: 260990
Speaker 1: We [the Dyerettes] didn't have to live or deal or deal with, you know, deal with that.  We didn't, no, we weren't close with, like if we had family that we were keeping contact with who would be sharing their--the closest that I came to that kind of thing is listening to my dad [William Burns] talk about he'd have to cross the street.  You'd have to cross over on the other side of the street, and this is in Denver [Colorado], you know, or you couldn't walk on the same side walk with a white.  You had to cross--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Denver?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the street.  Um-hm, yeah, they said Denver was very prejudiced years ago, very, very prejudiced, and you'd have to cross on the other side of the street.  So I had found out more from my dad, you know, then, that's my dad, so, you know, then we can share, and that seemed so, you know, ridiculous.  But, well, Chicago [Illinois] hasn't always been that great, you know.  We used to worry about--but my father, he'd--and, he just went everywhere trying to--as a salesperson.  And we say, "What were you doing way over there?"  Well--and he had customers all over Chicago.  I guess they figured well, if you're bold enough to come over here, yeah, well--and I like I say, he was a just he, just the way he presented himself.  He used to tell me, "A businessman has a business card.  And if you don't have a business card, then the way you present yourself when you open your mouth, that's your business card."  And he said, "So, I present myself in a manner--" and he, I don't know if, I don't remember him passing on any business cards.  He said, "I knock on that door, and if, you know, the first look is, 'What are you doing knocking on my door?'"  But then he started talking: "I'm from Standard Fuel Oil [Standard Oil Company].  And I'm wondering, and what, I see your heating--" you know, and he would just start to talking.  And he spoke so--just the way he presented himself, he got a lot of customers, a lot of customers.  So, it's, he handled his problems well, and I guess he sort of passed that on to us, you know.  We had to deal with it.
Story_ID: 260991
Speaker 1: It [segregation] was a shocker, but, well, no, we weren't prepared for it, 'cause we never knew that we would encounter it.  And even when they were booking us [the Dyerettes], I guess that was the last thing in the world that they were thinking of, is to tell us the dos and the don'ts, obviously, because we didn't find out until, you know, we got there.  But I had--I was reared a Christian Scientist, and I used to go to church, though, various places that we would go.  I would go to the girls', since more were Catholics; I'd go to church with them.  And I decided when we were in Mississippi, and we were staying at this rooming house, and I decided I didn't want to go to church with the girls.  And I asked if there was a Christian Science church, you know, that I, and she looked, you know.  And so we got on the phone, and we found out where it was, and we got a cab.  And I noticed the cab driver smiling when I told him the address and where I was going, but you know, I didn't know.  I wasn't really thinking about where I was, and, and I'm so glad that I went.  And when I got to the church, I was late, because the driver got me there late.  I left the house in plenty of time.  And wouldn't you know, instead of me coming up in the back of the church or on the side, I came up right in the middle, like it was a zillion people.  It was a huge church, much larger than our church.  I was brought up in the one [Eighth Church of Christ, Scientist, Chicago, Illinois] on [East] 44th [Street] and [South] Michigan [Avenue], which I'm sure you're, you know, are familiar with.  And I came up right in the middle of the church.  And trust me, I was the only one--of me--there.  And it was just the reader was reading, and she looked up, and she saw me.  And there was just this brief moment of silence, and then she kept on reading.  And so there's a real nice lady took--she could saw me.  And I'm looking around, and I'm saying, "Oh, my God, should I not be here?"  And she pointed, she beckoned to me, and she said, "Come sit down with me."  And I sat down, and I was nervous wreck the whole thing.  After church, those people just, they just came at me.  "Where are you from?"  They knew I wasn't from there.  And, "How many color do you have?  Is it a larger church?"  They just wanted to know where I came--"You didn't think that we would mind or anything?"  I said, for one brief moment, I was saying, "Oh God, I didn't tell the girls the (laughter) address," you know, where I was.  But that was a nice surprise.
Speaker 2: Now, where, where, where was this at?
Speaker 1: In Mississippi, and they don't have any blacks who are Christian Scientists there.  And it's a minority religion.  And when I say minority, you know, of religions you don't have a lot of people who are Christian Scientists.  And that was an--but a good experience, because they just wanted to know where I came from, you know, how many people, and they just wanted information, you know.  And in fact, the lady that--there was two sisters that beckoned for me to take, come and sit by them, they took me home.  And I was glad, 'cause it never dawned on me how I was gonna get back home.  You know, would I stand out in that and try to hail a cab, because the owner of the rooming house had called a cab for me.  So that was a--but a--that was a pleasant experience.  It was just that when I realized I'm in Mississippi, and I didn't see any other colored people there, and I'm saying, "Well, am I supposed to be here?"  You know, I don't know, are these people like the people in Chicago [Illinois]?  'Cause were experiencing different things from the people here, so at that point I was frightened, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was frightened.
Story_ID: 260992
Speaker 1: Is there any one experience when you were on the road and doing shows that's their, that you consider the best one, the best story, or the best experience?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't, I can't say--I think one of the highlights I would say is we did a--they had the annual policemen's ball in New York [New York] at the Astor hotel [Hotel Astor, New York, New York].  And they came to get us [the Dyerettes] in between shows, which we had to wear our costumes there and just throw jackets around us, 'cause it was in the fall, and it was a little chilly that day.  They sent police escort.  It was, oh, I forget how many police cars there were in front of us to get us, and take us to do this show.  I felt so important.  I mean, we all did.  We just felt so elegant, you know, here we are with this trail of police cars, you know, taking us to.  And, we saw a lot of movie stars and things there.  Of course, they're used to people coming in.  And I think that was really a highlight.  I thought it was really snazzy.  Traveling with the Sammy [Davis, Jr.] in his fleet of cars, that was a fun thing.  We did--
Speaker 1: How many, how long did you travel with Sammy Davis, Jr.?
Speaker 2: Oh, but this'll be off and on--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when he would need it.  This would be off and on--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --during that time, yeah.
Speaker 1: --during the whole, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, off and on.  And because when he started to using us, then Nat [King] Cole, Sarah Vaughan, all of the big blacks, Ray Charles.  We were a good opening act and a good act to put on before the star, because we would have the audience up here.  So, when the star came on, they just had it.  They didn't have to work to pull the audience up.  So, we became known as a good supporting act and an act to have to come on right before the star comes on.  'Cause a lot of times when Sammy would come on, and the audience would still be going wild, and he'd always make a joke or something: "Hey, hey, hey, remember, just let's remember who the star is; just remember I'm the star; you don't get this much applause."  You know, he'd always make some kind of joke, and then the audience would really like it.  Duke Ellington, Count Basie, Charlie Barnett, Tito Puente, all of these people, they'd call Mr. [Sammy] Dyer or call our agent in New York, "Are the girls busy?  Are they working?  We want 'em to do the show," at such and such, so by word of mouth.  And reliability, believe it or not, is very important.  You could have maybe some performers who might have been more skilled or better, but they missed shows; they were late for shows; temperamental, you know, all that kind of stuff.  So, rather, they knew that they could count on us you know, and that meant a lot.
Story_ID: 260993
Speaker 1: --Was there ever a real tough moment on the road, when things really got bad and you thought, how am I gonna get out of this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well, I hurt--I injured my back dancing.  We [the Dyerettes] were at the Palace Theatre [Rockford, Illinois].  That was a sec--we played the Palace three times, which was really good.  And you know, if you played the Palace, that was a prestigious thing.  And first time we saw the write-up, they said we were talented, but we needed some better costumes (laughter).  And we were so crushed.  But hey, that's, you know, that's the critics, you know, so we got the good wardrobe.  I hurt my back, and we were out of work for a while.  And we decided to get jobs.  And so we needed one person to stay at home to answer phone calls in case we got work.  So, Clarice [White Pruitt], we let her, since she was handing the business, we let her stay at home.  And Shirley [Hall Bass] and Gloria [Broussard Wilkes] and I, we got jobs in a book factory.  We didn't know what work was.  And when they were showing us, and we came looking all really not prepared for factory, glamorous.  And we could see the ladies looking when we walked in like, "Well, what are they gonna do?"  We had on, well, they then were called pedal pushers.  We had on the pedal pushers, but it was just the glamour.  We weren't dressed, you know, the way that they were.  And these ladies were taking these big books and lifting.  And we were looking.  We were--it was just unbelievable.  It was comical.  And the supervisor never learned our names, and she would always say, "Where are the new girls?  Where are those new girls?"  'Cause what we would do, we would go to the washroom, and we would sit, just sit in the washroom.  We would be so tired, you know.  Then we'd, what we'd do is we'd work, and then we would go out dancing all night, and then we would be tired for work.  And that was a rough time.  It was a hard time.  First of all, the doctors at one point, they thought I wasn't gonna dance again, but being in good health and all, that obviously didn't come true.  And I held a real positive thinker there.  I never engulf; I just never--I listened, I listened, but I didn't listen, and it was fine.  That was one of the rougher times, when I thought that I wasn't gonna dance again and when we had to take off work, you know, in order for me to get better.
Story_ID: 260994
Speaker 1: --Was it tough to quit, you know?
Speaker 2: No.  The reason why it wasn't: my friends at home [Chicago, Illinois], my girlfriends at home, they had all gotten married and had babies.  And when I'd come home, and I love children, and I'd see them with their babies, oh, I'd be so sick.  And then they'd look at me, and oh, "I wish would, wish I had a glamorous life like you have."  They wanted to do what I was doing, and I was frustrated; I wanted to do what they were doing.  It was so funny.  And no, I just knew.  We got--I was dating this guy, and we went out one night.  And he was affiliated with the show.  And the next day, when I came in, he had this beautiful black doll sitting on my dressing room table, saying, "As a result of last night," and here's this doll.  Well, this was the most beautiful doll I had ever seen.  Oh, it was just gorgeous, and she stood like about yay high.  And we made, we called her Deidre, and we made her the mascot for Sammy Dyer [School of Dance; Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois].  And I bought a little bag, like, pretty much like the book bags that the kids are having now.  And I would have her in the bag but with her head showing.  I had so many people wanting to purchase that doll from me.  I cannot tell you how many people, "Oh, I'll pay--" I said, "No, no, no, this is our mascot."  But then the guys, Marshal Royal [Jr.], who just passed a few years back with Count Basie's band, he said, "You know, when you start to playing with dolls, I think it's time for you to maybe think about doing something else," he said "'cause you're really getting attached to that doll."  And I got to thinking, yeah, I think I've done just about everything that I wanted, though--we can always perform with more performers and all like that.  But it wasn't as much fun as it had been, 'cause I really wanted to get married, you know.  And so when I met my husband [Bobby Wilson], and he wanted children, which, oh, that, he doesn't know, that really gave him an in, you know.  And so we got married, but then I told him I wanted to dance, since he was gonna be traveling playing ball [baseball], and I didn't want to sit at home.  So, I did dance for a year, and then we said, this wasn't working out too well.  We're going in, you know, opposite directions.  So, I said, "Well, you're the greater breadwinner; you make the most money, so I'll just stop and stay home."  And I did.
Story_ID: 260995
Speaker 1: When you were married, you lived in Chicago [Illinois] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I did.  He [Bobby Wilson]--I went one summer, and I decided with the baby--you can't imagine what it is.  And back then mothers sterilized everything.  You boiled the bottles, and you know, that was the old-fashion thing.  And I carried a big old packing truck, and I'd have the kids' little tub, 'cause I didn't want 'em sitting their little bottom on anyone else's tub.  And when you have to carry all that stuff and traveling with children, and he was gone most of the time.  The team would be home so many days, but then they also would be on the road.  And I'm living with French people.  They didn't, my landlord didn't speak English, and of course, I didn't speak French.  And so we communicated by grinning at one another and pointing.  And I'm talking.  I guess you just, you forget she's talking French.  And, then she'd go oh, like, I know you don't know, and I'd be talking in English.  And somehow or another you, you communicate even though you weren't communicating, 'cause she did not speak English.  Her husband spoke some English, broken English.  But he used to come up, he said what you talk about?  What the two, like he knew she couldn't.  But yet we, you know, became friends.  But it was just, it was too much with being away from home and being in an era--or if you called one of the other wives wherever they might have been rooming, then you had somebody, you know, to talk to.  But no, I traveled the first year, two years, and then after that I would just go and visit him.  And you know, it was just too much.  And then we would go and visit.  Well, his mom died.  His father had already passed when we were married.  I never knew his dad.  And his mom died after we were married.  But I got a chance to meet her and all the people down there.  He doesn't come--he came from a relatively small family too.  It was only three of them, and he was the only boy.  But no, he liked, he loved Chicago.  But see, he had his, one of his sisters, who had passed, had married a Chicagoan, and that's when he would come to visit her.  And he had fallen in love with Chicago, so I had no problem in getting him.  And I'm glad, 'cause I don't like Texas (laughter), so I think we would have had a problem.  I don't even know if we would've gotten married.  I really don't care for Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he loved Chicago, so that just made it really good.
Story_ID: 260996
Speaker 1: So you started like teaching dance again after a couple of years, you said, here in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After a couple, I talked with Shirley [Hall Bass].  She, there and again, opened up herself a little dancing school.  And she was still dancing and had not gotten married yet, and I would run the school while she was gone, and then we would teach together when they were in.  And they were beginning to dance--had got less bookings.  I think that they were getting tired, but they just wouldn't admit it.  And then when she got married, then we--they just got married, one right after the other.  Then they just, you know, they stopped.
Speaker 1: So, yeah.
Speaker 2: But it was a--
Speaker 1: So when you stopped there was only like, there were four, three, three left [in the Dyerettes]? They left--they were four (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They left at four.  No, they left at four, no, 'cause we were five, and they left at four.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Okay, alright.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But, 'cause when Jeannie [Jean Cornell Robinson], when Jeannie left there were six of us, and then it made it five.  And then when I left, then that made it four.  They did replace me with--they never made it five again, but they replaced me with June [ph.].  I forget June's last name, but the young lady in New York.  But they used my picture, which wasn't fair.  They didn't want people to know, 'cause then that's what we were so known for, not, no changes.  And you know, that's what happens with a girl act.  You know, you get the changes and what have you.  They had me to take pictures, after I got married [to Bobby Wilson], to take pictures with them, which they used.  And so it was the four, 'cause people were used to seeing, you know, the faces.
Speaker 1: That's incredible, actually (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  So, and then later on I guess she put her foot down, and they did get, she did get herself on the pictures, you know.  But we looked a lot alike, so I don't think people who didn't really know us paid that much attention, because it was a good replacement.  We were about the same height.  She was just slightly, a little heavier than myself but not enough for people to, you know.  And on photographs, you couldn't really tell the difference.  But no, it wasn't too long before everyone had stopped and had gotten married.  And I was the only one who wanted to go into the teaching.
Story_ID: 260997
Speaker 1: Now, how did you get involved in business?  Now, you--
Speaker 2: Well, like I say, in school [at Cortez W. Peters Business College, Chicago, Illinois], all of my courses were business courses and just seems like the jobs that I got was dealing in a business manner, you know.  And I remember when I was hired at, initially hired at Wieboldt's [Wieboldt Stores, Chicago, Illinois], the person who hired me, Helen Petak [ph.], she was saying, "Have you ever thought about being in personnel?"  And she says, "We have an opening."  I said, "Oh, I'd like something with figures."  I said, "That's what I'm used to, you know, working with.  And I have no," I said, "I really have no skills--." She said, "But your personality," she says, "I think that you would," you know, "that you would do well."  And I'd interview for jobs; I interview well, so.  She said, "I think you would be good."  And she says, "We're getting a little static from the--." Who was it that was giving them a hard time?  The--it was either the Urban League or the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  They were on them about not having black management, or enough blacks period.
Speaker 1: And Wieboldt's had a presence in the black community, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, well--
Speaker 1: Pretty much.
Speaker 2: --only on [West] 63rd [Street] and [South] Halsted [Street]; they had a store there.  But it was just they were figuring other stores were beginning to hire blacks and had black managers, so what was wrong with them?  And unfortunately, they had a reputation for being prejudiced.  So, I was the first black to work in their general ledger department.  And what had happened was not only was it one of our black groups who prompted this, but also someone within was complaining about, why weren't they ever promoted into that area?  So they didn't get, and I never to this day, I don't know who it was who had made the complaint.  But they didn't give the job to them, but they gave it to me.  And I worked in general accounting, and then I was getting ready to leave to go and work--I'd divorced my, Tom--Bob [Bobby Wilson] and I got divorced.
Speaker 1: About what time period is this?
Speaker 2: In nineteen--we were married for ten years.  And--
Speaker 1: So it's 1965?
Speaker 2: In the '65 [1965], yeah.  And I needed more money, and I was--had a nice job offer from Standard Oil [Company] in the business department working.  And when I went down and told them, they informed me that they were having pressure about the management area and wanted to know if I would be interested in going into--I said, "Well, you know, you asked me this when I was hired."  They said, "Yeah, but that was going to be a personnel clerk.  We need to have someone as a personnel manager."  And I said, "Oh," I said "well, you know, I only have the junior college [degree from Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], you know."  And she said, "We will train you," said, "that's the good thing about retail.  You don't have to have that degree.  You're not gonna be the director of human resources, but you will be one of the personnel managers."  And so I said, "Well, I'll tell you what, I will try it.  And if I can do a good job, then you've got yourself a deal," I said, "but I don't wanna be just a token, because you need, and we were still, need a black person to, you know, be in management," I said, "because that wouldn't be fair to the blacks nor would it be fair to me," you know.  I said, "If I can do the job."  And they had one of their best, Dick Vadinsky [ph.], that man knows personnel inside and out, and he trained me.  And they said I had a more extensive training than anyone that they had ever trained.  And so I became their first black personnel manager, and I did well.  And then she said, "Now you might have--some people are gonna give you a rough time, but I will back you up."  And when the older people--like I was in my thirties--when the older people would call down and say, "Well, she doesn't know about my problems," or, "What does she know about this or that?  She's too young."  And she says, "Oh, well, just try her.  She'll do fine."  That would be the central personnel manager, and she always backed me up.  And then I began to like it, and I, you know, I did well in it.  So that's how, as a promotion from within.  In most instances, you have to have a degree in that, you know, to go into it, but I was lucky enough to, to get it as, you know, a promotion from within.  It started out as a trial basis on my part.  Then they wanted me to try out for store manager, to be the first.  I said, "No, I have no interest in that," and I, no.  So I wouldn't take that.  I said, "You have to get someone else," but, I said, "'cause there's no interest at all."  Personnel manager, I could sort of, you know, see myself doing that and with the training.  But, store manager, I didn't care to be, and they had a lot of pressure.  So, I didn't accept that, but I put in twenty-one years there, until they closed.  Well, I closed--helped close the place down.  We moved from there and went into the Marshall Field Annex [Chicago, Illinois] and you know, did all the bookkeeping and everything and had it--got it ready for the bankruptcy (laughter) auditors.  So that was an experience.
Story_ID: 260998
Speaker 1: I've always been very good in business, and that's why Shirley [Hall Bass], when she left with our teaching at the school [Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], she moved in the '80s [1980s]. Let me see, '80s [1980s], yeah, it was the '80s [1980s] that she left here and moved to Nassau [Bahamas], and she and her husband [Ralph Bass] built a home there.  And she loves to swim, and she loves that kind of weather, and so that was just perfect for her.  And then she opened up a school [Shirley Hall-Bass Dance Theatre, Nassau, Bahamas], well, started teaching at a school [National Dance School, Nassau, Bahamas] there.  It was really, how can you say, under the guidance of or auspices of the government had a lot to do with the school down there.  And she, I would run the school here, and she ran the school down there.  But then she would come up a couple of months before our show time and help us do the show, and then she'd go back.  So, that's where we got with the [Foreign] Cultural Exchange Programme and so forth, where we start to letting our kids go down and stay in the homes of the Bahamians, and they would do a show.  Then the alternate year the Bahamians will come up here and stay in our homes.  And it's the different foods and the different culture, and it was nice, so we did that for a number of years.  And like I say, Shirley was, she just--she became a Bahamian, really, by, in heart, her heart.  She was born here, but she really loved Nassau.  And that's where she took, her husband is buried there, and she's buried there.
Story_ID: 260999
Speaker 1: I was only out of work for like six months, which was a good little rest.  And then I got the Merchandise--actually, I only went to the Merchandise Mart [Properties Inc., Chicago, Illinois], supposedly, I was gonna be there relieving someone who was on pregnancy leave, but here I am sixteen years later, still here.  But no, I spent twenty-one years at Wieboldt's [Wieboldt Stores, Chicago, Illinois], three in accounting, and then the other eighteen in H.R. [human resources].  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --just brought those skills over to the Mart.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I like it.  When you stop and think about it, it's dealing with people.  That's the same thing I'm doing at the studio, hiring teachers, critiquing their work, you know, just in a sense it, one carries over.  I carry over my skills right into the studio, for what I do there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, and what's your position now with Sammy Dyer's school [Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois].  You're the--
Speaker 1: I'm the director.
Speaker 2: --director of the school?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was, was assistant director, director, deputy director, and since Shirley [Hall Bass]'s been gone I've been the director.  But we have a highly, highly skilled staff, I mean, the best in Chicago [Illinois].  They are very dedicated.  Most of the young ladies were students at one time, and now they're teachers.  They're parents; they're teachers.  The, Idella [Davis], one of our board members, teaches as a, she teachers special ed [special education].  And you know that takes a lot of patience and a special skill.  And she's there all week with those kids, and then she comes down to the studio on Saturdays and work.  It's a dedication; it's through dedication.  And of course, hers, her children taken there--but we have three of our board members who are also teachers in the public school system and who work there, so it's nice.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it seems like there's sort of an intergenerational transference going on here at Sammy Dyer that goes--
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: --way back to when he started the school in 1932, you said?
Speaker 1: Three [1933].
Speaker 2: Three [1933], okay, 1933.
Speaker 1: We have, we have had as many as five generations.  We had a grandmother.  Let me see, she was--she's the mother.  Ms. Amy is the mother, and then Barbara's her daughter, and then we have the grandchildren.  We had all three generations all taking it the same time.  The mother was taking, the grandmother and mother was taking in the adult class.  Her daughter had been one of my students years ago, and then I now, and now we have her children.  Unfortunately, the mother, the younger, not the grandmother but the mother, passed a few--three years ago.  And the grandmother, thank God, who was healthy, and well, and energetic, she has the children.  And so she and the children are still affiliated with our school, and it makes it nice.  And we did give them scholarships.
Story_ID: 261000
Speaker 1: We [Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] are--have never been subsidized by the government and operating on one day, but we've always given out scholarships.
Speaker 2: So you operate on tuition basically?
Speaker 1: Tuition and what we get from the show.  We've been very independent.  We did rely on Shirley [Hall Bass]'s husband [Ralph Bass], who was an ex-executive with Chess Records [Chicago, Illinois], and the man had accumulated some money.  So, we did rely on him.  If we fell a little short, we could always borrow from him and pay it back with no interest, so how could you go wrong there, you know?  And he liked being needed, so that was good.  These past, since '98 [1998], we've--that crutch has been removed from us, and we're doing fine.  And like, I just sort of sensed something.  I said, "This man can't live forever.  We've got to start to not relying," you know, remove that crutch and start to watching these pennies and you know, live on what we have, or operate on what we can generate and not on what we know we can get from him, you know.  But he enjoyed it.  That was his wife, and that was her love, the schools, you know, and so he wanted to do anything to help.  But then you had Darell [ph.], he was in his eighties, and we said, "Well, he's just not gonna last forever."  So we sort of started to preparing ourselves even before, you know, he passed.  And, he wasn't really ill that long, but it was just a thing of realizing his age.  We said we need to start to be thinking about how do we do this on our own.  And out in the world they used to call me Jack Benny, when we're dancing, because I could pinch those pennies.  But I say, "But I'm never broke!"  And my sons [Marc Wilson and Bruce Wilson], they say same thing.  They call me Jack Benny: "Oh, come on, Benny, we know you've got some money."  But, I don't believe in borrowing, and I don't believe in living beyond my means, so, you know, I manage.  Then she had great trust in me.  She said, "I trust you totally with our money, 'cause I know that you're gonna, you know, manage it well," and we're doing fine.  We have just recently and for the, received a small grant from the City of Chicago [Illinois] cultural arts and for a three-year grant and--
Speaker 2: The Chicago Office of Fine Arts [Department of Cultural Affairs and Special Events]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm--
Speaker 2: --right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and which is very nice.  And they gave it to us basically for the years that we've been in.  One of our ex-teachers had written the grant, but it didn't quite pass all the criteria.  But then upon reviewing it again and just seeing that we had been in business all these years, you know, they, they gave us a special grant and for the next three years.  So it's, and like they said, it's not money that we're getting, not so much the money.  It's the part of having that on our stationary or anything that we do, saying that we are, that the program has been partially, you know, funded by--
Speaker 2: That is traditionally the first step in receiving other monies--
Speaker 1: This is what they said.
Speaker 2: --from the National Endowment [for the Arts (NEA)]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and from the Illinois Arts Council [Agency] and other--
Speaker 1: They said don't--
Speaker 2: --foundations.
Speaker 1: --don't look at it as this, which I didn't.  I thought it was an honor, especially since we didn't even--she didn't, she, some things that she did.  She's a beautiful writer and all that but just some things that they felt didn't quite meet the criteria, or that she didn't give the support data that was needed.  And, but then after reviewing it again, they decided that we were worthy of a special grant.  And you know, and so they've given us the special grant for 2004, '05 [2005], and '06 [2006].  And so that was, you know, it's real nice.  It think it was quite an honor, you know.  And like they said, it's opening the doors for more, because we've been very independent, no one ever accuse us of begging; we've been independent.  You know, we do this as out of love, and as long, we're not for profit, so you're not supposed to make a big profit, you know.  And as long as there was money, you can run the place and pay the teachers, then, you know, that was it.
Story_ID: 261001
Speaker 1: So the [Sammy Dyer] School [of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] is like seventy-one years old now, is that pretty much--
Speaker 2: The school is seventy-three years--
Speaker 1: Seventy-three?
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: Seventy--
Speaker 2: Yeah, seventy-three, 'cause we did our seventieth anniversary to, a couple of years ago, yeah, seventy-three.  This is our, this will be our-seventy-fourth show?  This will be our seventy-fourth show coming up in June of 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, 'cause that book that you have is our seventieth anniversary, and that was a couple of years ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's 2003, yeah, the seventieth, right.  And so this will be the seventy-first, yeah (unclear), right, 2003, it's--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, it doesn't make any difference, but it's a long time. This is a long time, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what I'm thinking?  I'm thinking of my age.  I'm thinking of my age, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, it's been a long time, in other words, yeah.
Speaker 2: A very long time.  Well, Sammy [Dyer] died in 1960.  And it's real nice to know that forty-four years later it's still, you know, still operating, 'cause everybody was thinking, "Oh, what are we gonna do?  Sammy's gone," you know.  But actually, he would have been really proud, because Shirley [Hall Bass] it to a new level.  Her thoughts were different, you know, her type of teaching.  But it's with his basics that he gave us, you know, but she brought it to a different level, and that's the way it should be.  The generation of teachers that we have, of course, now, these younger girls, they--their thinking is different.  You know, they've got our background enamel, but there's still that difference.  So they're taking it to a different level, and that's the way it should be.
Speaker 1: What's the scope of the school, and what are the--how many students do you have, and what, what subjects are, are taught, basically?
Speaker 2: We probably have about 150 students.  We teach tap, ballet, jazz, musical theater.  We have a tots [toddlers] class.  We, we go from ages three and up.  We have a tots class from ages three to five, and we call a combo class.  And then we have another combo class from six to eight.  We have adults class and then all in between there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we teach also--our ballet is mandatory at our school.  We kept that, Mr. Dyer, it was one of the prerequisites to be a part of Sammy Dyer and that we've kept.  That was his teaching, and we've kept that.  A lot of schools don't demand that their students take ballet for economic reasons.  They don't want to run the kids away.  And a lot of kids just don't like ballet, because it's so disciplined, you know.  And, but we've kept with that.  We do demand that they have ballet, and then they can, and they must take two subjects.  And then they can have alternate subjects after that.  They can take as many as four or five, but they must take two subjects.  So it's the tuition, which our tuitions are very reasonable tuitions, and the money that we get from the show.  We usually have an audience between twelve to fifteen hundred.  And so the money that we get from our annual show and the tuitions, that keeps us, that keeps us going.
Speaker 1: Now, you've been in the same location for a long time I believe, right?
Speaker 2: No, this is a new--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --location.
Speaker 1: This is a new, okay.
Speaker 2: We were at the location that we just moved from for twenty-plus years.
Speaker 1: Where is that?  That's--
Speaker 2: That was at 2411 [South Michigan Avenue].  That's where we moved from.  Now we're at the Hamilton [Park Cultural Center, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Michigan, okay.
Speaker 2: --Park Cultural Center, and we've only been there since September.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you just moved, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we just move, yeah.  She sold the--she did get a buyer.  She sold the building, but it had to be sold or find somebody with mucho money to put in there, 'cause it needed to be gutted and redone.  I don't know how often--well, you're, you're right down here.  You know, if you look at the buildings up and down Michigan Avenue going south, you see a lot of empty places.  And a lot of 'em are being gutted and redone--
Speaker 1: And rehabbed all the way up.  Yeah, the, the real estate here is really high and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and a lot of 'em, because they can't afford the rent.  They were gonna double our taxes.  And the other place that we were trying to pursue in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] on [East] 26th [Street], the Bronzeville Lofts, Bronzeville Lofts, the developer there said her taxes have been tripled, but then she turned it over to the condominium association, so she doesn't have to deal with that now.  But yeah, the real estate is very high there.  Well, that's supposed to be a prestigious area right now in there.
Speaker 1: So, basically, you're kind of driven out by property taxes then right, in some ways?
Speaker 2: Well, but, the need to relocate and where we wanted to relocate, we couldn't really, it was just exorbitant, you know, the need to relocate.  And all of, every, and then space, we need so much space; we need a lot of space, 'cause we run three studios at one time and then an office, so, and you need washrooms, so we need a lot of space.  But, yeah, driven out by high taxes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --high rents.
Story_ID: 261002
Speaker 1: What have been some of the highlights of the [Sammy Dyer] School [of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of my favorite students is Ted [Louis] Levy.  And I don't know if you're familiar with Ted or not.  Ted Levy, he's--
Speaker 1: Well, tell everybody 'cause I'm not the only one who's--
Speaker 2: Ted Levy--I'm sorry--who has now been on Broadway in 'Black and Blue,' he works a lot with Savion Glover.  He travels; he goes to Europe and so forth doing workshops.  Ted came up through the school, and he's one of those--I think, I was talking earlier in the day before we started the interview about all students don't start at, like, as a little child.  Some start at an older age and really become quite good performers and professionals and so forth.  I think Ted was about thirteen or fourteen, I believe, when he came to our school, but he was just a natural.  Some of, some people are just gifted, you know.  He needed to have his talents; he needed them to be developed, but it was there.  And he was a joy to teach.  I've never liked teaching a private lesson, never, ever, except with Ted, because he was one of those rare students that whatever you gave him, I don't care how difficult you tried to make the step, he was going to get it.  So he was actually a challenge to the teacher, you know.  He was a beautiful personality.  All the kids, starting from when he was very young, they all were crazy about him.  When I felt that I had given him all that, well, that both Shirley [Hall Bass] and I, that we had given him all that we could give him, I contacted Finis Henderson.  And I had mentioned him earlier as being a fantastic black dancer.  And I asked, and he was certainly had been retired for quite a while, and I asked if he would come over and look at Teddy.  And he said, "I'm not coming out of retirement," and he says "I, you know, I don't want--" I said, "Just do me a favor.  Come over and see this young man, and I think you'll change your mind."  And we were getting ready for one of our shows, one of our annual shows.  And so he came over, and he saw Teddy dancing, immediate, just immediate admiration.  And then he worked with Teddy for another, a number of years, and he became Teddy's second mentor.  Shirley and I were the first, but by far, Finis Henderson came in and put on the finishing touches, you know.  Because we felt it would be so selfish to hold him back.  You know, you can tell when you've given a person all that you can give them; then, it's just repetitious.  But he was a person that you knew could grow, and we wanted him to grow.  And we felt that he would have been dedicated enough to stay with us, you know, as long as we needed him, not allowing himself to grow.  So this way it just, in turn, he was so appreciative of what we had done, by putting him with Finis and not taking him away from the school but just under his, you know, tutelage, that he became more dedicated, you know, to us.
Story_ID: 261003
Speaker 1: So when Shirley [Hall Bass] died in '98 [1998], and Teddy [Ted Louis Levy] had then, had been on Broadway and gone to New York [New York] and done all kinds of wonderful things, he called and said, "Mrs. [HistoryMaker Muriel W.] Foster, what do you want me to do?"  I said, "Well, I would appreciate it if you could come and be a little crutch for us and help us to, you know, to get, do our show," sort of.  I said, "You know you can come here.  There's a lot that you can do."  I said, "We've been so used to relying on Shirley for the shows."  And he came.  We paid him no salary, other than his plane fare, but I mean there was no salary involved.  So this was truly out of love.  And he worked with us for three consecutive years.  He would work us in between his gigs, you know, to come and help us.  And really, there was no great salary involved; this was truly out of love.  And he told us, though, right up front, "I will help you as long as I can, and I can't promise that this is gonna be a forever, you know, forever and ever."  But he gave us that crutch, that well-needed crutch.  And so then we've watched how he did things and learned from him.  And the very last year that he came to do a show for us, which was just about two or three years ago, he said, "You guys pretty well--" 'cause when he came that year, we pretty much had it ready for him.  And he says, "Oh, you're getting the idea; you're doing it; you know, you've got it."  And he couldn't afford to continually take from his work to come down, you know, and help us, so it worked out fine.  But it took, it was three years.  He worked with us for three straight years.  So, he is our creative consultant, and we will be forever in his debt, because he helped us at a time when we really needed that.  We were a leery.  We had been putting on these fantastic shows under Shirley's, you know, guidance and with some darn good staff, you know.  But he is our prize of the school [Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois]--
Story_ID: 261004
Speaker 1: George Patterson is--has been in New York [New York] working as a professional.  George is a son of the musician, George Patterson, Sr., who just died.  George died--was it last year--last year, I believe.  And he's an excellent dancer. He's been with Savion Glover.  He has been to Europe.  He's come and done free workshops for the kids.  It's a thing that once we develop, once these kids get attached to the school [Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], it's like they just, they're there with us forever.  Have you heard of the M.A.D.D. Rhythms?  It's a dance group out now called M.A.D.D. Rhythms.  Okay, the founder, Bril Barrett, is one of our students, one of our ex-students.  He is teaching at our school.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, what is his name again?
Speaker 1: Bril Barrett, B-A-R-R--
Speaker 2: What's the first name?
Speaker 1: Bril, B-R-I-L.
Speaker 2: Oh, Bril, okay, all right, that's the hard part (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's the, he's the founder of, the co-founder of M.A.D.D. Rhythms, he and Martin [Tre] Dumas.  Martin substitute teaches for us.  So, between their professional work, they manage to come.  And Bril is teaching two classes for us now, this semester.  But it's the dedication that, you know, and then he has his sister and brother take, study with us.  They also study with Bril, Bril, their brother, whom they adore.  He's their idol.  But they like what goes on at our school, so they study at our school and study with their brother.  And we have that kind of dedication to the school from the people who have gone and left, and they come back.  Geraldine [F.] Johnson, who is a per--Dr. Johnson, who is principal the [McClellan Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois] over in [Mayor Richard M.] Daley's area [Bridgeport, Chicago, Illinois], and I always forget the name.  But you have a, there is, a pardon me, there is a letter from her of support.  She taught at our school for thirty years.  She taught ballet and modern for thirty years.  And I don't think she's missed a show since she left, and she left because her work at the school was getting to be a little demanding.  And there and again, that's someone who has just been very, very dedicated.  She would support us, you know, in anything that we do.  We have always maybe two or three generations people.  And some of our students that were--what can I say--the little devils that they were when they taking, and they bring their kids back, and their kids start to doing the--and I said, "Now you see."  "We see Mrs. [HistoryMaker Muriel W.] Foster.  We see your--" some students who come back still call me Wilson because my first husband was [Bobby] Wilson.  I remarried in '76 [1976], and my second husband was Foster, so you hear me referred to as Wilson or Foster.  They, no one at this point, none of my students have ever referred to me as Burns, 'cause I was married when I started, you know, teaching.  But it's Wilson, or it's Foster.  And I inherited a stepdaughter when I remarried, and all of her friends, obviously, they call me Mrs. Foster.  All of the sons, they call me Mrs. Wilson, so I'm sort of, have a dual role.  But no, we have had some wonderful, wonderful students who are very dedicated.  And also, now what we do, now I'm telling you what they've done for us.  But what we do for our students who have been with us for a length of time and when they go away to college, then when they come back they are automatically on scholarship.  That's one of the type scholarships that we do.  We feel that their parents supported us for five, six or whatever years.  So now this is our time to help them because when you have a child in college, maybe you don't have that extra money to send them to dancing school, since this at this point becomes something that they like to do.  But then, their dancing has helped them to get on dance teams in college and be stars and what have you, you know.  It has helped them so much.  So many of our kids, they leave and they come back telling us, "Oh, I'm the captain of this," or I'm whatever, you know.  But they do very well, and they go into their dance when they get in college.  We have had students who now have their own dance schools, which is nice.  We have one in Texas.  We have one in Tennessee.  In fact, she's opened up--I think they say she has two or three, young person.  She has two or three small studios, but that's so nice, because she's still a young person.
Story_ID: 261005
Speaker 1: Frank is a gymnast.  He has a gymnastic clinic [Academy of Gymnastics] in [Mesquite] Texas, and they travel all over.
Speaker 2: Frank--
Speaker 1: Frank, do you know Frank?
Speaker 2: No, Frank, what was his last name?
Speaker 1: Frank [Alvino] Freeman.
Speaker 2: Freeman, okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.  And who, one of our teachers [at the Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], who is with us now, she did have her own dance school, but then they had a problem with the building and so forth.  And so now they're back, they've been back with us for about three years.  But it's, we've had some very grateful students, I should say.  They do give back what they've gotten from us, and--
Speaker 2: Do you think that they'll be someone around to, to take over when, when you, you know, I mean--
Speaker 1: Oh, I've--
Speaker 2: --is there someone--
Speaker 1: --we, we already know who's taking over my spot, yeah.  Elaine Blair we voted on, who is our treasurer and--
Speaker 2: Okay, so you've got the generations coming behind you?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) we have.
Story_ID: 261006
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I would love to see more discipline.  Just our children, there seems to be so little discipline now.  We see this in our students [at the Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois].  And maybe it's because we have children rearing children.  I'm not saying maybe.  I'm sure that that's part of the problem.  More working together, and, but some of the, so much of this, this has to be taught.  It's like, siblings don't, to me, and now this is my personal opinion: siblings don't automatically love one another.  I feel that that has to be taught.  And I know when my kids were small, and you'd get someone out on the outside that's gonna try to turn one against the other, and I'd hear about it.  And I'd make them both come in the house, and I'd say if you can't play together, you play with no one.  This is your family; this is your brother.  But I don't feel that it's an automatic thing of they have to love one another just because they're brother and sister or brother and brother; these things have to be taught.  And discipline, I think we allow our younger kids to--I don't know if this is supposed, what is it supposed to be?  What do they call it?  The young people have it where they just let them sort of do their own thing.  It's--but it's a term that I'm trying to think of that I can't use that, that is used in rearing children.  And it's supposed to be like you don't spank anymore, and the discipline is not there.  To me, a spank, you're not killing children, but a little whack on the rear has never hurt any kid, you know.  And I don't believe in beating a child, but you, some children, especially these little hard headed boys, you have to let them know what you mean, you know.  There's the little girls.  I'm not gonna say that all little girls are angels, but these little boys, aahh, and they're little darlings.  We have more male students now than we've had in I can't tell you when, and they are so adorable.  We have a lot of tots, male tots, within their, they work, they dance with the girls.  And are they busy?  Oh, my goodness, they are so busy.  But it's, the young ones, I think it has to start when they're young.  I think sometimes we wait until they're too old, per se, to start to discipline them.  And then they've sort of fallen into a mode of doing what they want to do.  And then if you're gonna wait until they're nine and ten to start to disciplining him, it's sort of hard.  I think that has to start at the bottom and going up.  I think if we embrace--I always think of how the Dyerettes did.  Jealousies or what can I say?  I don't know if jealousy is the word that I want to use.  But if you have someone who is smarter and, let's say, smarter or more aggressive, I don't think one should not ever be jealous of that type person, maybe try to stay around them and learn a little something, but embrace what they have, and try to work together, maybe to learn, you know, something from that person rather than being envious of that person.  I think sometimes we don't embrace each other's strong points, you know, enough.  I really feel that way--that I've always had friends that we competed with at school, but always could know.  I mean if they were smarter than me, so, you know.  I worked to my potential, but I've never been envious, you know, of these people who I'm proud of them, you know.  And I think if we could just, I don't know, get back on track.  I sort of like the technology and all like that, that's fine.  We're way ahead now.  But then they're other things that I liked better when I was younger than I'm--
Speaker 1: This, this social fab--
Speaker 2: --seeing, yeah.
Speaker 1: --fabric is not what it was.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I, I liked better when, when I was coming up.  Maybe we didn't have as much, but more scruples, more morals, just, I don't know, it's different.  It was different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would, I don't want us to go backwards, but sometimes the way we treat one another or not working together, that to me is backwards.
Story_ID: 261007
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Yeah, finish my other two years of college [at Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] (laughter), yeah.  And I don't know if I would, I loved dancing so much, and I felt that I, since we all didn't have the same goal as wanting to, you know, go to the higher levels of education, I certainly would not have had the nerve to say, "Well, can you wait until I, you know, get my bachelor's [degree]?"  That would have been a bit much.  And at that time, there was no field that I was interested in going into other than the dancing that I needed more than what I had.  But now, since then, I wish, because I wanted to be a phys ed [physical education] teacher.  I thought that would be nice.  But then I thought about going through all those sciences and with children.  This is after I'd gotten married, and I was deciding, well, maybe I'll just go back and finish.  I do sort of regret that, that I didn't.
Story_ID: 261008
Speaker 1: Now, likewise, when you look back over everything that you've done to this point, and you're still active, doing things, what would you see at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think, well, I'll go by my staff [at the Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], my current staff, and I think I have left them, or I will have left them, a legacy of discipline, of a certain style of dance that some of the older ones know, good business management, trying to live, living within their means.  In other words, I'm constantly telling them we can't have champagne ideas with beer money.  That's the way you go in the hole, because you're always gonna be spending more than you have.  So trying to teach them, and I want them to--you know, like I say, I'm certainly old enough to be all their mother and--mothers, because most of 'em are my kids' age or much younger, you know.  So, I want to teach them how to set a good role model for our students, because that's important.  I mean, years ago when I was a kid, an adult could say, "Do as I say not as I do," but right now, you know that's not true.  You have to set the example.  You can't give them that.  If they see you doing just anything or handling yourself loosely, then how are you gonna tell them?  Kids are not, they're not in that era where I can do it, but you can't do it.  That's no more, and so to be a good role model, to get that respect, because that's everything, and that's to work with each other embracing the strengths and the, as well as the weaknesses.  'Cause when you can keep jealousies and devious acts out of it, the business can go on forever.  But I think the thing that kills businesses are when there's a group, especially when there's a group of ladies, is when you get to not working with each other, you know what I mean, not embracing the strengths and so forth.  I think that's very important.
Story_ID: 261009
Speaker 1: What kind of feedback did you get from your parents?  You've told us some things already.  But, I mean did they get a chance to see you become successful in business too?
Speaker 2: Not so much in, 'cause I'm trying to think.  My mother [Hattie Ellis Burns] did.  My mother did, not my dad [William Burns], but my mom did.  God, he had, he died almost twenty years prior to my mom, you know.  My mom did, but my dad didn't.  But he got to see me with the show biz thing, and that was his thing.  And he, he got to see--did I work on my first--no, not really, 'cause I started teaching.  He really didn't see me in the business world, get a chance to see me so much in the business world, but my mom did.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you have children.  Are they in the arts?  Are they involved in the arts at all?
Speaker 2: No.  My one son [Marc Wilson] passed in 1992, brain cancer.  And he had four children who are just wonderful, four sons, and my other son [Bruce Wilson].  They both came up though through the school, and they both studied at the school [Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois], but they never went into it, you know, in a professional manner, no.
Story_ID: 261010
Speaker 1: And you've always seen this as more than just the arts, as you've explained it before.  I think you said there's more, it's--the training is more about just being a dancer--
Speaker 2: Oh, we--
Speaker 1: --or a performer.
Speaker 2: Right, we teach them, teach them about being ladies and gentlemen, knowing how to treat the ladies and how to conduct themselves, yeah.  It's, we teach more than just how to dance, you know, just personal conduct, the whole shebang.  Like I say, we really are following in Sammy Dyer's footsteps there, of being--it's old, but it's good.  It's old, but it's good, you know.  Some things don't change.  Manners and all that, and self-conduct and so forth, that to me doesn't change.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we still follow in his footsteps there [Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 261011
Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you that you think that I, but we have one, one last question we ask.  Is there anything that you think I should have asked--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --you about that I didn't?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything.  I can't think of anything, other than, and you might have asked it in a different manner, but I'm hoping that the [Sammy Dyer] School [of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] will go on for another seventy years.  And as I told them, with the proper guidance and training it can, you know.  It's not impossible.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if we keep getting the quality teachers like we have now, and they're at the age that I was when Shirley [Hall Bass] and I really got serious X number of years ago, so it can just go on and on.  And then we have such wonderful tea--students among these young ones who are really good.  And if they come back and give back to the school, as their parents did, or the people before them, then this can just go on and on and keep evolving.  I think the success of our school has also, has been because we have mostly people who have been trained at the school, who come back after they get their education and what--of course, kids now mostly--not mostly, but a good many of them are going to college now and so forth.  They'll go to school; they get their degree; then they come back, and they're ready to teach on the side, you know.  It's a good, it's, you're doing something that you love, and then you're still earning a good living.  It's not something to make a lot of money out of, but it's usually a work of love.  When you're in this field, you know, you're doing it because you love it.
Story_ID: 261012
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is similar to legacy, but, ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As someone who was very fair.  I feel I'm very fair.  I'm very objective.  I feel that I set a good role model, and a disciplinarian, 'cause I don't mind that, I don't mind that.  I think children like to be disciplined, because it shows that you care.  So many kids, they're starving for someone to tell 'em, "Don't," "stop," or "you shouldn't do this," and they don't get it.  So, I feel that it's showing a child that you care when you give them discipline rather than just ignoring it and going on.  "Oh, well, he's not my child, so, you know, I don't care."  So I don't mind being remembered as a disciplinarian, because I've been referred to with endearment when they say, well, you know, "Mrs. [HistoryMaker Muriel W.] Foster," and, "she's gonna make us," and, "she's not gonna let us."  But then they know that you care, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I let, I would like to be remembered in that manner as well as a good dancer.  But some of these kids will never--they've seen me dance, because I came out of retirement and did a few shows for Lane Alexander in these past few years and danced in a couple of our shows.  But basically, I don't, you know, dance anymore, so most of them have never really seen me, you know, dance, but for those who have, to follow in my footsteps.
Story_ID: 261153
Speaker 1: That's my children or my sons' [Marc Wilson and Bruce Wilson] father, Bob Wilson [Bobby Wilson].  That would have been taken in the '50s [1950s].  We got married in 1956.  That would have been like about 1958.  He played Triple-A ball with Montreal Royals, and that was the Triple-A club.
Speaker 2: That is when I was personnel manager at Wieboldt Stores, Inc. [Chicago, Illinois].  And I was voted their black achiever for 1974.
Speaker 1: That's the Dyerettes and myself.  That's Vera [Wilson Mann]--can't see--that's Vera, and Clarice [White Pruitt], Jeannie [Jean Cornell Robinson], Gloria [Broussard Wilkes], and Shirley [Hall Bass] in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  We were appearing at one of the nightclubs there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DICUSSION)
Speaker 1: Ooh, and now that I can see who I'm looking at, that's Shirley, Clarice, Vera, and myself, and Gloria.
Speaker 2: And that also was in Atlantic City with a doctor, a doctor and his wife that we met, only the wife didn't get in the picture (laughter), in Atlantic City.
Speaker 1: That's, that was taken I believe at the Palace Theatre [New York, New York].  We all did solo work as well as group work, the Palace Theatre in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, we were in our teens at this time, at that time.  This is at our old studio, the one that Mr. Sammy Dyer founded on 3447 on [South] Michigan Avenue.  At that time it was called Sammy Dyer School of Dancing [sic. Sammy Dyer School of Dance; Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois].  And that's Florence, Florence Jones [ph.], myself, Shirley Hall, Jeannie Cornell, Clarice White, and Gloria Broussard.
Speaker 2: That's me upside down and the girls watching.  We were at, again, that was at the Palace Theatre.  That shot was taken at the Palace Theatre also--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  How old were you?
Speaker 2: --in New York.  How old?  In our twenties, early twenties.  It was in the '50s [1950s], in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: This one was taken, Garbo [ph.], he used to do all of our professional shots, and this was one of the last pictures I had taken before I got married.  So that would be in the mid-'50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: The photographers used to, at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] they would always make shots like this, which was very nice.  They'd make it of the billboard.  That's when we were with Ruth Brown, and Roy Hamilton, Leonard Reed.  That's myself in the center, and then it shows us, we did singing, and dance, and acrobatics and so forth.  And it shows us, a cameo from we're, we're doing our singing and dancing.  I was taking a bow in that one, and that was at the Apollo.
Speaker 1: Now that was with Sarah Bon--Sarah Vaughan, and Tito Puente, Al Hibbler, and the Dyerettes at the Apollo Theater.  Sarah was the headliner.
Speaker 2: That's at the Apollo Theater.  Charlie Barnett was the headliner on that one, and the Dyerettes, and Slim Gaillard.
Speaker 1: That's where in Toronto [Ontario, Canada] we did a performance in, on half-time for the Toronto Maple Leafs.  That would be in the '50s [1950s].  We were appearing at the Barclay Hotel [Toronto, Ontario, Canada] there.
Speaker 2: That would have been in 1953, I think, that we were in Honolulu [Hawaii] appearing at the Waikiki Grove [Royal Grove Hotel] in Honolulu.  And they had us to go out to the airport and do a, you know, a shot there for promo [promotion].
Speaker 1: That's with Sammy Davis [Jr.] backstage.  We did a lot of shows with Sammy, and that would be in the '50s [1950s] also.
Speaker 2: That's with Nat King Cole, and actually, that picture was taken before we even started to traveling full time.  We were still in school then, and that was in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And that's our, Mr. Dyer's bookkeeper.  And Pena [ph.], she stayed with us.  So after Sammy died in 1960, she stayed with Shirley and I until she passed.  She lived to be ninety-two.  And that's Shirley Hall Bass, and my predecessor, and a Dyerette partner, and myself.  She loved that picture because I was larger than her.  That's the only picture where I was larger (laughter).  And she said she would keep it forever (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's Shirley and I doing a duo.  At part of our act, we did a duo tap number.
Speaker 1: That's a cheesecake picture back in, when I was in show business, you had to show the legs and have the glamour, didn't have the privilege of the low shoes and so forth, Oxfords that they use now.  Everything was heels.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my dad [William Burns], who was in show business for thirty-five years.  He's the gentleman in the beige suit.  And that was that old-time vaudeville.  They, he was part of a singing and acting, he did singing and acting.
Speaker 1: That's a shot of Joe Williams, Clarice, and myself.  Joe got started at the Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois] just as we did.  With Sammy being the producer at DeLisa, we always knew we had someplace to work when we ran out of work when we were out of town.  And Joe got his start.  That's where Count Basie discovered Joe, at the Club DeLisa.
Speaker 2: That's a flyer that we use for advertisement which showed our variety of things, the diversity of our act and also gave history of the various stars that we had worked with.
Speaker 1: That's recent.  That was about three or four years ago.  They honored in legacy of Lane Alexander, the director of the Chicago Human Rhythm Project [Chicago, Illinois].  They honored Sammy Dyer in legacy.  And I did perform in that show and-
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So, is there a photo of you and Mr. Dyer anywhere in there?
Speaker 1: No, there is not.  I should have brought one.
Speaker 2: That's our, a picture of our recital from the studio [Sammy Dyer School of the Theatre, Chicago, Illinois].  The photographer that does our work, he usually makes calendars out of each of our shows and then we can choose which shot we want.  And that was the one for 2003.
