Story_ID: 7306
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Norman C. Francis, last name is F-R-A-N-C-I-S, and the first name is Norman, N-O-R-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: And can you give us the date of your birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was born in Lafayette, Louisiana, March the 20th, 1931.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm presently the president of Xavier University of [New Orleans] Louisiana.
Story_ID: 7307
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I suspect I'd say shrimp étouffeé.  That's my favorite food.  It's a good Louisiana dish and close to it would be crawfish étouffeé.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I'd say red.  Red is one of my favorite colors, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, sir, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I guess the--Thanksgiving time is a good time for.  It's a good break, the seasons are great here in, in New Orleans [Louisiana] and in the South, and I like Thanksgiving.
Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I travel a lot.  And I, I guess if I have to say where I enjoy going back to, is my hometown in Southwest Louisiana [Lafayette, Louisiana].  There's a, there's a romantic part about having left a small town and lived in a quote "big city", and you think about going back.  And that's--I enjoy going back home, yes.
Speaker 1: And, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think I have.  Maybe because I was trained as lawyer, and we have so many phrases and stuff that I don't have any favorite ones.
Story_ID: 7308
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your origins and can you give me--please give me the names of your parents and the dates of birth--,
Speaker 2: Sure
Speaker 1: --and spell their names for me us.
Speaker 2: Sure, my mother was Mabel Coco Francis.  M-A-B-E-L, and the Coco was C-O-C-O.  That was her maiden name, and, of course, her last name was--her married name was Francis, F-R-A-N-C-I-S.  And my father's name was Joseph Abel Francis, J-O-S-E-P-H, A-B-E-L, and then F-R-A-N-C-I-S.  They were both born in 1900, and when they died, my mother was eighty-seven and my father was ninety years of age when he died.
Speaker 1: Okay, did either one of them pass down or did your grandparents or anybody else in the family pass down stories about what your ancestors were doing in the nineteenth century, during slavery or Reconstruction or any of those periods of time?
Speaker 2: Ah, not specifically.  What I did learn from my mother's side, from, I guess it would be my great uncle, who, with my mother, came from what is of the Avoyelles Parish in [Mansura] Louisiana outside of Alexandria.  And interesting there because I spent a lot of time with this uncle, he told me about what he called 'the vigilantes' ['Vigilance Committees'--white militia ostensibly organized as crime-fighters, also terrorized blacks, who armed themselves in self-defense.]  And the more I think about it and have read, I think he was talking about what might have been the, sort of a precursor or not, a part of what the Ku Klux Klan would have been.  And he explained to me how they would have to be prepared to fight or run or protect their, their area at the time.  An interesting part of that, and I have not spent enough time to read more about it, but in the area that they lived, there was a large number of Native Americans, and there was a very close bond between the Native Americans and African Americans at that time.  And it seems like they were together in fighting what he called the vigilantes.  It, it was sort of a picture of segregation, if you will, because he had to have been born some time during the Reconstruction or immediately after the Civil War.  In, in that area of the country, it was a hot bed of what is considered even now, part of Ku Klux Klan territory, not as bad as it was, but it's, there's still great remnants of that.  And that's the, that's as, as much from my mother's side that I, that I was told through this grand uncle of mine.
Speaker 1: Now, what about through your father's side?
Speaker 2: My father's side was different in, in this sense.  My, my father was the byproduct of a, of a white father and a black mother [Eugina Celestine Bernard].  One of those unfortunate instances that happened in the turn of that century where his mother was taken advantage of, and he was the product of that circumstance.  And he had two other sisters, as I recall.  And as it turned out, as he grew up, he took care of his mother.  In fact, she lived across the street from us as I grew up, and his two sisters.  And, and we, we're always asked, I'm always asked about the origin of my last name as Francis.  And there are a lot of Francis, a lot of African American Francis.  But the grandfather on my father's side was named Francez, and I'm assuming this because I think this is accurate, that in--rather than put Francez, they put Francis and that was the origin of the Francis on my side, and they spoke French.  Well, most of the people in that part of the country at the time, black and white, spoke French, although interestingly enough, I'm told, my great-great-grandfather had came from the southern part of France and settled in Louisiana.  But that was on my mother's side, not on my, my father's side.
Story_ID: 7309
Speaker 1: As I start looking back, the older you get, you start looking back at things that you heard but didn't make a connection to it.  It was so interesting how as I grew up in the segregated part of the South [Lafayette, Louisiana], and certainly that's the state, how the language of French was a bond between both black and whites as they lived day-to-day, but they were separate as they lived in the public side of life.  And I use the word public side of life, whether you were going to stores or whether you were going to go to a theater or a church and the like or--that separated you by, by law, so to speak.  Having been trained as a lawyer, I, I go back, and I see now that the Plessy versus Ferguson [1896] decision that created the doctrine of separate but equal, which really originated in New Orleans [Louisiana], the streetcar.  That was 1898.  Interestingly enough, the governor of Louisiana at the time [Murphy James Foster] was the grandfather of the current governor [Murphy J. 'Mike' Foster].  And that law had its full bloom, of course, right after Reconstruction at the turn of the, the twentieth century.  And my father [Joseph Abel Francis] was born roughly in, in--at the turn of the century.  And so that we lived under that separate but equal doctrine, but yet in that little community, blacks and whites lived on the same street.  We were all, what I would consider, and we were probably considered poor, but not--it, it's interesting, when I use the poor, we didn't have a lot of money, but we lived together.  I, I have this memory of being about five years of age, and one of my little friends was a white youngster, very poor family.  And one day, I saw my daddy and about five other black men in the side of the yard working on a box.  And I asked my mother [Mabel Coco Francis], I said, "What are they doing?"  And she said, "Well, you know the little boy Jimmy, who lives down the street?"  Said, "Yes."  Said, "His father died, and he has--his mother has no money to bury him.  And so your father and his friends are building a pine box to bury him."  It, it's sort of that humanity that was there, and yet the sort of inhumanity created by the law that's such a paradox.  And, and, and those stories for me sort of frame the reference of how inhumane we can be with no reason or rhythm for it.  And it struck me then, and I guess it has followed all of my life, which I've spent trying to eliminate, if you will, the effects of what was created by Plessy versus Ferguson, the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision and trying to change the hearts and minds of people about who we are and why we're all one in the same, ultimately.
Story_ID: 7310
Speaker 1: What kind of a man was your father?
Speaker 2: My father [Joseph Abel Francis, Sr.], somewhat of a self-made man, very strong values, very strong principles.  And he had this feeling that you had to do what was right all the time.  You had to work for a living.  You had to take care of your family, and whatever it took reasonably to do, you had to do.  I, I knew my father more as a barber which he was during my lifetime.  However, I learned later that he first worked on the railroad, and, and when I use the word railroad, I'm not talking about riding the cars, putting in ice of, of the big steam engines for, for water, ice water or fixing things on the, the trains.  He then worked at the bus station, same thing, doing the kinds of work as a laborer, and, and as I'm told, had no problems with that work cause that was work.  And then bought the home that we grew up in, and later on became the, the head bellhop of the famous hotel in that little town where all of the public officials, the famous [Louisiana Governor] Huey Long and all the commons stayed.  He was the head bellhop. I remember going with my older brother [Joseph Francis] to bring him his food.  Now, we couldn't walk in the front door of that hotel, and, and it's interesting, we'd go through the back where all the big steam engines were.  This little boy--I was scared to death to go in those places to bring it to where the black porters and the bell hops ate their, their lunch.  And, and I, and I say that to say, he was a man that believed that any honest job that had to be done to save, and work for your family, you had to do.  And then he became the entrepreneur.  He decided, well, I've been working bus stations, railroad station, bellhop, and he opened a barbershop.  And for all of my life, at least, at least seventy-five years of it, till he died, he was a barber.  And I have a vivid memory or watching him come home at night.  And he kept a little book.  And he wrote down how much he made every day at that barber shop.  And to me that was a fascinating little book until one day, I looked into it.  And I was--I guess I must have been in seventh or eighth grade at the time.  Now, my, my father nor my mother [Mabel Coco Francis] graduated from high school.  But he was this sort of businessman, strangely enough, that kept account of every penny.  And, and I'll, I'll tell you some of the numbers in there, maybe a dollar and a quarter, good day, maybe three dollars.  A Saturday, which was a good day, might have been five dollars, maybe eight dollars at the most.  But getting a haircut I think was twenty-five cents.  So that you had to cut a lot of hair to make a living, but he made a living, and raised five children.  And my mother did not work.  She took care of the family.  But it was this, being frugal and being willing to work hard to support the family.  No automobile, rode a bicycle.  We had no automobile in my family.  All of us rode bicycles.  He rode bicycles to work.  And, and that kind of attention to his family and commitment left indelible marks on me.  I, I guess I'm a conservative in a way because he lived conservatively.  But we, we were not--we didn't miss anything.  And, and this is, this is interesting.  Aside from what he did working as a barber, we lived in this small town, which was the biggest town in that little area.  But we had a, a backyard big enough that we had a cow.  And he milked the cow every morning, and, and no pasteurized milk with the cow.  We had a garden.  And my grand--the, the granduncle used to come and--cause he had retired.  And we had all of the vegetables.  I remember loving tomatoes, had tomatoes, had corn, had everything we wanted.  So we, we grew what we needed to eat pretty much.  And, and he was sort of the leader of the band, and always said that work was something to be valued and respected.  And you should always have a job.  And I had one when I was ten years of age, bringing lunch that my aunt used to make for a railroad supervisor.  And I brought that lunch, and so I've worked every day from my--to earn money, since I was ten years of age.
Story_ID: 7311
Speaker 1: Now, what about your mother--?
Speaker 2: My, my, my mother [Mabel Coco Francis] was a, as all of us think about our families and our mothers, was like an angel.  My Daddy [Joseph Abel Francis] was tough, but my mother was a very soft-spoken, a very giving person.  She, she took care of my grandmother, her mother-in-law, who was bedridden.  I don't remember ever seeing my grandmother walk.  She was bedridden most of my life, and my mother took care of her, her mother-in-law [Eugina Celestine Bernard] when the aunt had to work.  The, the aunt lived--my father's sister lived with my grandmother.  And my mother took care of the mother-in-law across the street, brought food, and took care of the five of us.  And we were always spiffy, you know, little khaki pants, everything was washed, ironed, clean.  And I look back at that to say that we, we never looked at, well, we were missing something.  We, we, we just didn't miss anything.  We didn't have what many others had, but we didn't long for it.  And, and I have to put it in perspective.  I was born during the [Great] Depression, 1931.  So I lived under the Depression for whatever time the Depression ended, six, seven, eight years.  I'd say, '38 [1938], '39 [1939], and then here comes World War II, 1941.  And then for another five years, we lived in a kind of depression again.  So that for the first, almost--well, yes, fourteen years of my life, we always were sacrificing something.  Certainly during the Depression, there wasn't that much money, so we had to do with whatever we had.  And then here comes World War II, you, you had ration for food.  I, I'll never get, we just had so much stamps, if you will, for rationing, not for, for, for money, but rationing that you could buy sugar, shoes, silk.  And so I grew up at a, at a point in time where you did at the, the most with what you had, but never looked back at what you didn't have.  My mother, my mother was the anchor in that sense in the home.  My father was the, the anchor, the guy who was going to bring home the bacon and make sure everything was all straight.
Speaker 1: Okay, now where did--how many brothers and sisters do you--?
Speaker 2: I had one other brother and three sisters.
Speaker 1: And where do you fall in that?
Speaker 2: I'm, I was number four.  I had one sister [Mabel Bailey] after me who was really eight years younger than I.  So I was the, what you'd consider the, the baby for a large part of my life with two sisters [Velma Boykins and Pauline Navarre] who were there because my brother [Joseph Francis], who became a, a Catholic bishop, went to the seminary when I was, oh, about eight years of age.  So much of the growing up years of my life was spent two strong sisters who, I look back at it now, would clean the house and the living room as all of us grew up and said, "You can't go in that room cause we just cleaned it."  So that would, the living, the living room became a museum because I couldn't go in there.  But I could hang out, out in the kitchen and other places.  But I, I would the fourth of the five.
Story_ID: 7312
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about some of the things you liked to do when you were a little boy and some of the sights and sounds and smells of the neighborhood that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the things that are, that I enjoyed most was playing sports in the field, no matter what it was, whether it was basketball, baseball, played a little touch football.  That I enjoyed that doing.  I enjoyed going to school.  I enjoyed going to school because it was a happy time.  You had friends there.  You were learning things, and, and you were fulfilling what it was that, that father [Joseph Abel Francis] that admired--you admired, and that mother [Mabel Coco Francis] that you admired, kept saying to you, "You need to be educated."  And, and you got to learn, and you got to learn everything you can because if you are in fact gonna make--they said, they said, make something of yourself, you had to be educated to your full potential.  And, and what's interesting about that is this, these were two people who had not graduated from high school themselves and, and that they had lived in a community where opportunity just was not there.  And it obviously wasn't there because they were not educated either, but I've said this in public, and I say it around here a lot, and I say it in interviews, I deal with Ph.Ds of every kind and have done this for a greater part of forty-some odd years, but I have not found any of them any smarter than my mother and father who didn't graduate from high school.  And, and I say that because when I look at the context in which they lived and how they raised their children, they had to be some of the greatest psychologists in the business.  And they had to be some of the strongest people who could make the use of what they had to raise children who didn't go astray, so to speak.  And, and, and I think about this.  You grew up in a community where everything that you had to touch in, in the quality of life, you were told that you weren't good enough for it, even your own church.  We eventually, of course, had our own church where blacks went to church.  But if you went down the street, for an example, you could not go in the front of the church.  You went and sat in the back of the church.  If you went to a theater, you couldn't go to the front door.  If you went into a store, you couldn't use a drinking fountain.  All the stories that we have read, these were all real.  And, and, and yet if, I say to young kids today, if I told you everyday I saw you, you know, you don't look well.  And you'd say, well, I think I feel good.  No, you don't look well.  By the fifth day of my saying that, you'd start saying, you know, I don't feel well.  And you'd start feeling sick.  But yet, we grew up everyday being told that we were not as good, and, and it was reality.  And, yet, and yet, we did not succumb to that feeling that you weren't good as anybody else.  Now, how did that happen?  I accredit to my, to my family, to my mother and my father who said, "Yes, you are, and don't believe what you're living and what you're being told".  And that encouragement and that inspiration, I think, had much to do with what we did and how we were educated.  I'd, I would, I would like to see some of that today from homes where there are opportunities and not being used and some of the psychology and encouragement that came from that family, that family that held together and believed in the future and believed in the talent of their children.
Story_ID: 7313
Speaker 1: Were there other factors, I mean other things that encouraged you?  For instance, did you get the papers from other states like the '[Chicago] Defender' and the 'Pittsburgh Courier' and--?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneous] Oh, yes, oh, yes, oh, yes.  The 'Pittsburgh Courier' was delivered, I think it was a weekly, as I recall, came on Saturdays.  And we had the radio, and, and we'd listen to the radio.  I tell you, you talk about inspiration, it was to live in a little town where there was no air conditioning, and so all the windows were up in cool weather, and to hear the Joe Louis fights.  You could stand in the street, and you'd have surround sound because every radio on that street had the Joe Louis fight.  And, and, you, you listened to it, and, and just like a football game, after the game, you know, all the cheering, you had people come out of their house and cheer.  That was inspirational in the sense that you identified with Joe Louis who, who wasn't highly educated himself, but he used the talent that he had in his profession, and he used it well.  And, and all of these were used for us as symbols, that use what you could to the best of your ability whether you were in sports, but particularly, you were gonna go to school and you're gonna be educated.  And so this kept us, kept us holding on to something that we thought was important as individuals, and it did not, it did not inter--interfere with what we ultimately were going to do in life.
Speaker 1: Now, were there particular teachers or adults in the community that you looked up to and admired or that tried to help you?
Speaker 2: Yes, looking back, they were all people who, as we said in small communities, it takes a, a total community to raise a child.  Everybody who lived down the street, neighbors took care of us, whether we were playing in the street when we shouldn't have been playing in the street.  We were told, get out the street.  I mean they were, it was, we were everybody's children.  Teachers felt the same way, and, and we had that sense that everybody was carrying about us and wanted to make sure that we succeeded.  I can't tell you of any one person that stands out, but that's a plus.  Everybody stood out, everybody stood out, and that you knew that there was always somebody around that, if you needed help or if you were gonna get in trouble, was gonna straighten you out.  It, it was a, it was a community family.  And, and, and I say that because it was a small town, true, but at the same time, it was a true community.  And the teachers that taught me, I can't--I, I did go to private Catholic school, not--.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school, Saint--?
Speaker 2: I went to school in Lafayette [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school?  It was--.
Speaker 2: St. Paul's.
Speaker 1: St Paul's.
Speaker 2: St Paul's Elementary and Secondary School, and an order of black nuns taught there.  And, and we identified with what they were teaching, what they were doing.  We also had, which I didn't say earlier, that was true of my mother and my father and my family in general, was, was strong religious convictions, prayer.  You know, the old saying is you, you are taught by example.  My father [Joseph Abel Francis] didn't go to bed at night unless he got on his knees and said his prayers, every night, every night.  I can't tell you that I did it all my life, but I, but I did do it for along time in my growing up.  But we had just strong religious values.  And a number of the things that I grew up with in this family circumstance, not only do I use today, but I live today.  I mean even to this day, I had a student forum last night with students, and with--I answered questions about different things.  And, and, and I told, and I said, "But these are just simple values."  You know, "Right from wrong, not wanting anything or taking anything from somebody that didn't belong to you or not telling somebody an untruth, where, in fact, you knew it was not true."  And I said, "Sometimes that seems difficult, but the people who are really respected in life, who respect themselves and respect other people are people you know, and you think about them, they are people whom you could--you would say, they're telling the truth.  I believe them because they're always straight."  And I said, that's a, that's a extremely valuable trait or a value for people to say, I trust you.  And they trust you because you're not trying to hustle them.  They're not hustling you, and they don't try to mislead you.  And, and yet that comes from family.  If something doesn't belong to you, find out to whom it, for whom it belongs or to whom it belongs.  Don't take anything from anybody, and I said, one very simple thing is if you always tell the truth, you're never to have--you'll never have to worry about what you said the last time about something.  And there's no [Albert] Einstein theories in that.  And those came from my, my family.  And I think all of that shaped, at least, my outlook on life and myself, period, for whatever I was able to accomplish or do.
Story_ID: 7314
Speaker 1: I indicated earlier, I went to St. Paul's Elementary and Secondary [high school] School [Lafayette, Louisiana].  And when I decided, well, I, fortunately, had done very well in high school, valedictorian of the class.  And there was thought, well, you need to go to school.  Well, there was no way that my dad [Joseph Abel Francis] could have paid my way through, through college, certainly not Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans].  And I had a sister [Pauline Navarre], the sister before me was at Xavier at the time.  And she was living my mother's [Mabel Coco Francis's] relatives in order to have a place for room and board.  And I just knew I couldn't make it.  But as things would happen, one of my sister--that one of my teachers that was a sister nun called Xavier and said that the valedictorian of the class at this little high school was interested in going, and she thought that I could do well at college if I got some assistance.  And so they said, well, have him come down and, and talk.  And I did.  And the, the nun said, okay, we'll give you a work scholarship--that's what it was called at the time, and it'll pay for your tuition and your room and board.  And so I was assigned to the library.  And so I worked all of my four years at Xavier in the library.  And, and had I not gotten that opportunity, I was going to the [U.S.] Army.  I figured I'd go to the army or, or military in some way.  And then when I came out, I was gonna go to school.  Had that happened, I don't know whether I would have, you know, finished college and the like, but that's past.
Speaker 2: Yeah, let me, let me ask you about Xavier?  I mean, what--were you a Catholic before you came to Xavier?
Speaker 1: Yes, I was.  I was born Catholic.
Story_ID: 7315
Speaker 1: Tell me about Xavier University [of Louisiana, New Orleans], what--this is, I guess an opportune time to talk about like who founded it, what order of Catholics founded it--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: And why was it founded?
Speaker 2: Sure, well, the question certainly would be, well, why did you think about even going to Xavier, and why did your sister [Pauline Navarre] go to Xavier from that little small town [Lafayette, Louisiana]?  Two reasons, one, a number of the teachers and people who had done very well, who got a way to go to college had come to Xavier and done very well.  And secondly, Katharine Drexel, who founded Xavier University was this Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] blue blood whose father was the famous Francis Anthony Drexel of the Drexel family.  And she gave up all of her rights to the money that her daddy left for her and her three--two other sisters to become a nun.  And she opened up elementary schools all over the country, in Harlem [New York, New York], in Cincinnati [Ohio], in Philadelphia, St. Louis [Missouri] and she opened them up in Southwest Louisiana where I was born and raised [Lafayette, Louisiana].  And she was--best to describe her as I grew up and my mother [Mabel Coco Francis] and my father [Joseph Abel Francis] and all the people, she was that angel.  She was the one that came and brought Catholic education to blacks in my part of the country.  And if you were gonna--if you were black and you were Catholic, and there were a lot of black Catholics in, in that area, and you wanted to go to college, well, you ought to go to Mother Katharine's school.  And Xavier was Mother Katharine's school.  Now, let me back up a little bit.  And this is a story because we believe it's a miracle, and we say that every time Xavier opens its doors, it's still a miracle.  Here's a woman whose father was a multimillionaire in the house of Morgan that everybody hears about, J.P. Morgan.  The money behind, I'm told, J.P. Morgan was Francis Anthony Drexel, her father.  And so he left his will, in his will, the fact that the money that he would leave at his death would be put into a trust fund for the use of his three daughters as long as they lived.  But at their death, he named the beneficiaries of his will, in his will, for those after his daughters had died.  Now, it becomes an important story later on, but let me stay with it this far.  And so he died, and his three daughters now have the use of the interest of the money.  I am told, cause I was curious about all of what she did.  How did she do all of what she did using one-third of the interest of the money?  And I'm told that was worth about twenty-two million [dollars] or twenty-three million [dollars] at that time, which would be the turn of the century.  In today's dollars, it might have been four hundred million dollars and the like.  So that was substantial.  She decided, about maybe two or three years after he died, that she wanted to do something else with her life.  She was in the, the circuit of the blue bloods and everything else in society's Philadelphia.  And she visited Rome [Italy] and met with Pope Leo the Thirteenth.  Now, as a child, she traveled with her father cause he was in railroads and, and the like to the West, and she traveled to the South.  She saw the plight of blacks in the South, and she saw the plight of Native Americans.  And she decided that she was going to give up her rights to the one-third for herself personally, take the vow of poverty, chastity and obedience and become a nun.  And then she founded an order of nuns, but she devoted her life to only two races of people, Native Americans and African Americans.  That--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) This was around the--,
Speaker 2: This in the late--.
Speaker 1: --latter part of the nineteenth century?
Speaker 2: That is correct, latter part, right.  So she comes to the South right after the, the dismanning of Reconstruction and right at the time of Plessy versus Ferguson [1896], segregation.  And she, she sees these bright, black kids--colored at the time, in the South, certainly where I was born and raised in the South.  She saw them in Harlem, she saw them all over the country.  And she thought of opening schools for them in the inner cities and the like.  But in addition, what I learned only within the last two years--as much as I thought I knew about her, she made loans to parishes that were serving Native Americans and blacks who needed money.  She was like, you'd call the Ford Foundation of today.  The priest would write her and say, I need a thousand dollars, I need two thousand, I need three thousand.  And she was such a great businesswoman, like her father, that she said, here's the money, but if you ever find it that you can pay me back, I'd ask you to pay me back.  And many did, and she would recycle that money.  So as I grew up, here was this woman who was that angel.  When they were about to close a public school about twenty miles outside of Lafayette [Louisiana], she told the state, "Keep it open and I'll pay for it."  It was a school for blacks.  And, and we had this reverence for this lady and for what she had done.  And then her decision after opening elementary and secondary schools, well, these kids are so bright, I need to open a school for teachers.  And she opened a normal school and then found how many young people at the time wanted to be teachers.  She said, well, I need to expand this, and so in 1925, she opened the college which is Xavier, and then opened the College of Pharmacy just two years later that became Xavier's College of Pharmacy and therefore, we were a university.  Now, I sit in my office many days now and say, not only was she generous, good businesswoman, but she was a visionary.  And, and I say, here's a lady opening up a college of pharmacy.  She passed up a medical school, passed up a law school.  I guess she figured at the time with all the others, a medical school might have been difficult.  Law school might have been cheaper, but she passed it up and opened a college of pharmacy.  And today we sit as the only college of pharmacy in the city of New Orleans, only private school in Louisiana.  Number two, we became then the only Catholic university serving a predominantly black student body in the United States and still are today.  And what she did in opening a school was to provide the best of everything.  She had money.  Tuition was virtually little or nothing.  She gave scholarships.  You didn't have money, knock on the door, you can come in.  And everything had to be of high quality.  We were known in athletics as the black Notre Dame [University, South Bend, Indiana] of the South, whether it was track, whether it was basketball.  We played football. We even played baseball in, in, in the, in the '50s [1950s], and she hired the best people.  In the early years, there weren't that many African Americans or black teachers.  She sought as many as there were getting degrees.  So she brought teachers from the West, from the East, who believed in education for African Americans, and I, I obviously met many of them who I admire today because they had real commitment.  We did grand opera at Xavier for twenty-five years.  Some of the opera singers in Italy and Germany came from Xavier because she believed that if we were going to make it, we had to be the best that we could be, even better than others.  And she, she described her work for Xavier as creating leadership.  That was her--leadership, to make this society a more just and humane society.  And we all grew in that kind of culture of having someone who was so generous that they just didn't give the money, that--she didn't just send a check.  She gave her life.  And she took on sackcloth.  She rode the trains with her sandwiches in a paper bag and the like.  And coming back now to the beginning of the story, three sisters, one married, didn't have children, one never married, and then Katharine Drexel.  They both pre-deceased her.  So she then had for at least, I'd say, twenty years, the use of a hundred percent of the interest.  And she was able to expand what she did.  The buildings, if you will look at the main building here is an Indiana limestone building.  It looks like a building you'd find on Yale's campus [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]  or Harvard's campus [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], an Eastern-style, type building, the Indiana limestone.  And when she built it in the '30s [1930], 'Time' magazine wrote a story about it because whites were complaining that this white carpetbagger, socialite, although she was a nun, had come to New Orleans to open a Catholic school for blacks.  Now, Catholic college and Catholic higher education was the crème-de-la crème, so to speak.  But she was opening it for blacks.  And the article said that whites complained that she should be feeding the poor rather than educating blacks in higher education.  That didn't stop her.  And what's interesting about this story is that started her high school what is in--called Uptown New Orleans.  And there was a black state institution called Southern University [New Orleans, Louisiana], Uptown.  Ad the neighbors did not want that school so they moved from there.  So they--the state moved Southern University to Baton Rouge [Louisiana], outside of Baton Rouge and, and left the buildings.  And through a third party, she bought the buildings.  And the first two, well, better than that, first five to seven years of Xavier were in that building.  So where the state thought they were moving out blacks, she started Xavier University.  So for us, Katharine Drexel was a saint because of her generosity and the like.  But if you and I had said, well, now, she's got a hundred percent of that money, how long will she live because at her death the money was cut off, period.  It was gonna go to people named by her father.  Had her father only known that she was going to become a nun and do what she did, he certainly would have left her all the money.  Unfortunately, that didn't happen, but most people, if we were writing an insurance policy on her, would say, well, she'd live to be seventy-five years of age.  At that time, that's a good age.  If she had lived till seventy-five, Xavier wouldn't be here today because we would have been only ten years of age.  We could not have made it.  She, she--we would not have been able to earn a reputation for what one would expect of a, of a young school.  But God allowed her to live to be ninety-seven years of age.  So she lived twenty-two years longer than what you and I as an actuary might have given her.  And so at that point now, Xavier is best, now twenty years of age--well, no, actually, it was thirty years of age at that point.  So we had a status.  We had a--now, we did have a, we did have a problem, which I inherited in a way.  She never asked anybody for money, ever, cause she had the money.  Why would she ask for money?  And so people thought, well, Xavier was left a pile of money.  The day she died, all the money was cut off in 1955.  Secondly, most people thought that if you're a Catholic school, the Catholic Church takes care of you.  Catholic colleges are not supported by the Catholic Church.  They're supported by the religious order that founded them.  So if you're Jesuit, Jesuit Society or Holy Cross and all this.  But she was a, a lone wolf.  She was one woman founding a Catholic school.
Story_ID: 7316
Speaker 1: What was the name of her [Katharine Drexel] order that she--?
Speaker 2: The Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament located in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And, and, and what I described to you what she did for blacks, she did for the Native Americans on reservations and the like, opened schools on the reservations.  She did not open a college, although there were Native Americans who did come to Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans].  But she was the lone wolf, if you will, keeping the light burning for black Americans who were Catholics in higher education.  And you know some of the names of the--I mean, it's sort of interesting that the first black mayor of the city of New Orleans was one of her graduates, [Ernest N.] 'Dutch' Morial.  And we have other mayors now.  We have college presidents now.  We had a secretary in the cabinet [E. Frederic Morrow] of the, of the President of United States [Dwight D. Eisenhower].  What she set out to do was accomplished.  And, and the Catholic Church, of course, in October 2000, named her [Katharine Drexel] a saint, not for what she did for Native Americans and African Americans, but because of miracles that were performed on the hearing of two young children [Bobby Guntherman and Amy Wall], which were confirmed to be, what, in the church is described as a miracle cause there was no medical reason for the change in their inability to hear and then their ability to hear after asking for intercession by her.  That's the Catholic Church's miracle side to become a saint.  But I've said frankly, that she was a saint long before that for all of us because of what she did in her humanity and the education.  So, so Xavier was her crowning joy and jewel.
Story_ID: 7317
Speaker 1: When I arrived here [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans] in '48 [1948], I came just two years after most of your armed forces or soldiers had come from World War II.  World War II ended in '45 [1945].  By the time these guys got out, they chose then to go to college with their money.  Many chose Xavier because at that point, now we had a reputation.  We had a college of pharmacy.  We had a department of business.  We had a department of education, and we were known for a good--and so they had the money.  And, and, and I, I say to you that half of, maybe, at least forty percent of my education, when you think of being totally educated in this institution, came from my out-of-class experiences.  To be on a campus at eighteen years of age--  well I started at age seventeen--seventeen, eighteen, nineteen years of age, with men who had been to war, who knew what it was they wanted to do, and to be in classrooms with them, I, I dare say there are seventeen, eighteen year olds now are in college, and they have been in college, who look to their teachers, obviously, which they should, their counselors and their parents, but they don't have the example of a twenty-eight year old, twenty-nine year old man, married who says I'm here for a purpose.  And so I sat in class with men who were here for a purpose, lived in dormitories, ate in cafeteria with their--I lived in the barracks, we called it the freshman barracks.  But I used to walk over to where the servicemen were.  And, boy, the rooms were neat, clean, socks, everything folded, just as they did in the army.  And, and one interesting point of that for me, out-of-class experience, was that old saying, you know, "there are times to play, and there's time to work".  Well, on Friday at about four o'clock in the afternoon, most of the soldiers left the campus.  We didn't see them until about Sunday night about eight o'clock they came back.  And they had had their good time, and they were back now to take care of business.  And in class, seventeen, eighteen year old, you wouldn't dare maybe ask a question say, and to say to the teacher, "I don't understand that. Say that again."  Servicemen didn't hesitate, said, "I don't understand, say that again."  And this was quite an experience and, and to be in that atmosphere and then to have a curricula offering in its totality that was the best that you could get.  Now, people say, how do you know it was the best you could be, best that you could get?  It was as good as Notre Dame [University, South Bend, Indiana].  It was good as Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.].  It was a classic because she [Xavier founder Katharine Drexel] came from that, and the people she brought--as I said, many were on opera stages, many here were in, in intelligence work in the army when, when they left.  Many had graduated from the best schools in the country.
Story_ID: 7318
Speaker 1: And so when I left Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans] and became the first black to enter Loyola's law school [Loyola University New Orleans School of Law], which was, was quite a feat so to speak, because there was a movement for three years trying to break the barrier, starting back in 1949, actually, to get the law school of Loyola to admit a black.  And I wasn't the first that applied.  That--the, the, the process was, and it was a process designed by black and white community leaders who met--I'll never forget, every Sunday after mass to talk about how we will integrate Loyola.  And they had at least two Jesuit priests in the group.  And the, the, the first applicant was an Xavier senior.  The word was take an Xavier senior, let him apply.  And the first was Alexander, his last name was Alexander.  He was turned down.  He went to Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] Law School.  The second who applied was a man by the name Richard Gumbel, whose father was Bryant Gumbel.  He was turned down, and the third, I was chosen.  My--the, the clock stopped on me, and I became the first black at [Loyola University New Orleans's] law school.  I say this to you say that I then was in school with, with--more men than women, who had gone to many different college universities.  None of them had a better educational experience than I had.  I'd say it was equal, but no better.  I wasn't the smartest, but I wasn't the dumbest.  And, and this was an experience, not just for me, but for my classmates.  And I haven't written the book.  A lot of my classmates who were and became the judges, the legislative folks, the mayors of the city and the like, today, keep saying, well, "When are you gonna write the book?"  Well, I haven't stopped working yet.  Many of them retired.  I said, I went straight.  The rest of them went to law, and practiced law.  I practiced for a very short time, but we still are very close.  And one of my closest friends in law school was the mayor of this city [New Orleans, Louisiana], state legislator, became the secretary of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], and then a court of appeals judge, my closest friend, white, and, and I say, and he's still my closest friend [Maurice Edwin 'Moon' Landrieu].  It, like his daughter is the state's--sorry, is a U. S. senator who's running for office now.  I was in the law school library the first day of class.  You, you've got to remember, this is 1952.  And there was much talk about, well, Loyola's admitted a black.  Can he do law school work that is at this so-called prestigious law school?  And they did make a mistake.  I went to school early that morning.  It was an 8:00 class.  I wasn't gonna be late for the first class.  And so, as you do in a new--you don't really know anybody, I went to library and started looking around, killing the time.  And two guys came up to me, and one was this Moon Landrieu, who was the secretary of HUD, mayor of the city.  He said to me--he's twenty-one years of age, and he says, "I know who you are, and I want you to know, if you ever need a friend, I'm gonna be your friend."  Now, he wasn't running for office.  He had no ambitions, but that's the kind of guy he was.  And so we have been close since 1952, I mean very close.  When he became mayor, he made it possible for the first black mayor to be mayor, who was [Ernest N.] 'Dutch' Morial.  Dutch Morial and I, who were undergraduates here at Xavier, he integrated LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], I integrated Loyola.  And New Orleans would not be what it is today in race relations if it were not for Moon Landrieu.
Story_ID: 7319
Speaker 1: When people say, well, what are some of the highlights in your life, that may have had--made a difference?  Well, it wasn't so much what I did, but the fact that, having been in a law school [Loyola University New Orleans, Louisiana ] with young men who had never been to law school with a black, had an impact on them.  And I give you a figment, a, just, just a story about how things turn out in, in life.  I'll never forget.  We were downtown New Orleans in a fifteen-story building, a big American Bank building.  And the law, we were in the law firm's office of a state senator, whose son was in law school with us, [Maurice Edwin] 'Moon' Landrieu, this son and about three others were studying, and it was about, oh, 8:00 at night.  And they said, "Oh, time out," said, "time to go get something to eat."  And I said, "Well,  fine.  I want a hamburger and a big root beer."  And they looked at me and said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "Well, I want you to bring me a hamburger and a big root beer."  He said, "Who do you think you are, we're gonna waiting on you?"  I said, "Just bring me a hamburger and a big root beer."  They said, "If you're gonna eat tonight, you're gonna have to come with us."  "Okay, I'll come with you."  We get to where we're going, and the waitress says, "We can't serve him."  They said, "What?"  Now, this is 1953.  "You can't serve him?"  Said, "No."  Said, "Why?"  Said, "Because he's colored."  They said, "Lady, go get the manager cause you're gonna serve him tonight."  And they did.  We got back to the, the office where we were.  And I said, "Didn't I tell y'all that I wanted y'all to bring me a hamburger and a big root beer?"  It had not dawned on them that the laws of segregation was a two-sided knife.  Surely, it was saying I shouldn't go in certain places because of what my race was.  But it was telling them--,
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Telling them too at the same time.
Speaker 1: --whom they could choose as a friend.  That had the greatest impact. They were outraged that that law was telling them that they couldn't go in there with their friend.
Story_ID: 7320
Speaker 1: And the first thing [Maurice Edwin] 'Moon' Landrieu did when he became a city council was to put an ordinance to get rid of all the segregation laws. He was voting, the only one legislator voting against a--he devoted his life to making Louisiana and New Orleans [Louisiana] a more just and humane society.  And to this day, now, obviously, he ran for office, and of course, you know all the names they called him, but he believed what was right, and he survived.  And I say that to you to say that after law school when many politicians, whites, ran for office, they'd make it clear that they didn't want your vote.  They didn't want to be identified--well, we didn't have that many voting any way, but my classmates and I went around teaching people how to vote.  But I brought the Moon Landrieus and my classmates to social clubs where black professional were, where for the first time, they were meeting a white public official who was coming to them, man to man, to say "I want your vote.  Let's talk about what the issues are."  And they developed a core group of African Americans who believed in them, and they responded in like terms.  I describe that as a part of what I think was a social phenomenon and a public phenomenon that may not have happened had, if it were not I, somebody else, in that [Loyola University New Orleans] law school at the time.
Story_ID: 7321
Speaker 1: Though I did not practice [law] any length of time--I went to the service [U.S. Army's Third Armored Division] immediately after to, to,  my work at Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans] as an undergraduate and after my law school days [at Loyola University New Orleans].  When I came back, I became counsel to a law firm and then starting working as an administrator at Xavier.  But it was at a time during civil rights, and so the law firm that I was of counsel, handled CORE, the Congress of Racial Equality, and all of the matters dealing with civil rights, we negotiated those terms in New Orleans, the, the bus desegregation, the lunch counter desegregation.  So I was able to have my feet in two sides.  One in education, and then one as a lawyer working with a law firm in the civil rights.  And it, it helped--I wasn't much older than many of the students here at the time.  And the senior class president was the head of CORE.  In fact, it was he and a, and others who planned the first Freedom Ride, the bus ride.
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: Rudy Lombard, who, who then went on to Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York]  and got a Ph.D. in urban planning, but they knew of my association as a lawyer with the civil rights side.  They were in school here with me, and I was dean of men.  And I supported, of course, much of what was being done, both on campus and but more particularly, law, the legal side.  And an interesting part of this is that I'll never forget the day they walked in my office and said to me, "We're gonna have a Freedom Ride."  And I said, "What's a Freedom Ride?"  Said, "Well, we're gonna start in Washington, D.C."
Story_ID: 7322
Speaker 1: What you're doing and your presence in the law school--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --seemed to have made a generation lawyers aware of--.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.  We, my, my law school experience [Loyola University New Orleans School of Law, New Orleans, Louisiana] was good for me for two reasons.  One, it was a very good law school.  But number two, it erased forever, if I had any doubts about whether I was, one, talented enough to compete with another race that was, felt others to be superior.  That was eliminated for me, and it was eliminated for young lawyers who were to be the giants in the legal profession in the South where we were, who were gonna make the laws, enforce the laws, judge the laws.  And my presence with them, some it effected immeasurably.  Others tangentially, but enough, enough.  But a great part of them were affected by knowing that legal segregation was foolish.  And they set about making the changes.  And [Maurice Edwin] 'Moon' Landrieu, of course, being one of the leading ones.  But, but, and, and I should take it further cause I think it's important to say.  When he became mayor, I introduced him to the city of New Orleans before he raised his right hand and was sworn in.  It might have seemed insignificant, but he was sending a message.  Here you had an assembly on the grounds of City Hall, all the policemen, all of the public officials, but who steps up the microphone to say, "I'm now about to introduce the mayor, next mayor of the city of New Orleans?"  His classmate, who is black.  Now, this is significant, he gets into the office, and I am sit, seated with my wife [Blanche Macdonald Francis] at every public function at the table that he sat at.  So when the kings and queens, the presidents or whoever came to New Orleans, there was always gonna be a black couple sitting at that table.  So he was living what he believed.  And, and so they had effected him.  He was changing his public about what it was that the city of New Orleans had to appreciate with its large number of African Americans.  And, and again, I am convinced, had he not been there at the time he was, [Ernest N.] 'Dutch' Morial would not have been the black, first black mayor of the city of New Orleans.  He brought in blacks into city government.  His chief administrative officer was black.  That's unheard of.  But he did.
Speaker 1: Now, what are the dates for his mayoralty?
Speaker 2: He, he [Moon Landrieu] was mayor, would have been mayor from 1970 to 1978, 1978.  Now, prior to that time, of course, we were going through all of the civil rights days.  He was a city councilman, he was in the state legislature and the like.  And I mean, all hell was breaking out all over the, the place cause we, we both came back to New Orleans after the service in the, the late '50s [1950].  When I came back--he came back the year before I.  He was a year older.  When I came back, Little Rock, '57 [1957], September '57 [1957], Little Rock was being integrated, the, the high school of Little Rock [Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  And so we came back working, after the service, in '57 [1957] on.  So you just--now, [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] had started in '55 [1955].  And in '57 [1957], then you've had the, all of what transpired, and he was in the center of this with us.  And, and never--and he was called every name in the book, but he never looked back.  And, and I think that made a major difference in the city.  And it was for me, another crowning point of being there.  In, in law school, for example, he, he made sure--he had a core of friends, made sure that the first moot court case, when you had a moot court case, that I was paired--I was teamed with another young white lawyer.  So we became the first integrated pair to argue the moot court case on campus, the moot court case before the supreme court.  We, he brought me to organizations that were first all white.  I mean that was a very important part of changing the culture and, and the minds, and as--and, of course, with young lawyers, having them affected.  An example, we're in the civil courts buildings, downtown New Orleans, to be sworn in as lawyers in 1955.  We're in line.  And the local New Orleans bar association was passing out applications for the bar.  And I was F, so I was about the tenth in line.  And the man passed and gave the application to the first nine.  When he got to me, he passed me up, and he gave it to the guy behind me.  And the guy behind me said, "Oh, you skipped him," just innocently.  And he said, "But he can't join."  And they all threw theirs on the floor.  That's significant.  And, and, it helped me in my role at Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans] with youngsters who were now going through the struggle, who certainly were gonna sit on the lunch counters, who were gonna start the integrating. I was as young as they [Xavier students who would join in civil rights efforts] almost, and so I identified with them in many ways.  I was a lawyer, and, and that was a, that was a very special part too of, of their, of their, their growing up and, and having a lawyer in their midst.
Story_ID: 7323
Speaker 1: When the Freedom Riders started, Rudolph ['Rudy'] Lombard came to me.  Rudy said, "We're gonna start this, and we know you're of counsel with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality].  So you got to be available."  "Oh, I'll be available."  And I said to him kind of, really in a, in a--laughingly, I said, "You know Rudy, you're taking on something.  I don't think, I just don't think that's gonna, gonna work."  He says, "We're gonna sit on that bus--the plan is that we get to New Orleans [Louisiana].  And we getting to New Orleans.  That bus is gonna get to New Orleans."  I said, "I doubt if that bus will make New Orleans," just like that.  And, of course, as history will report, it was bombed out, what, Bessemer [sic, Anniston], Alabama, somewhere in Alabama.  And, and this, this had to be 1960, give or take--I think it was 1960 [sic, 1961].  I saw it on the news.  The next morning, I'm in my office, and Rudy walks in with, with another student.  He said, "We need your help."  I said, "What do you need?"  He says, "Well, you saw the news?"  Said, "Yes, I saw the news."  He said, "They have vowed to get to New Orleans if they got to crawl."  "Okay."  He said, "But we have no where to stay."  And all over the news, it was--there were reports of bomb threats, that anybody who took them in was gonna be bombed.  I said, "Well, what do you, what do you want me to do?"  He said, "Well, you got a floor in the dormitory, men's dormitory [of Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans], that you could put up about ten of the Freedom Riders."  I said, "Well, yeah, that's true."  I said, "But, Rudy, you know, I, I got seventy-five other kids in that dormitory."  Now, the reason we had that, that floor, it's interesting, we had just left sports, like, like if Notre Dame [University, South Bend, Indiana] would leave sports tomorrow morning, well, I didn't have anything to do with it, but we dropped every sport that we played overnight.
Speaker 2: That was probably the crisis of that money [the Katharine Drexel inheritance money that funded Xavier until 1955], I guess?
Speaker 1: Part of it was exactly that, exactly that.  You're absolutely right.  And so we dropped sports.  So we did have an empty floor in the men's dormitory.  And I wasn't president at the time.  I was executive vice president, so I went to the, the then nun president--the president who was a nun, because I became the first lay president.  So I wasn't president at the time, and I said to her, "I've got this request.  Now, this is a serious request.  It's not just, you know, put somebody up, because if that news gets out, you know, you could have any nut--you, you, you could very well--."  She said, "Well, you make the decision."  And so I came back, thought about, and said, "We gonna do it."  And, and we did.  Few people know, and the young kids don't.  Somebody told me last week, we need to put a plaque in the lobby of that dormitory that said, Freedom Riders stayed here, at such and such a date, 1960 [sic, 1961].  I stood on the steps of that dormitory.  It's right across the street here.  I couldn't believe the faces of the people and how they were beat up.  I mean they still were bandaged up and all cause it was within twenty-four hours.  They stayed two nights.  And it was a young white minister who was beaten just, oh, terribly.  And he filed a lawsuit, I think it was about two years afterwards.  Do you know that lawsuit lingered for almost thirty years and a judgment was made, but two years ago?  He died only two months after the judgment.
Speaker 2: That's the one that was in the wheelchair, crippled?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.  And, and, in fact, they held, the Freedom Riders and the leadership held several of their meetings here after that, and celebrations here after that.  But this was all a part of the Civil Rights Movement that came home to all of us because we were a part of it.  And the students became a part of it, and, and it made a huge difference.
Story_ID: 7324
Speaker 1: Summer of '63 [1963], [U.S. Attorney General] Robert Kennedy went down to Alabama to talk to [Birmingham, Alabama Public Safety Commissioner Eugene] 'Bull' Connor, and said to Bull Connor, "When are you gonna start hiring blacks above the mop and broom level," in, in terms.  And Bull Connor looked at Mr. Kennedy and said, in his southern drawl, "Mr. Kennedy, the state of Alabama is gonna hire blacks above the mop and broom level the day the Federal Government does."  Now, that was a shock.  What Mr. Kennedy didn't know is that the Federal Government and the State Government running were the same people, and that, though he as Attorney General, and his brother's the President [John F. Kennedy], might have believed otherwise, it was left to the people of the South, whites, to control the Federal Government.  And he got to Washington [D.C.], told his brother, and then he made several phone calls around., and one of them was to me and to another one of my colleagues--because we had spent time in the early '60's [1960s] when Kennedy got into office, to start integrating federal agencies.  And when they started looking for people, they came to black colleges.  And we had a good reputation.  We were passing the FC exam so we put a lot of young blacks into Internal Revenue [Service], Labor Department and the rest.  So I got this phone call, and he said, "You're a lawyer, you're in the university [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans], we've had a good relationship here with you.  We want you to cover a couple of cities cause we've got some cities we need to integrate."  Um.  I said okay.  It was August, school was closed.  I got assigned to Birmingham, Alabama, Jackson, Mississippi, Coral Gables, Florida and to Jacksonville, Florida--was it Jacksonville?  I think it was Jacksonville, Florida.  My first stop was Birmingham.  I was a, sort of a special agent.  And my responsibility was to find blacks in Birmingham who could qualify for what would be a GS-11 or twelve in FHA [Federal Housing Administration].  Now, you'd have to be living in the South to know that FHA was the worst agency you ever wanted to find.  And as a part of--of what was then Housing and Home Finance, HHFA, was the, the first name for HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], HHFA.  And ironically, Mr. Weaver was black, was the secretary of HH--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Robert C. Weaver--.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.  And so I was assigned.  I stayed in [Arthur George] Gaston's Motel in Birmingham [Alabama] just two months after it was bombed.  I, I--my headquarters was, was, was Gaston's Motel because I had to use the underground to find out where would I find blacks who had some real estate experience in order to qualify.  And I, and I met [Rev. Fred] Shuttlesworth, all the Civil Rights Movement guys at the time.  They bombed that church [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] just three months--with those three [sic, four] little girls right up the street from where I was.  You could cut the tension in Birmingham in the summer of '63 [1963].  I mean I was amazed that the black neighborhood was so close to downtown, just two blocks.  And I walked downtown and it was unbelievable.  I'll never forget, I walked in that beautiful Federal building in, in downtown Birmingham that first day, and the manager of Federal, FHA, came and said, "Well, we know who you are. And, but we're gonna tell you, we don't have any jobs for anybody."  I said, "I understand that, but when my work is finished, you will have some."  And, of course, they did.  I left there and went to Jackson, Mississippi.  [Civil rights activist] Medgar Evers had just been killed, murdered.  And he died in the arms of a, this neighbor who was a pharmacist from Xavier, who was a year ahead of me.  I met his, his brother, what was Evers' brother's first name?
Speaker 2: Charles.
Speaker 1: Charles.  He was unpacking his boxes in Jackson, Mississippi to set up his operation at the time.  [Medgar Evers's wife] Myrlie [Evers] and the community was boy-boycotting downtown.  It, it, it was an unbelievable scene.  I didn't even stay in Jackson.  I had a police escort, and I stayed on the campus of Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi], which is about ten miles outside of Jackson [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: It seems like a safe island over there in those days.
Speaker 1: It was--and I was an agent trying to change that culture in, in a less.  I left there and went to Florida.  And I have to tell you this story.  I'm driving from the airport, little airport in Florida to downtown.  I couldn't stay in a hotel.  I stayed with a family.  And on the way to, to the downtown, I saw a guy with a shotgun standing by a telephone phone.  You know, you're riding in the cab, and you see this.  I didn't say anything.  We went about a half a mile, a mile later, I see another guy with a shotgun by a telephone pole.  I finally tapped the driver on the shoulder and said, "Mr. wait a minute.  What is going on?"  Then I figured this--I've been to Jackson and Birmingham, but I'm not a--I didn't see any shotguns there.  That--he said, "Oh, no, no.  Don't worry about it."  He said, "There's a telephone strike going on.  And whenever the guy would go up to fix the pole, someone was taking a shot at him.  So they put a shotgun to take care of the guy on the pole."  I said, "Well, I'm sorry that happened.  It's a little better than what I thought it was gonna be."  But my point to you is that, that the South was incredible.  And you've got to remember, [U.S. President John F.] Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas [Texas] just three months later.  It was November, he was assassinated.  I was there December of '63 [1963].  The, the feelings were just unbelievable at that time.  But it, it was all was a sense of what we needed and had to continue to do.  And if I have any regrets today, is, we haven't gone as far as we should gone with the price that so many people paid to do what we did.  I look at the voting now, young people--and I preach this all the time, what people gave up to register to vote, and now we have youngsters who are not voting today, black and whites, but there's no excuse for blacks not voting, in, in terms of what those responsibilities are, civil responsibilities are.
Story_ID: 7325
Speaker 1: I tell the story about having been in law school [Loyola University New Orleans School of Law], then coming into, to higher education, and, and I must say, I didn't expect to be in higher education that long.  I thought I had a responsibility to give back.  The institution [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans] was looking for an administrator, and I became an executive vice president. And I served in student services and the like, a development officer.  And I figured I'd go back and practice law.  But I, but I must say, when I took the, the job at first, I represented a number of people in the criminal court system.  And I'll never forget, sitting in the jury box waiting for my case, and to see the people who were coming in, who didn't have representation, not proper representation.  And I figured, well, you know, as one lawyer, I might be able to do something, but if I were in education, I might be able to produce more young people--like throwing the rock into the water where you have a ripple effect.  And as I look back--and I was just honored about a year ago for a black society of lawyers which I was a founding member of.  It may have been only about thirteen of us when we, when I graduated from law school.  And there must be two hundred and fifty now, if not more.  And I looked at that audience, and I said first, you know, lawyers, you've got a big job to do.  I'm not saying just practice and represent people well, but practice to change what are still problems in the quality of life of young--of people in terms of housing, health, education.  You are in a very key role, and I hope that you will see that as your mission.  And you'd wonder why I would say this.  Well, I say it because we protected a number of young blacks who have grown up in the last twenty years.  And we did it because we did not want them to face the same things we did.  But somehow maybe we did not make as clear a quote "demand of their responsibilities to give back to their communities" the way we saw it.  Now, I may--this may sound a bit arrogant to think that we, we did more than what they're doing, but I don't see the same passion.  And the problems are still here; race and color still matter in this country.  And, and we aren't doing--at the same level--and, and it may be because we faced it so clearly, and they may not see it as clearly.  And, and there are many of us who must remind them.  And I don't mean being cynical.  I don't mean being so up tight that you don't believe in people, white, black, whoever, but know that there are things you need to do to make a difference.  The, the one question that I know some ole activists have said to those of my generation, well, why didn't you do more in your earlier years?  Well, number one, we needed to get what I call the ammunition, the education, to make that difference.  You know, you don't go bear hunting with a switch.  And we felt that we needed to be educated.  And we were.  And when we did that education, we started using it for change.  And, and, and that was important because whenever those of my generation stood up to talk, we didn't say, you know what I mean?  Or simply, you owe me this or that.  We spoke about what was important for all of us.  You know, this business about, well, you got a hole under your side of the boat.  We were able to articulate in many places, but we were all in that same boat together.  So if there was a hole in my side of the boat, you were in trouble too.  And, and as we look at most of the problems we face today, we're not gonna get people to change unless they see their best interests effected if things don't change.  I think the mutuality of interests is extremely important.  And the case that we must continue to make is that if we look at this country, and we look at the projects for the future, minorities are gonna play a major role in what this country is or will become.  And if we don't educate young people, we don't provide--and the business I'm in now, the financial assistance for them to be educated.  We are cutting off our nose to spite our face.  The young people whom I have and see in college today, if we put money in financial aid, will pay more back in taxes over their lifetime than the small investment we make today.  They are going to be the backbone for whether this is gonna be a prosperous America, a constructive America, and whether it will be, so-called, a world power.  And, and so, I'm saying in effect is, that which I lived through in a segregated system, is now as important in a so-called desegregated system, which has greater challenges in many ways, than my own generation.
Story_ID: 7326
Speaker 1: What has been the single biggest challenge of being the president of Xavier [University, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: The biggest challenge has been providing the resources.  And, and, and that's people and money, for students, for faculty, to provide the excellence that we have become known for.  And, and it, it pains me because we have proved, as other black colleges have proved, that young African Americans can be educate to the fullest degree in almost every discipline.  It base--it surprises some people when I tell this story.  Here we are, and we have grown, but we have a college of arts and sciences, which is roughly about 2,800 students.  And we are now in the United States, the number one producer of African Americans who get undergraduate degrees in the biological sciences.  We're the number one institution in the United States producing African Americans who get degrees in the physical sciences.  We're the number one school in this country with African Americans who get undergraduate degrees in physics.  We're the number one producer of pharmacist--now, I'm talking about the college of pharmacy, which is five hundred, the number one producer of African Americans who get doctor of pharmacy degrees in this country, and as most people have come to learn nationally, we're the number one producer of African Americans who get admitted to medical school in the United States.  And it's been true for the last nine years.  And people say, well, how do you do this?  Well, we're proud of it, but I can also say to you, that shouldn't be the case, that a school of 2,800 shouldn't be number one in all of these major areas.  But we have proved that African Americans can do science.  We can--we have proved that if you give a youngster, no matter what background economically and socially he or she comes from, if you give them the support they need, you believe that they can learn, and you hold them to higher expectations, and I mean with discipline, they will succeed.  And that myth that, they can't learn, it's just that.  It is a myth.  And so I look back and say, well, what [Xavier University founder] Katharine Drexel started out to do, we are continuing to do.  And we have become a model for other institutions to aspire to make it a--make the opportunity available.  Just this past--about two years ago, the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], to their credit, got great publicity for graduating three black females with Ph.Ds in mathematics.  You produce a black female in math, maybe at one or two a year over the last twenty years.  To produce three at one school is quite significant. One of those three happened to be a Xavier graduate.  There's another one coming up, it's gonna be an Xavier graduate will be in two years.  My, my point in saying this is that what is frustrating is to see that we have produced excellence, and we are at the top of the heap.  And the figures I've just given you is produced by an outside agency, and to black use of higher education, which shows the top one hundred colleges in the United States, top one hundred, not just black, in the country and who is producing African Americans who get degrees.  So we are at the top of the heap in these areas, and yet we struggle, struggle to get monies for these young people to come to college.  I think there should be much more financial aid available.  I write it on my sleeve.  You don't have the money, but you're a bright student.  I say, okay, we'll give you a--what we call a tuition admission, no money behind it, just come and, and, and we're try to find the money for you.  It's hard when the end of the year comes, and you still got two million dollars of a receivable, and, and, and yet you're investing in those young people.  And, and so we are continuing what Katharine Drexel did, although she had the money, we don't have the money to the degree we need.  Now, we are getting grants from, from folks who now see that, boy, you, you know what you're doing.  But we need more.  And I'm not saying, you know, just for us as an institution.  I'm talking about for young people.
Story_ID: 7327
Speaker 1: These are bright young people.  You walk back downstairs and look around and you see these kids at these computers.  They're working hard, they're studying hard.  And they want to be somebody, having spent thirty-five years as a college president [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans] and having watched several generations, this generation reminds me a lot of my generation in this sense.  They know that it's gonna be difficult to make in America because race and color, color still matter, but they are convinced that they want to do whatever is important to do that.  And they don't say to me, I don't want to be this or that.  They say tell me how high, tell me what the obstacles are, and I'll work at it.  I had a student forum last night.  We didn't talk about academic and excellence, they know that.  They're proud.  We talked about parking, you know.  We, we talked about, well, we ought to have a more flexible meal plan.  They didn't talk about food that was bad.  They want a more flexible--and we had a great time; talked about what are we gonna be doing in the future about buildings and the like.  And I was very clear to them about how fiscally we have to operate.  And, and they were--they asked great questions.  And, and I can tell you, and, and I do this any time they want me to.  I sit on the chair, and ask--answer any question.  Don't talk about people, talk about policy and the like.  Well, I had two of my administrators with me that day.  When I, when it was over with, then I said, "You know, I, I--they knew I had an hour and a half.  I had an appointment after that last night, but I went over."  And I said, well, "I think--they said, look, we thank you."  They walked out with me.  They said, "Wonder--when you come back?"  I said, "You just asked me."  I've been doing this for thirty-four years.  They are looking for people to tell them the truth about things.  I talked about tuition, what it cost, why it cost, how much it costs.  The fact that only fifty percent of what they pay in tuition covers the cost of education.  They'd never thought of that.  And I said, you know, "You see these buildings going up?  None of your tuition dollars pay for these buildings."  I said, "We don't, we don't take tuition money--we can't."  We talked about something very interesting.  One young man said, well, well, "Why don't we, we build a football stadium?"  And all the rest said, "What?"  And I, and I said, well, "You got your answer from the rest of your, your friends."  I said, well, "We can't afford it."  I said, "We left football because we couldn't afford--you got to play big-time football to do this."  I said, "The money that I'd put in football, I'd be taking out of your academic."  And I said, "The academics is much more important than this."  And he, he, and then he looked at me and said, "And I think you're right, you're right."  So we, we had that kind of growing up talk.  And I think they appreciated it.  And, and I enjoy it.  And as I said to them, I learn from them.  There were, several questions came up, and I said, "Well, what would you do?  What would you do?"  They'd questioned something in a policy--not that they disagreed with the policy, but disagreed about, well, how it was written and the like.  I said, "Well, tell me how would you rewrite it?"  And several of them started in, "Well, no, we wouldn't--."  I said, "Well, you see."  This is part of the problems we go--we're all human.  We make mistakes as well.  My point in saying all this to you, this is a generation that's gonna make a difference to America, and we've got to believe in them.  We've to educate them, and so far, I'm proud of what we've done, but I know we got a long way to go.
Story_ID: 7328
Speaker 1: You've been president here [Xavier University, New Orleans, Louisiana] now about thirty-four years?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: You were friends to at least two of the mayors in New Orleans and key supporters--you know, key support to [Mayor Maurice Edwin] 'Moon' Landrieu and [Mayor Ernest N.] 'Dutch' Morial.  And there's been talk about running you for mayor.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes.
Speaker 1: And you're fairly satisfied at what you--you're very satisfied being president of Xavier.
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Yes, I, I've, I'm very, very satisfied being, being president of the university.  Yes, if they had given--roughly sixteen years ago, I probably would have been mayor given all the circumstances that were there at the time.  In fact, the person who did become mayor worked for me, came in to see me and said, "I'm told that you're gonna run."  I said, "I'm not gonna run.  I would encourage you to run," and then he ran and became mayor [of New Orleans, Louisiana]. It was Sidney Bartholomew.  He, he succeeded Dutch Morial.  But my point is that my responsibility, I felt, at being president of the university and with my personal psychosis and psychology and makeup was made for what I'm doing now, not mayor of the city of New Orleans.  I think I could have done what was expected, expected of me, but I, but I really felt that I could do more where I am now and there'd be others who could do well, if not better than I, as, as a mayor.  So I, I passed that opportunity up.
Story_ID: 7329
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community here in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Well, I have several.  And I'm working in a, in a situation now where, hopefully, we might be able to put this together.  I hope that the black community, in education in particular, can come together--and I'm thinking elementary and secondary, and, and say quite clearly what they want and expect to happen for their children in education.  In major cities today, writers are writing about how young Americans, in particularly, minorities are not doing well in their early schooling and the rest.  And there's some confusion regarding whether parents and all are supporting their young people, their young children.  In some ways they're not.  In other ways they are, but that we are going to have to speak with one voice and say we want the best there is in our public school system or private school system for our children.  We do--we want our young people to be held to high expectations.  We want them to be disciplined.  We want them to understand why it's important to be educated, and to change those misguided views that it's not cool to be educated or that the language that they use with each other and how they treat each other is, is not appropriate, and that they have to see the future through the prism of when opportunity knocks they've got to be ready.  That isn't coming through to the extent that it should be today in, in the school systems.  We don't have the number or the quality of both, I think, curriculum in teaching that those youngsters need to have.  But that's not the only problem.  I'm not putting it on simply the backs of teachers.  I'm saying that more parents have to be involved.  I think the system has to put resources in to address the problems.  I think, very strongly, that when we talk about resources, I'm talking about distributing those resources equitably, not just simply equal.  There is a thread running through the country today that would suggest that enough has been done for poor people, both black and white, but particularly blacks, and that we need not do much more.  And all we have to do is provide equal distribution of resources.  But that philosophy presumes that the playing field is equal, and it's not, that the schools that many poor children, and I'm talking about poor whites and poor blacks, but more disproportionately, blacks, those schools are not on the same level of the playing field for many reasons, and race and color is one part of that.  And so if you're gonna distribute those resources equally, I learned early in my elementary school days in that small little town [Lafayette, Louisiana], that if you're pour equal amounts of water in unequal glasses, the glasses remain unequal.  So what you have to do, if we agree that we want all of these children to have a full glass of educational water, and those glasses are equal, you have to pour the water equitably; that you may have to pour 75 percent of water in some glasses, 50 percent in some glasses, and in some glasses only 10 percent.  And, yes, you will not be distributing it equally, but equal is not what you're trying to do.  You are going to pour it equitably. And that's a public policy that's hard for some people to understand because they then say, you are favoring some against others.  But that's not the case.  What you're doing is, you're taking the largess that I feel we have in this country, and distributing it equitably.  And, and what is significant about that is, that you're taking the water out of that youngster's glass over here to pour here.  You're getting it from a source that is plentiful and in supply.  So, mine is that the black community has to demand, if you will, and explain aggressively that equity and excellence are two sides of the same coin; that we believe in excellence and we believe in equity, and that our children can learn, and that we're going to demand the high expectations, and we're gonna support that.  I think there has been a back movement in some cases to suggest that my youngster can't do that.  That's too hard.  Well, that's, that's judging the book by just looking at the cover, and I think we have to change that attitude in our community.  But we all--we have to be prepared to defend, both logically and reasonably, why we take a position, and that the research is there and there are models to prove it.  So I, I, I really believe that our future as blacks, certainly in this city [New Orleans, Louisiana] and in the major cities of this country, are going to be measurably determined by the education of the generation of young people we have in our schools today.  I personally think we've lost two generations.  I am disappointed when I see the disproportionate number of African American males who are not finishing high school and who are, unfortunately, coming up on the wrong side of the law for reasons that they have not been educated, when they could have been educated.  And they would have--they had the talent.  And I think we cannot afford to lose another generation.  So education is certainly one.  The second is, I would also believe that we have to form a coalition and collaboration with people of like philosophy to change the quality of life in other areas, better housing, better health, better social services, and not take for granted or take less than what is required.  That also means being more involved in the political process, that much of what has happened in America comes out of legislative mandates and others.  And we have to be vigilant in reminding our legislative representatives, whether in the Senate or the House [of Representatives], in states or in the Congress, of what their responsibilities are.  And I mean that, whatever the color or race those legislative people are.  And, and we've lost some of that.  And maybe I'm being unfair when I say that, but, but because of what I lived and I cherished going to could vote because I believed somebody was really thinking, not only reasonably, but fairly, and to sit home and not vote and then complain about what happens, that's, that's irresponsible to say the least.  So I see that as a very important aspect of the future, certainly in New Orleans and other cities, our involvement in the political process.  And, and that's a big order, but I think it's fundamental for any progress we're gonna make as a race of people and any progress we're gonna make in a country.  We are important for the country and its future as a--in addition to ourselves.
Story_ID: 7330
Speaker 1: You still are doing quite a bit, but what do you see--and you certainly have, in the last thirty-four years, you've done a lot, but what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I, I think, I think my legacy would be having worked with an amazing group of faculty and staff as a colleague in showing the, the potential of the human dimension from a minority population.  People are going to say, well, during his tenure, there were people at Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans] who believed in young people and inspired them and worked with them for them to reach their full potential.  And they're now in almost every discipline that you can imagine.  And they will say that we at least had somebody who was a president who didn't dictate what was to be, but who believed in the capacity of the people whom--with whom he worked, to the extent that he encouraged them and he supported them.  And that if one thing is remembered, and it would be by those who have--I have had the pleasure to work with in the last thirty-four years, and now going on thirty-five, that I recruited and surrounded myself and the university with people smarter than I was, and I got out of their way in the sense that I did not interfere with their ability to do the work that they were capable of doing.  And that, that has been my style.  I've delegated to those people who were administrative academic administrators, the authority to make decisions because they were prepared in their expertise to do that.  I couldn't delegate away my responsibility for what they did, but I delegated that authority.  And I've found over those--these thirty-four years, and which I hope will be a legacy, that in doing so, I brought out the best in those people because they knew that when they made decisions, I was gonna support them.  And so they, they--I, I describe this way.  I slept well at night while they stayed up all night cause they knew the next day they had a big decision to make, and they wanted to make the right one.  And they were gonna make the right one because in the area that they were working, they were the expert.  I'm not a fiscal man, although I have an undergraduate degree in mathematics [from Xavier University, New Orleans, Louisiana], but I'm not a fiscal man.  Under--I understand fiscal matters, but I'm not that.  So I rely on good fiscal people.  I don't have a Ph.D. in romance languages or math or history, but the people who are in those departments do.  And they were designing the curriculum, and I encouraged them to design the best that there was.  And if they needed money, help and the like, I was gonna support them.  In the sciences, for which we are known, where seventy percent of our youngsters major, those people know that business very well.  And they have proved that they do with what they have produced.  I was their greatest cheerleader.  And, and if they needed something, I was there, where can I help?  Now, that's a style that may not fit everybody, but it fit my personality because I have no ego in the sense--well, we have an ego, but I have no ego in the sense that I needed to get credit for what was done.  I believe in, in something that was said to me years ago.  We can do anything we want to do as long as we don't worry about who gets the credit, who gets the credit.  And I'm the first to say who did what, and why they should be thanked for it.  Now, unfortunately--and I use the word unfortunately only in the sense that people look at the president of any institution and say, well, he was a good president.  Look at what he's done.  No, no., look at what he was able to be a part of and it took a team to do that.  Unfortunately, people see presidents as quote the, the beg--'the alpha and omega', which is not true.  Now, nobody on this campus believes that because we know we operate differently.  But ev--and even students know that.  In that forum, I led off with saying in effect, I don't decide what the rules of tenure are.  I confirm when they are awarded, but they are awarded by their peers.  So that there are people who are trained to do certain things, and I respect that.  The long and short of it is that my legacy will, in fact, be that I was a member of a team who had the responsibility of an institution, but I delegated the authority for making it work.
Story_ID: 7331
Speaker 1: I suppose your parents are very proud of you--.
Speaker 2: They're both deceased.
Speaker 1: Right, I know, I know they are.  They got a chance to see you become president [of Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans]?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.  My, my mother [Mabel Coco Francis]  and my father [Joseph Abel Francis]--I have pictures of them sitting in the front row as I became president.  And it was quite a joy.  And, and I, I would say more--I guess for both of them, but my daddy more probably than my mother did (laughter), because knowing him and his strong feelings that you had to be the best that you could possibly be, and to come from a small town and to come to a university that he admired because he admired the founders, this was, this was quite an accomplishment.  And I'm sure he, and justifiably so, had to take credit that he had a lot to do with where I was on that stage that day.  And, of course, he lived long enough to, to see me in the presidency for some time, and, and to appreciate the fact that when I came home to speak and the like, that, that, that I was the president of the university.  I guess one of his special moments--I got invited to come back to my small town to speak to the large state institution in my hometown [Lafayette, Louisiana].  And I don't remember, obviously correctly, but I'm told that when we would be passing by this big university when I was a youngster, I'd say I want to--"That's where I want to go to school."  And I'm sure as every child would say, I want to go to school there.  Well, when I graduated from high school [St. Paul, Lafayette, Louisiana], I couldn't go to school there, couldn't be accepted, but I was now back that evening with him sitting in the audience, giving the commencement for that institution.  I'm sure that was a, a proud moment for him.  And, yes, he was proud and, and my mother was proud.  And I think he was proud of all of us.  I, I, I would have no hesitation to say to you, though, that his, probably for both of them, their proudest moment was when my brother [Joseph Francis] was made a Catholic bishop.  It was a proud moment when he became a priest, I'm sure, but to become a, a bishop in the Catholic Church, a church that they lived all their lives in, and, and to see him in a city and a state, the, the only black bishop in the Newark, New Jersey area, baptizing and confirming and saying mass in churches where the audiences were, the parishioners were all white.  That was significant for them because it reaffirmed for them all of what they'd said in their--our earlier lives, that you are equal to, as good as anybody else.  And this was that affirmation for them.  And, and they were, indeed proud of that.  And, and I must say, I was proud of my brother as well because I, too, lived those days and to see him as a bishop--and incidentally, when he died, one of the, one of the comforting things for me was to have other priests, blacks particularly, and some white priests, say to me, "Were it not for your brother, I might not be a priest today," or say to me, that you know, "your brother was a rebel bishop" in the sense that he spoke up at times when nobody else would.  He was a part of writings, one famous letter to the bishops that were meeting in Washington [D.C.] this past week.  Well, when they met, he was a part of that, and, and wrote a part of other--with others that, that called on the church to declare racism a sin.  And another piece called, 'What We've Seen and Heard' [sic, 'What We Have Seen and Heard'], and, and not that he was a thorn in the side, but he never hesitated in being in that role as a black Catholic bishop to ever forget that he was both black and Catholic, and that the church still had things it needed to do.  So he spoke up at, at whatever price it, it was.  It didn't matter to him.  And so that was comforting for me at his death to have priests say that, as well as bishops say that.  So, no, my mother and my father I think were very proud of the whole family in terms of what we, we were able to do.
Story_ID: 7332
Speaker 1: What about your own family?
Speaker 2: My own family, I have a family of four boys and two girls.  And, and I guess, like my father--and you know, we all are like our fathers, I expected the same thing out of my boys and my girls as my father [Joseph Abel Francis]  did of me.  You don't think about it, but that's part of how it goes.  And I can tell the tradition is, is following because my sons now are raising their children the way I raised them in a way, and how my father raised me.  My oldest [Michael Francis] is a, is a physician.  My second son [Timothy Francis] is a, is a lawyer.  The third son [David Francis] is with the only newspaper in town as a vice president for business.  My fourth child [Kathleen Francis] is the, the daughter who grew up with three brother and perhaps became the best athlete because she had to play baseball, had a rule--they grew up on this campus [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans], had a rule that when they played, one or the other had to choose her on the other side.  They'd rotate it.  And she became--had a job I would have traded for, she became the vice president for marketing for Major League Baseball [MLB] at thirty-four years of age.  And as these generations--she left that high position as a black female and now is the vice president for marketing for the Meadowlands [East Rutherford, New Jersey], the whole Meadowlands complex, the arena, the stadium, the racetracks and the like.  And she's, she's done very well.  The fifth child [Patrick Francis]--sorry--yeah, the fifth child got his M.P.A [Master of Public Administration], from the J--well, the Lyndon Baines Johnson School of Business in Texas [sic, Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs, University of Texas at Austin], and he's a specialist program in higher education for the state of Texas in the legislature.  And the youngest, which is the youngest daughter [Christina Francis] is a marketing supervisor with UniWorld [Group, Inc.], the big black marketing firm, and now is in Los Angeles [California].  So they've all done very well.  We're very proud of them and the--growing up in a city like New Orleans, and all of the trials and tribulations and the like, they kept their, their focus.  And they did, they did very well.  Athletes--the athletic programs I think were very, very good for them.  The--and interestingly enough, we kid about this because the only one who smokes is the doctor (laughs).
Story_ID: 7333
Speaker 1: This is slightly different from legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Interestingly enough, I would like to be remembered as somebody who was fair, was honest and a decent human being, plain and simple, with no, no bells and no whistles.  That's, that's my modus operandi on this campus.  If you were to spend any time with me, you'd see--I laugh because there're some students who, who don't recognize me.  I, I--it, it happens many times, more than you think.  They'll stop and, and say, I--and incidentally, I say hello or good morning to every student on this campus.  They, right, but they'll say--there were young ladies in the crowd and I'll pass them, she says, "Excuse me."  I say, "Yes."  She says, "Your face is familiar."  And she says, "What do you do here?"  I said, "I work here."  And she says, "Well, I, but I--."  I said, and the other little girl said, "He's the president [of Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans]".  She said, "Oh, you're the president?"  "Yes," I said, "and you don't remember me in orientation and the rest?"  She said, "Yeah, but I don't see you that often."  I said, "But if you saw me too often, we'd all be in trouble."  But, but I sit in basketball games.  We got a small gym and, and I'll never forget the day we won the championship, and, and the captain of the team, when the whistle blew, he ran up the stands and handed me the ball.  And he said, "You've been here every night that you could."  He said, "You refereed every game.  You gave instructions from where you sat," (laughter) cause I would shout out.  He said, "So you deserve this ball as well as anybody else."  But, and, and, in fact, today the same thing is true.  I can walk the campus and the girls will see me, and say, " We're playing tonight.  Are you gonna be in town?"  And I said, "Yes, I am, and I'll be there."  Saturday night I was there, sat four hours and watched two games.  Last night, couldn't make it because I was at the student forum.  We played our NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] team and those girls won--our girls won by ten, ten point--no, fifteen last night.  My point is, they, they don't--well, they know I'm the president, but they don't see me with president written on my chest or my back.  And, and, and so I--because I grew--I'm one of them.  I pick up paper when I walk on the campus.  And, and one day I was about to pick up the paper, and the young man came up and said, "Don't worry, I got this one," you know.  It's all part of what I feel I need to show them.  It doesn't matter where you are, how high people think you have gotten, you're, you're all--you are a part of the common good.  And, and in a way, that's part of what I'd want my legacy to be, and, and I, I've worked hard at it, and I think I've had some success in it.
Story_ID: 7334
Speaker 1: How long do you think you'll remain president [of Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans]?
Speaker 2: Of course, that's a decision the board makes.  I, I say to people, "I'm still on probation.  When I learn to do it right, then they'll let me go."  I don't know how much longer, but as long as there is continuing success, and I'm happy getting up in the morning, coming to work and everybody feels that I still have my good senses, I will.  I can assure you though that the day I think that I'm not doing the job to the extent that is required, I will not be here.  But I'm very--I'm healthy.  I'm seventy-one.  I don't feel seventy-one.  I'm healthy.  I'm happy doing what I'm doing.  I think we are having great success.  And so I will do it as long as I'm able to do it.  But I will also say, the day I retire, I will not look back.  I will not look back.  I will, I will leave with the feeling that we are in good shape, and the next president will have full reign to do what he or she is capable of doing.
Story_ID: 7335
Speaker 1: This is my wedding day.  Married my wife, Blanche [Macdonald Francis], June 6th, 1955.  I graduated law school [Loyola University New Orleans] on Saturday night, and on Monday we were married.  And I left for the service [U.S. Army] about two months later and, best decision I ever made.
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis with his wife Blanche Macdonald Francis on their wedding day, New Orleans, Louisiana, June 6th, 1955.  From the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7336
Speaker 1: This is my time bivouacking in Frankfurt, Germany when the United--NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] alert came, everybody had to go in the field.  I was in a private, and went out.  I put on everything I owned that day, and I was still cold.  I was Southern boy who didn't know anything about the cold winters in Frankfurt, Germany.  I spent one year in Frankfurt, and I have the distinction of saying my replacement in the Third [U.S.] Army Division was Elvis Presley.  I left in '57 [1957].  He replaced us in '58 [1958].
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis as a private in the U.S. Army, Frankfurt, Germany, ca. 1957.  From the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7337
Speaker 1: This is my brother, my oldest brother [Joseph Francis], who was the third black Catholic bishop named in the United States when he was named to become an auxiliary bishop in Newark, New Jersey.  We were at a banquet together, and a great resemblance of each other, and we looked a lot like our father [Joseph Abel Francis, Sr.].
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis with his oldest brother, not dated, from the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7338
Speaker 1: This is my grandmother on my mother's [Mabel Coco Francis's] side.  Her name was Mathilde and if I remember correctly, her maiden name was Reynaud.  That's a famous French name, but she married my grandfather who was Shelby Coco.  My mother's mother, my grandmother.
Speaker 2: Is Coco French?
Speaker 1: I have to tell you.  It's very interesting.  I was inducted into the Italian society in New Orleans [Louisiana] as a black, and when I told my Italian sponsor, who was one of the leading Italians in the city, that my mother's maiden name was Coco, he sent me a book that showed that the Cocos where she was born were Italian (laughter).  So he wasn't making any great moves, he said, cause I was part Italian.  But I doubt that.
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis's maternal grandmother Mathilde Reynaud, not dated, from the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7339
Speaker 1: This is my great-grandmother and [great] grandfather.  And I must confess, I, I don't have them on this list, but I think their last names was Rapplier. Rapplier.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: R-A-P-P-L-I-E-R.  But that's my great-grandmother and grandfather.
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis's great-grandparents, Mr. and Mrs. Rapplier, not dated, from the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7340
Speaker 1: This is a interesting story written in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] paper ['Philadelphia Daily News'] by Chuck Stone, the great black reporter who tells the story of, of when my brother [Joseph Francis] is named bishop, and I had been named president [of Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans] in '68 [1968].  And my brother was named bishop in '76 [1976].  It was the second time in the history of the United States when a black was the president of a Catholic university and also had a brother who was a Catholic bishop.  The first were the Healy brothers.  The president, [Rev. Patrick] Healy, was the president of Georgetown University [Washington, D.C., 1873-1882], and his brother was a black--was a bishop of the church.  Their mother was white, and their father was black.  So they were the first black bishop and president in the United States.  And my brother and I became the second.  I became the president of a Catholic university, and my brother was a Catholic bishop.  And so it talks about an Irishman's son as the first black history, and now we have two Catholic brothers who'll repeat the history.
Speaker 2: Most people wouldn't have guessed that Georgetown had ever had a black president.
Speaker 1: Did indeed, did indeed.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They were the, they were two sons of a interracial marriage.
Speaker 2: ['Philadelphia Daily News' article featuring Norman Francis and his oldest brother Joseph Francis, not dated, from the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7341
Speaker 1: This is a very young picture of a president who was named in 1968 as the first lay black president of Xavier University [of Louisiana, New Orleans].  That's thirty-four years ago.
Speaker 2: That's Dr. Norman Francis.
Speaker 1: Dr. Norman Francis.
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis, ca. 1968.  From the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7342
Speaker 1: This is one of the proud moments of my mother [Mabel Coco Francis] and my father [Joseph Abel Francis], and I think you could see it perhaps on my daddy's face.  This is my, my father with the glasses on, and my mother sitting on his right at the day that I was inaugurated president [of Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans] in 1968.  Sitting on my father's left is my wife [Blanche Macdonald Francis] and my youngest son, Patrick [Francis], and to the right of my mother are the other four children at the time, Michael [Francis], David [Francis], Kathleen [Francis] and Timmy [Timothy Francis].  They didn't seem to be that excited about it, but they had to sit in the front row.
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis's family members at his inauguration as president of Xavier University of Louisiana, 1968. (Left to Right) Son Michael Francis, son David Francis, daughter Kathleen Francis, son Timothy Francis, mother Mabel Coco Francis, father Joseph Abel Francis, son Patrick Francis and wife Blanche Macdonald Francis. From the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7343
Speaker 1: This is a picture taken of my meeting Bill Clinton, I think for the first time, as president of the United States and standing between was to become the [U.S.] Secretary of Labor,  Alexis Herman, who was 1969 graduate of Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans], the first class that I presented a degree to as president of the University.  Alexis was telling the president, right before the photograph, that he was--he, Clinton, was her second president.  I was really her first president.
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis, Alexis Herman and U.S. President Bill Clinton, ca. 1993. From the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7344
Speaker 1: This picture was taken, I would say 1972 when we honored then, Ethel Kennedy, who was, of course, the wife of [U.S. Senator] Robert [F.] Kennedy.  Standing with me as, was then the president of--the chairman of our board of trustees, Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans] graduate, Dr. Claude Organ who became the president of the Society of Surgeons in the United States, a very distinguished surgeon who is still practicing in California.
Speaker 2: [Dr. Claude Organ, Ethel Kennedy and Norman Francis, 1972. From the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7345
Speaker 1: President Richard Nixon at the White House in one of our visits, and I served on a committee.  We were presenting to the President our report on the work that we had done.  I don't remember the years, but the years of Mr. Nixon's presidency in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: [Richard Nixon and unidentified men of a committee Norman Francis served on, Washington, D.C., ca. 1969-1974.  From the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7346
Speaker 1: And it was our pleasure to have on campus the first year of my presidency [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans] the president's wife, [U.S.] President Lyndon Johnson's wife [Claudia Alta 'Lady Bird' Taylor Johnson], Mrs. Johnson, who had come to Xavier the year that the President, the very year that the President not to run for re-election.  And this, this had to be 1969 [sic, 1968], during the time of the Vietnam crisis.
Speaker 2: [First lady Claudia Alta 'Lady Bird' Taylor Johnson Johnson on Xavier University of Louisiana's campus during Norman Francis's presidency, 1968. From the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7347
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of my meeting, the then, Jimmy Carter, [U.S.] President Jimmy Carter from Georgia, and standing to the President's left, hardly visible, is the famous Martin--I'm gonna say Leon, but it's not Leon Martin.
Speaker 2: Louis Martin?
Speaker 1: Louis Martin, sorry.  This is the President, Jimmy Carter with Louis Martin who was in the White House at the time, and was with leadership of the Democratic Party.
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis with Jimmy Carter and Louis Martin (background), ca. 1977-1981. From the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7348
Speaker 1: This is a picture taken in New Orleans [Louisiana]  with the famous, at the time, Muhammad Ali.  Muhammad had come to fight Leon Spinks and I had been asked by my classmate who was mayor of the city of New Orleans [Ernest N. 'Dutch' Morial] to be his representative with the promoters and to be at almost every gathering.  And it was quite an experience.  I, I admired Muhammad Ali's ability to speak on the spur of the moment, with a tremendous memory.  That was a great occasion.
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis's friend Muhammad Ali and unidentified men, New Orleans, Louisiana, 1978. From the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7349
Speaker 1: My first visit to the White House when [U.S.] President Ronald Reagan was in office.  I was there with Chris Edley who was representing the United Negro College Fund, and I was serving, at the time, as president of the membership of the United Negro College Fund.
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis, Chris Edley, Ronald Reagan and unidentified man, Washington, D.C., 1981-1989.  From the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7350
Speaker 1: This is a family photo taken in 1950 when my brother [Joseph Francis] was ordained a priest.  It includes my dad [Joseph Abel Francis, Sr.], my mother [Mabel Coco Francis], my sister and my uncles and aunts.  My sister, youngest sister, Mabel [Bailey] and our cousins.  Significantly, also in the picture very prominently standing right behind my father and immediately in front of the candlestick is my grandfather, Shelby [Lewis] Coco--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Let me point out the, point some of the people out.
Speaker 1: All righty, if you point, this is my father with the little girl in front of him--.
Speaker 2: Pointing to right here?
Speaker 1: Right to the right,
Speaker 2: To the right.
Speaker 1: One more over.  That's it.  This, this is my father.  Behind my father is my grandfather [Shelby Lewis Coco], my mother's father.
Speaker 2: Right here?
Speaker 1: Right here.  That was my mother father.  And then over to the left of my brother, and the brother is right--.
Speaker 2: I can't see very well from here?
Speaker 1: This is my mother.  This is my brother who was ordained a priest, my mother, my sister, two sisters, my aunt, my uncle, and this is a cousin, but prominently is my father, my mother and my grandfather.
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis and family, 1950. Mentioned in the photo are his father Joseph Abel Francis, mother Mabel Coco Francis, brother Joseph Francis and grandfather Shelby Lewis Coco.  From the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7351
Speaker 1: This is my family of four boys and two girls after a celebration in New Orleans [Louisiana] called the Jazz Fest [New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival] and they all are very happy, it appears.  The top, starting from left to right is David [Francis].  In the middle is Kathleen [Francis], next is Timmy [Timothy Francis].  And on the front row, starting on the left is Michael [Francis], the middle is youngest daughter, Christina [Francis], and the right is the fifth child, Patrick.  The front row has a doctor [Michael Francis], a marketing executive [Christina Francis], the higher education specialist [Michael Francis] in the state of Texas.  In the back row is a vice president of business for the only newspaper in town [David Francis].  In the middle is a former vice president of marketing for major league baseball [Kathleen Francis] who is now a vice president for marketing for the Meadowlands [Sports Complex, East Rutherford, New Jersey], and Timmy who is a lawyer and a developer.
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis's children, not dated. (Top row left to right) David Francis, Kathleen Francis, Timothy Francis. (Bottom row left to right) Michael Francis, Christina Francis, Patrick Francis.  From the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7352
Speaker 1: This is one of our visits to Rome. [Italy]  I served on a pontifical commission for the Vatican and this is with Pope John Paul II in Rome after one of our meetings.  And on the left is a African Cardinal whose name escapes me at the moment, but I'm sorry, [Bernardin] Cardinal Gantin, who was Cardinal, who was next--who was speculated at one time--he's still living, but older now, that might have been a pope of the future.
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis, Pope John Paul II and Cardinal Gantin, Rome, Italy, not dated, from the collection of Norman Francis.]
Story_ID: 7353
Speaker 1: Another version of that same visit, and you'll see [Bernardin] Cardinal Gantin in the center with Pope John Paul II on the right of myself, shaking hands, inviting the Pope to New Orleans [Louisiana], and he did come.  And in 1987, the only college he visited in the United States was Xavier University [of Louisiana, New Orleans].  And he was on our campus for an evening, and I got to know him quite well.  I spent four years on the commission, and saw him every year in the vat-the Vatican and saw him in New Orleans again in 1987 and saw him again in 2000, October the first when he canonized our founder, Katharine Drexel.
Speaker 2: [Norman Francis with Pope John Paul II and Cardinal Gantin, not dated, from the collection of Norman Francis.]
