Story_ID: 17834
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer.  And Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and I'd like to have you state your name first and middle name and last name, and, and spell it for us and your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, tell me when you're ready?
Speaker 1: I'm ready.
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Arthur A. Fletcher.  My date of birth December the 22nd, 1924.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell Arthur, and then what does A stand for?
Speaker 2: Arthur is spelled A-R-T-H-U-R, and A stands for Allen, A-L-L-E-N, and the last name is Fletcher, F-L-E-T-C-H-E-R.
Speaker 1: And can we have the address that we're at right now?
Speaker 2: 516 G Street, S.W., Washington, D.C.  The zip code is 20024.
Speaker 1: And today--we did, today's date?  I don't think we did today's date.  It's May--. (unclear) Okay, I'm sorry, okay.
Speaker 2: It's May--what is today?
Speaker 1: Twenty-ninth.
Speaker 2: May 29th, 19--I'm sorry.  May 29th, 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your profession?
Speaker 2: Currently, my profession is government relations and community affairs consultant.
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself, though, just as--would you describe yourself as affirmative action founder or, or--I mean how would you describe yourself?
Speaker 2: I describe myself as the father of the affirmative action enforcement movement, with the clear intent of changing America's culture.  Affirmative action did exactly that, changed the culture from exclusion to inclusion in the workplace first, with the understanding that if you can change the culture at the workplace, since this country conceived itself as being a capitalist country, that it's more concerned about capitalism than social justice.  Therefore, we can measure the progress we've made because capitalism requires, fairness requires equity.  And since we are taxpayers--everyone is a taxpayer.  And since every taxpayer's dollar that goes into the federal government is used for one or two purposes, one, for investment purposes in the private sector, and, two, for employment purposes.
Story_ID: 17835
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Potatoes.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Kansas.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying?  My favorite phrase is, "it's a very poor dog that won't wag his own tail."  (laughter).
Speaker 1: We haven't had that one.
Story_ID: 17836
Speaker 1: And I'd like to start out by asking you about your parents.  And, you know, I'd like to, actually, if you could start with your father, and his name and what you know about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, first, my father, the man who raised me, was a Buffalo Solider.  His name was Sergeant Andrew Fletcher.  He was considered one of, if not the best, horseshoer, in the entire United States Army, even in a segregated army when there was time to put the shoes on the army's prized horses, they usually sent for my father to come and supervise, if not actually put the horse--the shoes on himself.  He was called upon whenever America's prized polo horses, to supervise the shoeing of those horse, America's horse show horses.  And when I say America, I'm talking about the Army, the Cavalry, horse show horses.  And he was called upon to also shoe those horses.  And when he retired, he moved to California, and the army officers who went into the horse breeding business kept calling on him to come shoe their horses, although he was retired.  He only had a third grade education, but believed strongly in education and played a major role in convincing me that I should take full advantage of the G.I. Bill of Rights.  He was in both world wars, World War I and World War II.  And he reminded that--he went in the Army, incidentally, when he was fourteen.  He was big enough and strong enough.  And in those days in World War I, they didn't care about a birth certificate.  Were you big enough and strong enough to do the work that the United States Army wanted black troops to do?  He was big enough and strong enough to do it, although he was only fourteen years of age.  So he managed to get himself enrolled, enlisted in the Tenth Cavalry.  And he had a thing going with horses.  They loved him and he loved them.  So he hit a home run the minute he went in.  But he only had a third grade education.  So he reminded at the end of World War II that the difference between the benefits of the troops at the end of World War I is that they--after protesting like all get out, they finally got a bonus.  And he said, "Most of us got the check on Monday and were broke on Friday."  He then said, "You're gonna get an education under the G.I. Bill of Rights."  And he drove that home.  "You will get an education.  You will get--that will be an asset that will last you for the rest of your life.  So whatever you do, since they're gonna pay you to go to school, whatever you do, go to school."  And, of course, I protested that my mother [Edna Miller Fletcher] had two degrees from Prairie View State Teachers College [now Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University, Prairie View, Texas] and never got to use either one.  She graduated in 1970 [sic] and never got to use her nursing--seventeen [1917], I'm sorry, never got to use her nursing degree and never got to use her teaching degree.  But they both insisted that my--the world that I would finish my life in would be a world in which education would be the sunum bonum.  So they both insisted that I go to school, although I, the day I enrolled, I had a wife and two children and one on the way.  They said, "That's no excuse.  Since the government is gonna pay you to go to school, then you go to school, and you use every ounce of opportunity that you have to equip yourself for the kind of life you're gonna live, which is altogether different than the kind of life we lived.
Story_ID: 17837
Speaker 1: Did your father [Andrew Fletcher] talk much about being a Buffalo Solider or the Tenth Cavalry [of the U.S. Army]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was raised on military bases.  So I was raised at Fort Huachuca [Arizona], raised at Fort Leavenworth [Kansas], raised at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, and raised at Fort Riley, Kansas.  So he didn't have to talk about it (laughter).  I was raised up in and out of the stables all the time, raised up going over to the golf course and caddying for the officers in the summertime.  Mornings, I caddied for the officers' wives, eighteen holes in the morning and caddied for the officers in the afternoon, eighteen holes.  And then on the weekends, put on a white jacket and waited tables.  So I was raised in the military environment, in which--two things you always do in the military.  You always train, and you always practice what you've learned as a result of the training.  And when you're a kid fortunate enough to be raised in a military environment, you catch--it catches on.  And you begin to understand then your, your--what's the term I'm looking for?  Your understanding of life is a little skewed because all you see is your father being trained all the time.  You wonder, is there, are they ever gonna stop training him?  So next thing you know, you begin to appreciate what's involved.  And, in, in, life, you understand that life is a, is a constant flow of trained, retrained, and train some more if you're gonna stay up with and/or in front of the trends.  So he, he didn't, he really didn't have to talk to me about the regimentation of the military.  We lived on a military base, and we were automatically regimented as a result of that.  A good example of that is the twelve kids--thirteen kids who finished high school with me, thirteen black kids in a class of about two hundred and seventy-five.  Twelve of the thirteen all finished college (laughter), all right.  And, and several went on to get multiple degrees, master's degrees and Ph.D's.  And it came from living in a--for want of another term, a militarized household.  You know, you had--back in the old days, your dad got up at 5:00 in the morning to go do 'Reville'.  Normally, he would come in, my dad at least, would come in and pull the cover off and say, "Up, young man."  And you get up and do the household chores before you get on the bus to go to school.  And when you got home in the evening, you had a checklist to see whether there was anything you had to do to finish out your assignment.  Then you could go play football. Then you could go play baseball.  Then you could do other things.  But the house and the family was a unit where everybody shared responsibility for the maintenance of the house.  My job every--Friday--Saturday morning was to go over to the commissary and buy the groceries for the, for the week.  Often--in some instances for the month.  They'd give me a list of things to buy, and I'd go over to the commissary and stand in line and buy them, put them in a sack and walk back over to the house, which was usually, which was about a mile and a half, and stack in the, in the pantry, and organize them so that when Mama [Edna Miller Fletcher] got through cooking at the officer's club, she could get home in a hurry, pull down stuff and cook for us.  The minute we got old enough to cook for ourselves, then that's what we had to do.  My dad said, "You're not gonna kill my wife cooking for y'all.  She may cook on Sunday (laughter) for you, but you like to eat, then learn to cook."  And so he would teach us what he little knew about preparing food.  Of course, we worked with and around Mama, and so we learned how to cook.  And we--in high, junior high school, we could cook a three, a three-course, four-course meal, breakfast, lunch and, and dinner.
Story_ID: 17838
Speaker 1: Now, your mother, can you give her name and--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Her name was Edna Miller Fletcher.
Speaker 1: Do you know about her background?
Speaker 2: Her background, mama was part Comanche Indian, and, and, and black.  Her father was a presiding elder in the Methodist church in Houston, Texas.  There's a school named after him.  It's called Miller Elementary School.  And he owned--he was a presiding elder.  He owned two businesses, a newspaper and a, a jitney company.  Now, for those who don't know what a jitney company is, that's a cab company that can only go up and down one street.  He owned the only jitney in, in the fourth ward of Houston.  And so on both sides of the family tree, there were men and women of considerable initiative.  My mother's mother passed when she was an early teenager, and the new wife was less than enthused about raising my mother.  So my father [Andrew Fletcher] sent her to Prairie View State Teachers College [now Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University, Prairie View, Texas].  And she finished academy--the academy there and then went on into Prairie View and finished school at Prairie View by getting a nurse's degree and a, and a teacher's certificate, but because of animosities involving what they referred to--my mother used to re--sometime refer to herself as a half breed, that because of the animosities between blacks who were 100 percent blacks and blacks who were part Indian and part black, it wasn't the finest environment for her to be raised in, in and around the Houston area during the early parts of the last century.  So--and then when her, her father put her in Prairie View, she kind of turned out to be a renegade.  And, and once she didn't get a job after being well qualified, then she managed to do a little private nursing, but beyond that, it--she never really got to use her education the way she had thought she would and the way her father thought she would when he put her through, through, through college.  So married Sergeant Fletcher and moved from military base to military base.  She worked for the officer's clubs in, in the daytime, and in the night, in the evening, if she was up to it or it was convenient for us to do so, she'd find a place to rent and run what we often refer to today as a greasy spoon.  She--and I learned to cook from peeling potatoes for her and other things that made her little business go.  So she, she never really got to use her education, but she and my father both insisted that, never mind what she didn't get to do and never mind the fact that he didn't get an education, that I should leave no stone unturned getting one and clearly understand that the future would demand that I not only get an education, but make sure I understand that education is, is the precursor to trainability.  You can't be trained unless you're educated.  And once you're educated, then you can be trained.  And if you can be trained, you can then tap into the gift that God gave you to do the work he sent you here to do.  But unless you can be trained and acquire a skill, then you will end up with what mama used to call an educated fool, who can read textbooks from one end of the country to the other and can't apply a thing.  And she had a definition of education, that, that I use today, and she said "Education amounts to the ability to read, to write, to calculate, to communicate, to think, to reason and to use good judgment."  If you can't--she said, "The last three are what's really important, ability to think, the ability to reason and the ability to use good judgment.  If you can't do those things, it matters not how well you can read.  It matters not how well you can write.  It matters not how well you can calculate and communicate if you can't think, can't reason, can't use good judgment.  Then you're not gonna tap into the gift that God gave, and if you're gonna tap, able to tap into the gift he gave you, then you're not gonna do what he sent you here to do and that was help him manage his universe."  So that's, that's the environment that I came out of.
Story_ID: 17839
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up was having a very--I often refer to it as the first day I was conscious of the fact that I was alive.  My mother [Edna Miller Fletcher] had been working, at the time, was working for a rich white family in Guthrie, Oklahoma.  And I was staying--Mother had parked me with a family that was doing the sharecropping thing.  And they, the day I--the first day I remember I was alive, she came to bring me some new clothes.  And when she got there, the family was all out in the field picking, picking cotton.  And when she got there, I was still in the same clothes she left me with.  And she had been sending them clothes, and they'd just repackage them and send them to, to their relatives.  And so when she came in the tent.  We were living in tents in the, in the, in the, in the cotton field.  And she saw me still in the same clothes that she left with me with them in, and she burst into tears and picked me up and hugged me and, and just turned and walked away and put me in a car with her.  And we went to Langston, Oklahoma.  And they--I stayed with a lady named Grandma Young.  And Grandma Young kind of raised everybody's kids (laughter) back in--and I lived with Grandma Young.  And off and on at different times when my mother and father [Andrew Fletcher] weren't together, then she'd always carry me back to Grandma Young.  And Grandma Young, again, raised everybody's kids, and it was kind of--what's that saying about it takes a village to--well, Langston, Oklahoma in the early '20s [1920s], all the way up, I guess, to World War II was one of those villages (laugher) in which everybody took responsibility for, for everybody else's kids.  And they, they kind of guided you.  My parents finally reunited again in 1938.  And then from that point on, and just in time, I might add, I was just getting into being a teenager where I was getting ready to bust San Quentin [State Prison, California] wide open (laughter), and, and carried me to Fort Sill, Oklahoma and then Fort Riley [Kansas], and then Fort Leavenworth [Kansas] for my teenage and maturing years.  And I was there until World War II started.  I went in the Army August 8th, 1943, among the first draftees, after Congress passed the bill that you could draft eighteen year olds, I was in that first class of draftees.  The rule in that legislation said, if you're in the senior year in high school, you get to finish and then you go right into the military.  So I finished May the 23rd, 1943 and got my draft papers May the 26.  And by August 8, I was in the military.
Story_ID: 17840
Speaker 1: Your siblings, how many children did?
Speaker 2: I have five by my first marriage--.
Speaker 1: No, no, siblings?  Oh, but, for--your parents were married--?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I'm sorry.  I have one brother, one brother, one brother.
Speaker 1: And his name is?
Speaker 2: He was Earl Fletcher.  He's passed on now, but I have one brother.
Speaker 1: Was he older or younger?
Speaker 2: Two years younger and, and a professional musician.  He played with Andy Kirk, did a stint with Jimmie Lunceford, and Fletcher Henderson.
Story_ID: 17841
Speaker 1: Now, you grew up, was it in Guthrie [Oklahoma] or was it in Langston [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Well, we started out in, in, in Langston, my day, first day of--recognition was in Langston.  That's where Mama [Edna Miller Fletcher] carried me to stay with Grandma Young.  So it was in Langston.  And I remember living with, with her off and on until 1929.  And then in 1929, my mother and father [Andrew Fletcher] went back together.  And from there I went to Fort Huachuca, Arizona.  And Fort Huachuca was where all the black troops were, the Ninth Cavalry, the Tenth Cavalry, the Twenty-fourth Infantry and the Twenty-fifth Infantry were all stationed on the borders.  They used to be the border guards.  And so they were stationed at Fort Riley [Kansas], Nogales, Arizona, Bisbee, Arizona and those areas.  So I was raised in my younger elementary school years in that area until 1936.  Then in '36 [1936] Mama had moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and I moved to L.A. to live with her.
Speaker 1: Now, I, I just want to take you back to Langston, you know, with that time.  And if you could tell me, if you could take yourself back to being young and tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of your childhood if you think back?
Speaker 2: Well, the sights were, were cornfields and cotton fields.  Grandma Young had a huge, estate-type house and how she came by it, I don't know.  But it was huge, and she kept, as I told you, anybody's kid who was left with her.  And she had--the house was on a, on a huge farm.  And they grew, they grew corn and various other kind of cereal crops on one side of it, and on the other side, a small cotton patch.  And the smell I remember was at the other end of the, of the cereal end of the piece, was a house and a great big barn and a five-hundred gallon still in which they made bootleg whiskey (laughter), all right.  And Oklahoma, as you know, was dry.  This was in the era of Prohibition, and Oklahoma and Kansas and, and those areas remained dry right up until  1948.  They were bootleggers' havens.  And Grandma Young had a older son by the name of Arthur Young.  And Arthur was the, who, who ran the stills and made the, the bootleg whiskey and sold it to the consumer's market and to the country clubs (laughter), American Legion and other organizations.  So that's the smell I remember.  Every Friday they ran off a, a batch.  He had two stills, and one he used on one Saturday and on one side of the barn, he had the meshworking, and he'd work it on that one.  And then the other side, he'd be running that one.  And he traded back in--and he, and he produced most of the staple that he needed except for the sugar.  He, he produced most of the staple that he needed on the farm, the grains and various other things were grown either on his farm or somebody else's and they traded.  The vice business in those day, and maybe even to a degree today, but the vice business, namely, the illegal professions such as bootlegging and others, was turned over to black Americans.  They were the ones that produced the--kind of like Chicago [Illinois], where they turned over the underworld to the Italians.  The underworld, if you wanted to call it that in Oklahoma and in Kansas and those areas that were dry, blacks ran those businesses.  And that's how they, they earned their business-earned their living.  And we kids grew up thinking, in my case, thinking that the only businesses we could get into were those that were actually on the other side of the law.  So it was kind of, it was kind of unusual for the thirteen kids that went to college, who went to school with me, to all end up going to college 'cause that's not the example that we were raised in, raised up in on the civilian side of the equation.  Now, if it hadn't been for the fact that we were in military households, I'm not too sure where we would have gone (laughter) all right?  But that's the story there, and thank God that, in my case and the others of us, we had another example we could see.  And the class line between educated blacks and poorly educated wasn't there in those days.  There was no such thing as the, the class line that was a barrier, like it is today.  That class line wasn't there.  Of course, it wasn't that many educated blacks.
Story_ID: 17842
Speaker 1: As you heard me say a moment ago, the thing that really, from a revolutionary point of view, increased education in the black community was the G.I. Bill of Rights.  I maintain that the, the, the legislation that caused the civil rights revolution was the G.I. Bill of Rights.  I say that because over a million and a half of us went to college when the wars were over, when World War II was over, when the Korean War was over, we went to college.  And we came out with every kind of degree you could think of, from master's down to bachelor's and, and Lord knows what else, not to mention all the training we got in the military, maybe only, only to find a culture that said no.  We educated, we--but we didn't intend for you to ever use your education.  So, in fact, we tried to talk you into not--my counselors, for an example, when I had to get the counseling to Washburn University [Topeka Kansas] where I graduated from, prior to, one of counselors at Washburn, and other, wanted to know, why'd you come here?  Why don't you go to trade school?  Why don't you go to a tech--go somewhere where they're probably gonna give you--but, you, you're, you're not gonna get a chance to use your degree here.  Most of us didn't listen to that.  And, consequently, the G.I. Bill of Rights educated an army that [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] mobilized when he went across the country making speeches, and building up reserves that would send money or whatever he needed to carry off his mission.  The, the story of the amount of monies and the support he got outside the United--outside the South has never been told.  But if that story was ever told, starting in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and San Diego [California] and going all the way up to Seattle [Washington] and then coming across in the North, there's a story there of the kind of support he got from frustrated African Americans who had fought in World War II.  He--it's a different story, and it will explain where his, his army came from to carry off his revolution.
Story_ID: 17843
Speaker 1: Can you just quickly tell me sounds, that remind you of your childhood?  That's the one thing you didn't tell me?
Speaker 2: Playing the trumpet.  I play the trumpet (laughter), okay.  One of the nice things about being raised around a military base, if you want to do something, there's somebody in the military who'll teach you.  I wanted to be a jazz musician.  So when it was time for, to share that interests, I used to share it with the band practice everyday, and they looked around and said, that boy must want to play.  And so the next thing you know, they issued me a trumpet from the military, went down to the supply house and issued me a trumpet.  And there were men in the band who played, who were dying to pass their skill on to somebody else.  So I liked the tone of the trumpet and liked jazz--still do, and that kind of trapped me into wanting to become a musician.  So I played in the high school orchestra and played in the marching band, until I got to playing football.  And then I kind of dropped off from music.
Story_ID: 17844
Speaker 1: My father was, he was, he's, he's on the tail end, but he was a Buffalo--but on the tail end.
Speaker 2: On the--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, very tail end.
Speaker 2: Was he stationed at Fort Riley [Kansas]?
Speaker 1: Yes, he was, as a young--.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  And did he tell you that as a result of, of a potential riot that they moved them to Texas?
Speaker 1: No, he didn't tell me, no.
Speaker 2: A black troop was killed from--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Okay. Do you know what year that was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 19--1941, '41 [1941] or '42 [1942], a black troop was killed by, by a Junction City [Kansas] policeman.  And the brothers went back out to Fort, to Camp Funston, got a halftrack with a, with a, with (laughter) a .55 [caliber] machine gun on it, drove it back to town, pulled up in front of the police station and threatened to blow it up. And they sent B. O. Davis.  He'd just become a general.  They sent him out there to calm the, the troubled waters.  By that time, by that time, the horse Cavalry had outlived its usefulness.  They'd have the, the maneuvers in Arkansas, Texas and, and--and this was in '39 [1939], and while they were maneuvering on horses, [Adolf] Hitler was taking Poland with a mechanized cavalry.  So when the maneuvers were over, they sold the, all the horses to the canning factories (laughter), and broke up the Ninth and Tenth Cavalry, sent those who had educations to Texas, to Camp Clark.  And, and they became a part of the mechanized Cavalry.  And the rest of them, who had limited educations became trainers and they went to different military bases and began to train.  They were academy trainers, and they went all over the military bases training the young black troops who came in from, from the major cities.  But the broke it up for two reasons, one, they were a threat as a result of, of killing that one troop.  And they really didn't want them to come to Texas.  The two--they'd already, the Ninth and Tenth had already had a riot in Texas during World War I.  And so they didn't want them down there (laughter).  And they brought them back anyway.  And that's where Jackie Robinson was discharged.  See, Jackie would turn his troops in Fort Riley after he got his officers' degree.  They wanted them to sit in the back of the theater.  He wouldn't call his troops out.  And so they had to get him out of there, and when they brought him down to, to Texas, he did the same thing.  And they gave him a discharge without honor.  They didn't give him an honorable discharge.  They gave him a discharge without honor and then cleaned it up.  (Laughter) Okay, Branch Rickey got it cleaned up so he could bring him into baseball.  He got a discharge without honor and so did Sugar Ray Robinson.  Not a dishonorable discharge, but a discharge without honor.
Story_ID: 17845
Speaker 1: I had that you were born in Phoenix, Arizona.
Speaker 2: Born in Phoenix, Arizona and sent back to Oklahoma, carried back to Oklahoma by my mother [Edna Miller Fletcher] with, to live with Grandma Young.
Speaker 1: Now, give me the schools that you attended, you know, just sort of in ord--you know, in order.  I know--.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I attended school in, in Langston [Oklahoma] as a fifth grader and the kindergarten.  Then we moved to Fort Huachuca [Arizona] and attended school at the segregated school with two teachers, Mr. and Mrs. Snowden, at Fort Riley [Kansas], at Fort--at Fort Huachuca.  And then we moved down to Nogales [Arizona] where I had they had a two-room school for black kids in Nogales, Arizona and attended school under a lady by the name of Ms. Washington.  And Ms. Washington recognized a spark of brightness and wanted to adopt me so I wouldn't be moving around all the time, but my mother refused to, to do that.  Then I moved back to Fort Huachuca.  And then from Fort Huachuca to Los Angeles [California], where I went to Ninth Street Elementary School.  And then we moved out to Watts and went to elementary school out there, and then back to Oklahoma (laughter), where I went to Emma Page Elementary School and went to Douglas Junior Senior High School in Oklahoma City and finally settled down.  By the time I was in the eighth grade, I couldn't read my name in boxcar letters and couldn't spell.  And Mama was furious and said, "I don't care where they transfer you, we're not moving him again."  So the reason I finished school at Junction City Junior/Senior High School [Junction City, Kansas] is my mother refused to, to move again until I finished high school.  And I managed then to, to catch up.  When I got to the eighth grade, I couldn't--I actually couldn't read a sentence without stumbling.  And finally when--and that was the right time.  So when I got to the eighth grade, I was headed into puberty, and you really need somebody to regiment it--to help regiment your life, and there is where Sergeant [Andrew] Fletcher really turned out to be a super plus.  As I said, he was committed to education 'cause he--and didn't have one, but wanted to make sure that me and my brother [Earl Fletcher] had one.  So that, that was it.  Altogether, I bounced around from, from town to town from California to Oklahoma to Kansas to Arizona (chuckle) and then from different schools.  The schools in California, incidentally, were integrated.  Those were, those were the only integrated schools I went to before I got to, to Kansas.  All the other schools in all the other states, Arizona and--were all segregated schools.  When I got to California, elementary--the Ninth Street Elementary School was, was, was integrated.  And I did so poorly when I arrived there, they had a class called the non-graded class.  And what that really meant that you couldn't read or write technically well enough to tell what grade you ought to be in.  So they kept me in the non, ungraded, the ungraded class.  And the, I'll never forget, the teacher there was Chinese, and Ms. Wong was her name.  And she took special interest in me and before I knew it, I guess I was--I wasn't in there quite a, a little more than a semester.  And she had me reading at grade level.  Then they moved me out and into the fifth grade, and then I began to move along in pretty good shape.
Story_ID: 17846
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?  How would you describe yourself?
Speaker 2: Shy and kind of withdrawn.  The bouncing around, my mother [Edna Miller Fletcher] having to, to leave me with people who would be willing to keep me.  And, of course, my old man was, Sergeant [Andrew] Fletcher was moving around all the time.  So the bouncing around and realizing that if I became a problem to the people who were keeping me, then they'd be calling Mama telling her, come and get him.  So I was kind of withdrawn and shy.  And I lived within myself and said very little.  I'll never forget when I made my first presentation (laughter), in high school, it shocked everybody that I could talk (laughter).  I think part of my poor grades in high school--in, in junior high and high, in, and particularly, junior high, was the fact that I was, was kind of with, withdrawn and didn't come out of it until I took a manual arts class.  And the shop teacher gave me an assignment that he didn't think I could do because I didn't communicate that much.  And I not only made the item--it was a project to make a, a still that would purify water.  And I made it from the blue, the blueprints only with very little question--.
Speaker 1: Stop just for a second, okay.  I was just--.
Speaker 2: I think she's finished. And that's when I realized I could reason on my own and could communicate what I was reasoning and thinking because when he asked me, how did you--how'd did you know to do this, that and the other, just from--and he kind of smiled.  And I don't know what happened at the teachers' meeting following that, but obviously, he told the teachers, I'm assuming he told the teachers, he doesn't say much, but he's much brighter than, than you would think.  And all of a sudden I began to see a change in attitude on the part of my classroom teacher, and particularly, the math teacher, Dr.--Mr. Daley (ph.) was his name.  He, he really changed his whole approach to me, not, not--I can't think of the term right now, but he knew how to pull it out of me.  And he had no problem coming in those old-fashioned seats--you probably don't remember, but he'd say, scoot over.  And he'd sit down beside me at the old desk, and he'd make me walk through a math problem the way I thought it was done.  And then he'd pinpoint where I made the mistake and straighten that out.  So all of a sudden I began to experience in myself, in my way of having confidence in my own ability to reason and think.  And he, he and the shop teacher, Mr. Daley, and for the life of me at the moment I can't think of--oh, McAllen, Mr. McAllen had a lot to do with my beginning to believe that I had, could, that I had some academic skills too that I could, could develop.  And that, that, that was a--that, if you ask about a turning point, that was a turning point in, in my youthful years.
Speaker 1: Now, what year was that?
Speaker 2: That was in 1930--'39 [1939].
Speaker 1: And what grade were you in at that point?
Speaker 2: I was in the, in the second half of the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Second half--we, we used to have the A, B, you know--you remember that?  Well, I was in the second of the eighth grade, getting ready to go into the ninth.
Story_ID: 17847
Speaker 1: When you said you lived inside yourself, you know, you were--would you dream or think or?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, oh my, I had more fantasies that you can shake a stick at.  One of my--to go, back up a moment, in April of '38 [1938], yeah, April of '38 [1938] or was it '37 [1937], '37--'38, April '38 [1938], Ms. [Mary McLeod] Bethune came to Douglas Junior Senior High School where I was attending school in Oklahoma City.  President [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt had her going through the South inspiring kids to stay in school.  And she came just before we were let out for Easter.  And she made a speech dealing with the opportunities we were going to have if we would but stay in school and cooperate with our teachers.  And, of course, obviously, Roosevelt knew the war was coming, and I guess she knew it was coming.  And between the two of them, they knew they'd have to use African American skills, okay.  So he had her going around the country speaking to high schools in the South, from Texas all the way back to Florida and various other places.  And she came and spoke at my, my junior/senior high school.  And she painted a picture, what, what the future held in store for us if we could but get ourselves educated.  After that I used to, I used to--(laughter), I used to fantasize about being a, an able communicator.  She was the model that I heard, long before I ever heard [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.].  She was the model, but it was so much her communication skills as, as the truth she told.  I experienced what she told us.  She told us that in '39 [1939]--I'm sorry.  She told us that in thirty--'38 [1938], and lo and behold within, by the time '43 [1943] rolls around, and I go to the, and I go to the induction center, we have a test and--a enter--military entry-level test.  I scored high enough on that test to go to Officer Candidates School.  So I then, you know, I, and I kept reflecting back--I'll never forget taking that test and then going back over to the barracks, and then getting a call to come back over to the testing headquarters and being told that you qualify for Officer Candidates School.  You scored well enough to, to, to be--to go to Officer Candidates School.  I said, what's--yeah.  So we're gonna put you in that category, and we're gonna send you to Fort Knox, Kentucky, and when the next class for African--when the next class for officers comes up, you will qualify to go into it.  So I didn't--I then began to realize the truth of Ms. Bethune's speech that day.  And it, it--and when I, when I got sworn in as Assistant Secretary of Labor and sat down in that office, I thought three people.  I thought about my mother [Edna Miller Fletcher], my father [Andrew Fletcher] and Ms. Bethune.  Mama and the old man just thrilled to get an education.  And Ms. Bethune said, if you dare get one, you're gonna be used beyond your wildest imagination.
Story_ID: 17848
Speaker 1: When did you become interested in sports?  Was that like any kid interested in sports?
Speaker 2: Well, being raised around the military, you, you lose your options.  You're either gonna be interested in sports or music, one of the two.  When I was a kid coming up, in and around Fort Riley [Kansas] and Fort Leavenworth [Kansas], you're gonna be interested in one of the two.  You, you, you--and if either one, there will be people who are capable in both fields to teaching you.  So if you wanted to play baseball and wanted to pitch, there was a Ninth Cavalry pitcher, pitching team, the Tenth Cavalry pitching team, the Twenty-fourth Infantry pitching team which would teach you how to throw the ball.  If you wanted to be a second baseman, a third baseman, whatever, they were there to teach you.  If you wanted to be a musician, the Ninth Cavalry had a band, the Tenth Cavalry had a band, the Twenty-fourth Infantry had a band.  If you wanted to play an instrument, there was somebody there that would be tickled to death to teach you.  So whatever you were interested in--and, and basically, you know, kids coming up, they liked to play this, that or the other.  So you're gonna be exposed to somebody who not only can play it, but will teach you how to play it right, will teach you how to throw the ball right, teach you how to block right.  They would teach those things, as they had been taught.  And it's kind of interesting because these are young men and young women--well, they didn't have as many women in the military then, but these are young men who, in spite of their youth, wanted to pass it on to the next generation.  They didn't wait until they were in their late forties or early fifties to realize they needed to pass it on 'cause the minute they learned how to do it, they were eager to teach it to see how well they could teach somebody else to do it.  And, and have the old timers standing and watch them both.  So--.
Speaker 1: So you had, you--it was a nurturing environment?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: At the bases.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  You, you--to go back to the phrase, it takes a village, well, you were the military's kids.  In those days, as a kid coming up, you belong to the ninth, tenth, twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth infantry.  And, and they took personal responsi--any--and they would tell you, don't do what I do, son, but do what I tell you to do (laughter), and you'd go do it.  Don't, don't, don't mimic me downtown or over in--and, of course, the only places they could go in those days was to the speak easies, two, three blocks up to speak easies, the only place that black troops could go and the only place anybody else could go.  So as a kid coming up, you're gonna see all kind of wild behavior.  But it was interesting that there was a mix--and, and, in the midst of all that wild behavior because of the military thing, there was some consistency.  They, they knew when they had to do what they had to do and the reason they had to do it.  And when there was any freedom to do otherwise, many of them would take advantage of that, but they knew exactly what they were supposed to do and when they were to do it, how they were doing it, why they were doing it.  And they would teach you that.
Speaker 1: Now, so, the interest, so, so sports came, you know, was--?
Speaker 2: Just, just natural.
Speaker 1: It was natural, but when did it get recognized that you had athletic abilities?
Speaker 2: I was in the eighth grade at Junction City Junior/Senior High School [Junction City, Kansas], and I went out for the eighth grade basketball team and quickly made it.  I'd learned how to dribble a ball and all that good stuff out at Fort Riley [Kansas] (laughter), and down to Fort Sill [Oklahoma].
Story_ID: 17849
Speaker 1: And so when we moved up to, to Junction City [Kansas], the school system--let me divert for just a moment.  In the state of Kansas, a lot of people don't know this, the Civil War started in the state of Kansas, five years ahead of the attack on Fort Sumter [South Carolina].  That's why they called Kansas, Bleeding Kansas.  The war was already going on.  What they had in Kansas was a local option.  They had referendums.  And each county in Kansas could vote to see whether there'd be slavery or non-slavery.  So they had local options that became a part and parcel of the reason for bleeding Kansas.  The slavers would come over from Missouri and shot up any town that was dominated by non-slavers (laughter) all right?  They burned Lawrence [Kansas] to the ground for an example.  So I learned that, that, that history in Kansas.  One of the blessings of going to Kansas, going to school in Kansas, particularly at that time in my life, was to really get an understanding of how confused this country is over race and the difficult time they had trying to make a decision as to whether, one, we were members of the human family to begin with and then two, if we were, then how much humanity (laughter) were they to dispense to us.  You learned that.  In eighth grade history in Kansas, you actually learned how confused this country, and still is, over race, all right.  Now, what was interesting is, if a county voted to have slavery, then it had a local option and anybody, any black caught in that county was treated as if he was caught in Mississippi.  If the county voted non-slave, then, then you were treated as, as any other America.  Then a local option meant then, when they finally--the war is over, and they're finally getting ready to have schools, the local option meant that if a county voted to have the--segregated school system and were willing to pay for it, via their property taxes, then from K [kindergarten] through twelve, that county school system was segregated.  The next county over could vote to have an integrated school system, and whatever they were willing to pay for.  So if they were willing to pay for it up to elementary school, then the elementary schools were segregated.  The junior high schools were desegregated and high schools were desegregated.  So Kansas was a patch--was a patchwork thing.  I--Fort Riley is in Gary County [Kansas].  Gary County voted to have integrated school system from K through twelve. So even though I was in the state of Kansas for, for, for my--from the eighth grade through, I had an integrated school experience.  Thus--and it was totally integrated.  By that, I mean you could play all three sports.  A quick example, a couple of miles up the road where Topeka [Kansas] was, Shawnee County [Kansas], they, they, they did not--they voted only--and a lot of people don't know this, 'Brown v. School Board of Topeka' [1954] was to desegregate four elementary schools, not the junior high schools.  The junior high schools were integrated.  The high school was integrated.  What was segregated was the four elementary schools.  That's what they voted to have, all right.
Story_ID: 17850
Speaker 1: To get back to your sports question, it really was confusing because wherever I went to play high school, junior school or high school basketball, if it was in a county that had voted for total segregation, then I got, I caught it.  The minute I stepped out on that floor, I was called every kind of (laughter), of coon, you could think of.  The next town over, where they didn't have that kind of situation, I did not get any special treatment.  Point, you had to be good to make the team, and you had to be emotionally secure to keep playing a quality game regardless of the town you were going to.  If you're going to McPherson to play basketball, football or run on the track team, McPherson, Kansas had voted to have a segregated school system from K [kindergarten] to twelve.  So when you showed up, when the bus showed up, and you got off, there would be an (laughter), in my case, there'd be effigy hanging (laughter), hanging.  Do a number on him (laughter), right.  Next time, it would be different.  So--and, of course, sports then was--as it is today, sports then was the way to stand out, okay.  Sports then was also the way to be convinced that nobody can help you be good.  If you're good, you're good 'cause you have honed your skills to the point that you are good.  You are above average, if not superior.  In my case, I honed my skills in football to the degree that I was the first high school black to make an all-state team in the history of the state of Kansas.  I was voted an all-state end and an all-state running back in 1942 at Junction City Junior/Senior High School.  Now, most of the teams we played against, about half the teams we played against didn't even allow blacks on the field, let alone on the team, 'cause that, that's sort of--that's the kind of environment that I had, for want of another term, my formative years in, those in, in late junior high.  From 1938 we, we--I finished the spring semester in Oklahoma City in '38 [1938] and, and in the fall semester, I was in Junction City.  And I finished junior high and high school there.
Story_ID: 17851
Speaker 1: Were there any subjects you were interested in or things, other people that may have influenced you or--you know, you mentioned teachers, but I'm just--is there anything that was sort of--?
Speaker 2: I can identify teachers more than anything else, the teachers that made me think they were interested in my learning.  I had, I had one teacher, Mr. Clough (ph.), whom I never forgave for teaching the--Dred Scott decision.  I'll never the day.  Eighth grade, Kansas history is taught in the eighth grade, the first blush of Kansas history.  Clough seemed to take great delight in looking at me.  Now, maybe it was me and my sensitivity.  But he seemed to take great delight in looking at me and reading the phrase from that case, "a black man has no rights, and a white man has the respect".  And he, it looked like every time that was, that only--we only discussed it for about a week, but it looked like--and I was, there were only three other blacks in the class, two girls and myself, and it just looked he took great delight.  I'd made the basketball team, incidentally (laughter).  And it seemed to me--now, maybe I was reading in, but it seemed to me he, he was less than pleased that I'd made the club.  And it seemed to me further that he took great delight in discussing this, this, this right thing with reference to whether a black man had any rights that a white man had to respect.  And I might add that, that, that decision and his attitude and behavior that, that I read into is the driving force that caused me to, to one day be the father of affirmative action, okay.
Speaker 1: Now, so, in--?
Speaker 2: My, my other teachers, I might just add, Ms. Besack (ph.) who was a science teacher, she pulled it out of me, so much so that I just, didn't just stop at biology.  I then took botany and took zoology.  And I think I took those subjects--I know I took those subjects, more or less because she showed a special in, in me.  It appeared, you know, and she made me prove to myself that I could get Bs in, in scientific courses.  I might just add that I had probably one of the greatest high school coaches anywhere in the country at the time, my football coach.  His name was Henry Schenk (ph.).  Henry had a system that was, I wished was implemented today.  Every Monday, when you come to practice, when the practice was over, you got an eligibility card.  And that eligibility was for your basic courses, English, math and history and whatever.  And there were four boxes on that elementary card--on that eligibility card, a box for A, a box for B, a box for C (laughter), and a box for D.  If you got two checks in D, you lost your game uniform (laughter) all right?  You had to at least get a C or a B to keep our game uniform.  And he would tell you, "I cannot build my team around somebody who may not be eligible".  So if you want to play basketball and football and run on my track team, then you are going to stay eligible, and in order to stay eligible, you've got to get along with your teachers because every Thursday, you've got to put your eligibility card in the eligibility box.  And it hung right there by the gym (laughter), all right.  Yeah, you got to put--and at the--and they'd take those eligibility cards and, and if you were about to be ineligible, he took your, your first team practice jersey away from you.  You'd, you'd go out on the field.  When you get out there, if you were not likely to play that Friday, you--he'd call you and say take that, that first-team jersey off and put on this maybe jersey (laughter).  So there's no playing around.  You're gonna make sure you study hard enough to at least get a C and if you studied hard enough to at least get a C then you're probably gonna get a B. So, I just wished they were doing that today 'cause--I don't--he'd tell you, "I don't care how good you are. You will not play on my club"--and you better start playing good as a sophomore because in the junior and senior year that's when you wanna be a first teamer, a regular. "You better start doing good as a sophomore or I'm not going to count on you as a first-teamer when you become a junior and senior." He only lost one game the season the year I was there. One a season. And went from there to University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] and was going to recruit blacks to play at KU and one of the reasons they didn't keep him after the war is they didn't want blacks playing at KU so they took the head coaching job away from him.
Story_ID: 17852
Speaker 1: You graduated from high school [Junction City Junior/Senior High School, Junction City, Kansas].  What was the next move at that point?  Were you, the draft?
Speaker 2: Military.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the first class of, of--Congress passed the bill to draft eighteen-year olds and just before the Christmas break in, in 1942, I guess it was.  Yeah, '42 [1942], and the understanding was that any kid that was in his senior year could finish high school and then go into the military.  So I turned eighteen on December 22, 1942, and was drafted in August.
Speaker 1: And you then--where did you--?
Speaker 2: Fort Knox, Kentucky, okay, where I took my basic training and proceeded to make the football team at Fort Knox.  I walked on the field and watched them practice and asked the coach if I could play--and remember now, this is Fort Knox, Kentucky, and a slave state.  (Laughter) He looked at me, and he says, "Where'd you go to school?"  I told him, "Junction City Junior and I was all-state."  He said, "You see those guys out there?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "They went to"--he began to name as some of them run by, said, "He's from Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  See that one over there, he's from the University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania."  And then, and named them all.  He said, "These guys all went to college and that guy over there played with the Philadelphia Eagles" and said, "There's just, there's no room for a high school football player out here."  I said, "Okay."  So I went back over the barracks.  I listened to them practice for a couple of nights.  Then, then I walked back over.  And he looked and saw me and says--I said, "I'll tell you what I'll do.  You need somebody to hold the blocking dummies and put on the blocking apron.  If you need some cannon fodder, I'm gonna play college ball when I come out of the Army, so I think I could learn a lot by, by being your cannon fodder.  So rather than have your regular players wear those blocking aprons and risk getting hurt, I'll wear it.  I ain't gonna, you know."  He said, "Okay."  So he gave me a, he gave me a uniform, and he soon discovered that I was pretty hard to knock down.  I weighed two hundred thirty-five pounds then.  I had muscle in my ears.  I had been an ice man before I went into the military, and I could pick up three hundred pounds, a cake of ice, and walk up steps with it.  So when he saw how hard it was for them to knock me down, and he noticed the footwork and the ability to stay on my feet, and, and he asked me to warm up the, the passers.  So I had to go out and they'd throw me passes on the--then we played the first game, he said, "Now, you're not gonna get to play, but would you like to have a game uniform and sit on the bench with the players?"  I said, "Sure."  So he gave me a game uniform.  And we played Camp Campbell [now Fort Campbell, Kentucky].  Camp Campbell had a, a roaring team made up of some good pro and college ball players.  And for the first quarter and most of the second quarter, they were about to run us out the stadium, and about six minutes before the halftime, I saw him and the--I saw the line coach and the head coach talking to each other and looking down at me and looking up at the clock, and they talked, and they--.  Finally, they said, "Come here."  I said, "Me?"  I thought that's who they talking about.  They said, "You" (laughter).  So I went, said "You think you can help us keep them out of the end zone for the next six minutes?"  I said, "I think so." He said, "Give it a go."  And so I went out, and the first play, they looked at--you, you should have heard the hoots.  You should have heard the hoots (laughter).  The stadium was packed.  And when I went running out on that field, you should have heard the hoots.  It was something, and the quarterback in the huddle on the other team looked up to see, and when he looked, said, "Oh, boy, look what we got."  And, of course, they coming my way on the first play, and they did.  And they picked up about nine yards that time, and they went the other way.  And then they got ready to come back.  And--.
Speaker 1: Hold on one second. Nine yards, I think that's what you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, they gained nine yards.
Speaker 1: Oh, they gained nine yards.
Speaker 2: And then they ran the other way, and I knew they were coming back my way.  They, they were setting up a play to come back my way.  And, of course, I knew all the signals that they were coming my way.  So when they snapped that ball the second--the next time, I shot across and hit the pulling guard and the pulling tackle, and knocked them both down and made the--in football, we call it the belly, made the ball carrier belly deep to try to outrun me.  And you see, I could run the 220 [yards] in twenty one [seconds] flat.  And so I just let him belly until he got in the middle of it, and then I took--unloaded on him.  The ball went one (laughter), and his helmet went the other (laughter).  And I ran off the field.  We recovered, I ran off the field, I'm going off the field, and they waved me back.  And I said, "I don't know the plays.  What is he doing?"  And the quarterback came, came running in and said, "I'll tell you what to do."  And he called the play, and then he'd tell me what my pattern was.  And I was playing end.  And he'd tell me, banana out, Z out, Z up, post, and, of course, I knew what those pattern--those words meant.  So he called a banana out, which is a deep--you know how a banana is shaped, which is going up the middle and then it's kind of peeled.  I went roaring up the middle.  I know he ain't gonna throw me the ball.  And I did the peel, and when I did the peel, I looked (laughter), and here comes the ball (laughter).  I caught it and ran a touchdown.  From that point on, I made the club.  And, and the problem I had was I wanted to be an officer, my--since my dad [Andrew Fletcher] was in the military, and I had passed the--scored high enough to go to OCS [Officers Candidate School], I wanted to be an officer.  But special services company of Fort Riley--Fort Knox wanted me to stay there through the whole war.  They wanted me to play basketball, wanted me to play football and wanted me to play in the band.  I never would have gone overseas if I'd agreed.  But I was also told when my--my unit had to move to California.  And I was also told that if I--when I got to California, they had some slots open to go to OCS, officers candidate school.  So if I stayed with my unit when I got to California, they'd put me in, in OCS.  So I waved Kentucky goodbye, Fort Knox, goodbye and went to California, only to get there and for them to cancel all those slots in OCS, cancelled them all.  And I ended up having to go overseas with my regular unit.  But my goal, I, I was dying to go back and, and give my father the privilege of saluting me (laughter), as an officer.  It didn't happen.  It didn't happen.
Story_ID: 17853
Speaker 1: You went, went to Europe, right?
Speaker 2: I went to Europe, sailed out with the biggest convoy that ever left, Miles Standish in, in March of, of '44 [1944].  And Sugar Ray Robinson was supposed to be in that convoy, and he had been denied the opportunity to use the telephone in, in Birmingham, Alabama after he and George Gainford and Joe Louis and some others had raised millions of dollars in bonds doing exhibition fights.  And when he went to the train station to use the phone, they wouldn't let him use it.  At that point, he walked away and went back to Harlem [New York], and they gave him a discharge without honor.  But he was supposed to be in my convoy.  And he didn't go, but we, we sailed to, to England.  I landed in Glasgow, Northern--up in Scotland.  And then we worked our way down to, to Crewe, England, which is actually in Scotland, just on their--and was stationed there until--and that's when I got my trumpet out.  I got my trumpet out and got to playing in a special seventeen, special service unit.  I'll explain that.  When we had so many thousands and thousands of troops laying on shore in, in the British Isles waiting for the invasion, there was no entertainment for them.  So Glenn Miller was brought in the--brought into the military, and he recommended to [Dwight D.] Eisenhower, who was the commanding chief over there, said, "With all these troops over here, there's got to be some, some musicians that played in college and university bands and high school bands.  And what we need to do is put together some provisional special service companies and put together some band and, and entertainers right out of the military to entertain these troops laying around."  So at the base I was located at, which was near Nottingham [England]--well, actually, it started in Crewe, the Crewe castle, I started playing with a small group.  In fact, it was an engine--it was an artillery outfit.  There was a black artillery outfit called "The Singing Sixty-Nine", that were excellent in, in firing their, in firing their weapons.  And someday, somebody's gonna tell the story about them.  But you could always tell when they were shooting because of the style they had.  But anyway, they had a, a combo and a, and a choir, and they sang all over England.  And I first hooked with--hooked up with them by, at a practice one day.  They needed somebody to play the bass, and I knew enough, four chords on the bass, so I picked it up and started playing.  The next thing I knew, I was traveling with them.  When I went down to the next base, by this time, Glenn Miller had convinced Eisenhower that they ought to hold auditions at all those military bases where they had troops and put together some provisional bands and orchestras.  So I joined seventeen special services, which was a unit that we were stationed just outside Darby, England.  And it was a seventeen-piece band, and we put together a forty-five floor show.  And we played hospitals and USOs [United Service Organizations] in the morning.  Well, we played the hospitals in, in the morning and early afternoon, played USOs in the, in the evening, and then we broke up into combos and played defense factories.  We played for an hour for the shift that was going on at midnight, and an hour for the shift that came off at midnight.  Then we went to the nearest base, slept (laughter), and got up the next day and did it all over again until it was time for the invasion.  Then when it was time for the invasion, they took my instrument away from me (laughter), and put me back in my unit.  And we went over, but in both cases--my ability to, in athletics served me well when I first went into the military.  That ability and the ability to play, play the trumpet served me pretty well when I first went into military.
Story_ID: 17854
Speaker 1: You served in one of General [George] Patton's--?
Speaker 2: We--I was in, I was in the Red Ball Express in General Patton's Third Army.  And we, we went in D plus three.  Some went in D three, others went in D four.  D four means invasion day plus four days.  And we couldn't get our trucks in to, to move things around.  So we joined in grave registration.  And those graves you see at the Omaha beachhead, we put them in.  And what happened, they don't tell you this, but the invasion plan was, was--very little of it, if any of it, went right.  When those landing barge gates fell down, they were supposed to step off into four feet of water.  Instead, they stepped off into eight and ten feet.  So most of those graves you see are not people who got shot on the beach.  Many of those graves you see are people who drowned and were, were, were put in, put in those graves.  About, at least half of them drowned.  They didn't get shot.  They drowned, and the bodies washed ashore.  And we couldn't get our equipment to shore so they temporarily assigned us to grave registration, which mean that we had the grave registration units whose specialty was burying the--we helped them get those bodies in and buried them until July the Fourth.  On July the Fourth, Patton's units were all ready to roll.  And we kicked off on July the Fourth and started rolling and didn't stop till we got down to Metz [France].  We got down to Metz in the early part of November.  And we were so far ahead of the armies on the north and south that they were afraid the Germans would pull a pincer movement and capture the whole Third Army.  So in order to stop the Third Army, to keep it from rolling, they took our gas away from the Red Ball Express (laughter).  We, not only could we not haul any gas up to the tanks, we couldn't get any gas to move our trucks.  So they took our gas.  Thus, we couldn't move any gas to the front for the tanks.  We couldn't move any shells to the front for the tanks.  We couldn't move any ammunition to the front.  We couldn't move any, any food or anything else they needed on the front.  That's the only way they stopped--Patton had decided he was gonna beat the Germans--he was gonna beat the Russians to, to Berlin [Germany], against what the politicians had decided.  And if they'd let him alone, we'd a got there.  We'd a beat them (laughter) or either got captured.  That's what they were afraid of.  They were afraid--they, [Dwight D.] Eisenhower and the top command were afraid that the Germans would let us get so far out ahead and then come in, which is what they tried to do at Baston (ph.) is to do, do a pincer movement and capture that whole army.  And they didn't manage to pull it off.  But that, that was, that was quite an experience.  And that's the first time they let the black tankers fight.  Now, the black tankers had, had played nursemaid to those tanks all over North Africa.  And then they would sail them around and landed them in, in France and, and wouldn't let them fight.  They didn't let them fight until we got down to Metz.  When we got to Metz, the casualties were so high, we lost twenty--had twenty-seven thousand casualties at Metz before it fell.  At that point, they finally decided to let the black tankers fight.  And they had a black tank, destroyer's tank division and, and, and another heavy tank division.  They rolled into Metz and took it like it was a candy store.  And they haven't told that story yet, haven't told it yet.
Story_ID: 17855
Speaker 1: You had some heroic efforts as part of your time there [fighting in Europe during World War II], didn't you?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't nothing.  You know, you just, you just, you just do what you have to do, (laughter) all right.  And--.
Speaker 1: Did I read wrong that you were denied a Purple Heart?  Is that or is that--?
Speaker 2: Yes, that, that, that was the case because they--when I got hit, the night I got hit, they don't recall the--they asked me who, who, who shot you?  And the reason they could never make up their mind is because black troops had no love for a black MP [military police] (laughter), all right.  And neither did the white troops.  For me to be a combat MP was asking for, was asking for it.  So we could never decide who actually shot me.  And since I've never made any stink about it, I just said, "To hell with it, give me my disability, and I'm going on to school."  I never put on any kind of campaign to get it.  I said, to hell with it.  You know I'm shot (laughter), okay.  And you do know it was in the, in a combat zone.  But if you want to make a issue as to whether I was shot by another black troop because I was an MP or whether I was shot by a white troop and not a German, I'm not gonna make a issue out of it.  To hell with it.  I, I'll take my discharge and get out of here.
Speaker 1: So you were an MP at that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a combat MP.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's one of the most dangerous jobs there at that time because blacks did not want to be arrested by a black MP.  Whites didn't, and I'm in, the Ninth, the, the, the Third Army, Patton's Third Army was made up of Arkansas, Mississippi (laughter) and Texas, Alabama.  (Laughter) Those white troops didn't want to see no black man with a MP badge on.  Likewise, blacks didn't want to see one 'cause the attitude then was that you, you had sold them out.  You had went--so you, you, you never really knew.  You, you carried your life around in your hand.  You really never knew who was or wasn't with you.  Now, my little record was that I'd sell them--I would take the largesse--blacks were selling all kinds of food to the, to, to people, which was illegal.  They, they would, they would take food from the, from the depots and sell it.  In fact, they almost sold everything in Paris [France] (laughter).  They almost didn't get beyond Paris (laughter), all right.  And so, I, I would, I would take their largesse and tell him, get rolling; get out of here.  I wouldn't take them down to the MP station and, and arrest 'cause I knew what was gonna happen.  See, in those days, if they caught you doing that, you could get--you faced the firing squad at five, at 5:00 in the morning.  They'd kill you, all right.  And so I, I--ain't no way in the world I was gonna turn a brother in for, for that sort of thing, all right.
Speaker 1: Now, you were stationed where?  Over in--I mean exactly where in Europe--?
Speaker 2: In, in--.
Speaker 1: In France?  Was it France?
Speaker 2: France, France.
Speaker 1: It wasn't in Germany at all?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I--just France.  I got hit before we got well into Germany.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But I stationed over in a little town called Touls, France and at one time spent about a month down at Metz [France], after Metz fell, spent a, spent a month down at Metz.  But Metz and Touls are the, are the two communities that stand out in my mind.  But most of the time, remember as a, as a trucker, you--or as an MP in a trucking unit, you're not stationed very long at any place.  You, you get on the truck and head where you have to be to be the traffic cop (laughter), you come, you come.  So stationed in the sense of being at one base, the best they had there was probably your paperwork at any given base.  Your, your, what we call the paperwork to know where you were at any given time.  And then they moved you on.  So I was constantly moved around.  I was, I was, I was not assigned in the sense that you'd be assigned to one given unit.  I was attached.  And I would be attached here for a few moments, a week or two, a month or two, and then attached somewhere else, wherever I was needed in terms of keeping the traffic flow system rolling, wherever I was needed, that was my job.
Speaker 1: Now, when--you served how long, sir?
Speaker 2: I served from August till, till--August of--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Of forty--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Of '43 [1943].
Speaker 1: To?
Speaker 2: To October the 19 of '45 [1945].  I was discharged from Fitzsimmons [Army Medical Center, Denver, Colorado].
Speaker 1: I see.  Now, when you got out, what did you--is that when you went to Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: When I got out--.
Speaker 1: Were you--?
Speaker 2: --I was in, I was in--I had to go to Denver for the final operation.  All chest wounds were transferred to Denver.  All, all bone wounds and that sort of stuff, broken bones were sent out to Salt Lake City [Utah].  And I forget what else was sent to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Since I was hit in the chest, I was sent to, to Fitzsimmons for my final operation.  And they, they--I had a, I had a hernia that, and the bones, the muscle wouldn't knit to my hip bone.  And so they wanted to operate one more time to see if they could get that muscle to, to knit.  And it did.  So I, I was operated on there, and then after that I got my discharge from Fitzsimmons.
Story_ID: 17856
Speaker 1: And then you did what after that [after being discharged from the military]?
Speaker 2: After that I, I actually went out to Denver University [sic, University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] to enroll and go to school under the G.I. Bill.  See, my mother [Edna Miller Fletcher] and father [Andrew Fletcher], believe it or not, my old man was at the auxiliary guard in Lowry Field Air Force Base [Denver, Colorado] when I landed.  And when I went to the hospital he and Mama, my mother was, was then cooking at the, at a major hotel in downtown Denver called the Brown Palace [Hotel].  And they started preaching to me to go to college right then and there, to, to--when you get out.  Well, when, when I got through with my, when I got through with all the operations, had operated on me one more time, and they wanted to discharge me without any disability.  And I refused to, I refused to, to accept that.  And I had an older person tell me, make them give you at least 10 percent disability.  Don't let them push you out and tell you, you as good as new.  That's what they gonna try to do.  And that's what they tried to do.  But I had a way of, of taking advantage of, of an illness that they hadn't cured.  So I let that illness flare up (laughter).  And they finally decided the way to get him out of here is to give him that 10 percent.  So they gave me that 10 percent.  Then when I got out, I wanted to go to Denver University, but we couldn't find any place to live.  I had, had two--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: You had gotten married--had you gotten married by that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  I got married when--I, I graduated on June the twenty--on, on--I'm sorry, on May the twenty-third.  And as soon as I got my draft papers, I married, all right.  And so we had, we--at the end of the War--Mary was in family way when, when we married.  And so when the War was over, there are no houses for returning vets with their families.  And either you stayed with your parents or you couldn't find a place to live.  We couldn't find a place to live in Denver.  And so we had to go back to Kansas.  When I got back to Kansas, we lived with, with her parents.  My parents had moved already.
Story_ID: 17857
Speaker 1: So when we got back to Kansas, I got an opportunity to go to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] and play ball in the Big Ten [Conference].  And Indiana wanted me, University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign] wanted me, and, and University of Ohio [Athens, Ohio] wanted me.  And I decided to opt for Indiana U.  And I, I--we packed up the kids and moved to Indiana U or moved to Bloomington only to find out that, that Bloomington was further to right in terms of race than Biloxi, Mississippi.  And the only integrated spot on the map there (laughter) was Indiana University and it wasn't that, that integrated.  So I practiced--I made the club.  I practiced there for, for two weeks, couldn't find a place to live.  In the meantime, I got a call from my high school coach, who had played at Indiana, Bob Briggs.  And he called me.  He said, "How do you like Bloomington?"  And when I told him, he said, "That's what I thought."  He said, "Why don't you come on back to Kansas and go to school?"  I said, "Bob, I can't, you know, I can't play at K-State [Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas].  I can't play at KU [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas], they don't let blacks play in the Big Six [Conference]."  Fate said, there's something more important than playing football in the big sense--Big Six, Washburn University [Topeka, Kansas] where you will get one of the finest educations that money can buy at Washburn.  Why don't you come back?  I've arranged for you to go--if you want it, want to do it, I've arranged for you to go to Washburn.  And trust me, you will, you'll, when it's all said and done, you will be grateful for the fact that you went Washburn.  So I just packed up my family, and got in the car and drove back and visited the campus and en-enrolled there.  And just as he said, (laughter) it's the best decision I ever made.  They told me when I enrolled, we're not a football power, and you're not gonna make us one, but when you leave here, you will be able to do what your degree implies.  And that's, that, that, that's what happened.  I made a little All-American there, and put the, put the school on the map anywhere as a small college football power.  But my instructors in all of my classes made sure that, if they put a B on that paper, I'd earned a B (laughter); put a A, I'd earned an A (laughter).  So I, I went through Washburn and graduated--my first year was quite a struggle.  I couldn't write well enough to, to hit a home run.  And I had a, a English teacher there who insisted that, as well as I could speak, there's no reason I should be failing any classes or be marginal cause I couldn't write.  So she insisted that I come to--if I'd agree to come to her house three times a week for about six weeks, she could have me up to the point where I could write well enough to sound like I was a college student, to read like I was a college student (laughter), okay.  She said, "You sound like a college student, but you don't read like one."  And we, we're not gonna grade you on oral tests.  We're gonna grade you on what you can put on a piece of paper.  And you must learn to write, so I did, and sure enough, it didn't take six weeks.  She got it done in, in three.  And the next thing you know, I'm writing papers that were getting by in history, getting by in philosophy and began to learn to enjoy writing.
Speaker 2: So you, you've said--you had said that Washburn was one of your best decisions?
Speaker 1: Greatest decision I ever made, greatest decision I ever made.
Speaker 2: The small classes too?
Speaker 1: Small classes, the teachers knew my name.  I knew their name.  They knew my strengths.  They knew my weaknesses.  They knew how to guide and direct me and teach me so that I could, not only enhance my strengths, but diminish the impact of, of my weaknesses.  And they had a lot to do with my beginning to enjoy, not only reading but enjoy trying to write and, and realizing that what you put on a piece of paper is what's up here (laughter), whatever you intended, whether you intended to tell the truth, you know, it's up in here.  And if you intended to tell other than the truth, it's up here.  So once I, I learned that, then my grade took off, and I missed being, what do they call it?  Who's Who for Academic Achievement, I missed it by two grade points my sophomore year and made it with room to spare in my junior and senior year, and worked forty hours a week and on the weekend in doing it.
Speaker 2: And you, and your degree was in political science?
Speaker 1: Political science and education and, and sociology, minor in sociology.
Story_ID: 17858
Speaker 1: Why did you major in political science, do you--?
Speaker 2: Because of what I just got through talking about.  I began to realize, I learned--.
Speaker 1: It wasn't like you were politically involved at this point?
Speaker 2: Well, I joined the Collegiate Young Republicans in my sophomore year at Washburn University [Topeka, Kansas].  I learned then that the reason Kansas wasn't in the slave column was because of politics.  It wasn't because Kansas had this sainted, whatever you want to call it.  That had nothing to do with it.  The fact of the matter is, politics and politicians kept Kansas out of the slave state--out of the slave column.  As a result of Kansas not being in the slave column, I had opportunities as a kid coming up, all the way into college, I had opportunities that kids in the next state down, Oklahoma or the next state over, Arkansas, or the next state directly over, Missouri, didn't have.  And it was a political decision.  It had nothing to do with goodwill (laughter), it had nothing to do with any--it was politics.  And I, and then we had some old timers.  For an example, Elijah Scott, the lead lawyer on 'Brown v. School Board, Topeka' [1954].  Elijah Scott and his three sons all went into the--Elijah didn't go into World War II, but he did in World War I, Elijah Scott met us when we came home.  The man who filed 'Brown v. School Board, Topeka', the lawyer that filed the first case, met us when we came home.  And along with our parents, telling us to go to college, Elijah Scott insisted we go to college.  And he made a point of telling us, when World War I was over, a bonus and that was it.  World War II, you get a chance to go to college, now, whatever you do, you make sure you go to school.  And if he heard one of us was gonna drop out of school, he'd drop whatever he was doing, come and get us, and say "What you--how come you're getting out--I heard you're getting ready to quit school, boy."  (Laughter) And we'd say, "Yeah, my money is short, and I got these kids."  He would toil and wheel and got to the state house and walk right in the governor's office and say "You got enough jobs here to hire anybody you want.  Put that boy in--give him a job.  I don't care what he does.  Give him a job."  Then he'd come back and tell us, "You get down to the state house and you go hither, thither and yon, and they--the governor's already called the highway department and told them to hire you or he's already called the vehicle department and told them to hire you.  He's already called the health, whatever it--and you'd go down there."  He wouldn't let us, he would not let any of us veterans, if he knew about it, there's no way he'd let us quit school.  You just--and, and he made the point of telling us, you know, the boys and girls you're going to college with are gonna run Kansas one day.  And you're gonna meet them on that college campus, and they're gonna meet you.  And when they become the, the administrator for health and human services, when they become the administrator for the highway department, when they become the administrator for this, that and the other, you will know them on a first-name basis, and they'll know you on a first-name basis.  And you will have gotten your education in the same classes, from the same teachers that they go theirs.  And so he made us understand the value of getting to know people in their developmental years as they got to know us.  And they--you didn't see it then, but it became clear then, in spite of our color, if we performed in class, they would respect us--getting back to that word respect.  They would respect us because they had witnessed our performance in the same classes that they were in, and in some classes we got better, made better grades than they did.  So he would say, "When they take over state government, you will, you, you won't be wandering in there, wondering who they are, and they won't, when they see your name on the visitor's list, they won't be wondering who you are.  And you then will be able to have the impact that you got to have on Kansas government."  He said, "Remember, now, you live in Kansas, not Washington, D.C.  And the policies, practices and procedures that the Kansas state government authorizes is the ones that you're gonna be living under as long you stay in Kansas.  So it's important that you know them."  Now, how important was it?  We got a Fair Employment Practice Commission initiated in Kansas in 1952, a full twelve years ahead of the federal government.  And the black population in Kansas was only 4 percent (chuckle), all right.  And both houses were both Republican and the governor's office was Republican.  We got Republicans in the House, Republicans in the Senate and a Republican governor to sign off on creating the Kansas Fair Employment Practices Commission.  And notice, I said, fair employment practice.  We didn't get carried off about social justice.  We said, fair employment.  And it was created in 1952.  And when it was time to create the federal government's EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], they came to Kansas--[Dwight D.] Eisenhower, who was the President, when the debate started, said, "Send those Kansas Republicans in here to help convince Republicans from the states, in Nebraska, Republicans from the states of Iowa, Colorado, Missouri and various--send them in here so that they will be meeting with Senator (unclear).  They will be meeting with, with, with Senator Allen, and those conservative Republican senators who are not pleased over this, but they are looking.  And they see that Kansas state already has a Fair Employment Practice Commission.  So they sent for us to come in and walk the halls.  When Roy Wilkins and, and, and all of that NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] crowd of that era, who were staunch Democrats, couldn't get nothing out of the conservative Republicans from Indiana to Colorado, they sent for us.  And we would come in with proof positive.  There's the Kansas Fair Employment Practice Commission.  Here's the history of how we got it done.  And here's what its impact is.  And we had more to do with changing the votes from congressmen and, and senators from Indiana to Colorado and from, from Kansas and actually, Oklahoma too, from Oklahoma all the way up to, to Iowa and the Dakotas.  We came back, and we were the ones that walked the halls and, and, and lobbied those guys when, when, when Democrats couldn't even get inside the door.  And it was based on experience.
Story_ID: 17859
Speaker 1: Now, why did you choose to join the Republican Party?
Speaker 2: If you were in Kansas, if you weren't a Republican--a Democrat couldn't get elected dog catcher (laughter), okay.  It was planned--we were told by [Elijah] Scott and others, you know, if, if you--if the Republican Party is gonna run Kansas, you'd better not only know Republicans, you had better be a part of the machinery.  So I was vice chairman of the Collegiate Young Republicans on the campus at Washburn [University, Topeka, Kansas] in my sophomore year.  Then when I graduated, I became vice chairman of the--of the Shawnee County Young Republicans.  And, and, and after that I became vice chairman of the senior party.  In 1954, I became Chairman of the Kansas--Vice Chairman of the Kansas Senior Republican Party and elected, and played a key role in carrying seventeen counties that elected Fred Hall, governor of the State of Kansas.  And Fred Hall, among other things, signed off on the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission].  Now, if I had been a Democrat, he never would have signed that (laughter).  The [Kansas] House [of Representatives], again, the House Republican, [Kansas] Senate Republican, if you're gonna get them, you'd better be a part of them.  You're not gonna stand outside screaming and hollering and shame them into doing what you done.  If you know you want it done, you'd better be one of them.
Story_ID: 17860
Speaker 1: You didn't ask this, but let me make sure that I drive this home.  Because we were effective, we tried to get [Dwight D.] Eisenhower to pass a bill creating the, the Civil Rights Commission before he got reelected.  We came back here and did our best to get him.  He said, no.  He wouldn't do that.  He'd gone as far as he was gonna go with the, with the Arkansas school thing, okay, desegregating that.  After the election, after he got elected, we put the full-court press on again and finally convinced him that the federal government ought to study racism.  We finally convinced him he ought to do it, us, plus some others.  But it was the Kansas delegation of young black Republicans that came back there, back here and convinced him that he ought to sign legislation creating the Civil Rights Commission.  Now, he agreed to do it provided we didn't ask for enforcement powers.  We pressed for enforcement powers, but we couldn't get it.  Now, he then signed the bill.  Now, the significance of signing that bill and a lot of brothers and sisters don't understand, this was the first time, signing that bill was the first time that the federal government in modern time in particular, that the federal government was admitting it had a race problem (laughter), now you see that.  Here's the federal government saying, we're going to create an entity to study this, this anathema called race.  Now, what was the benefit there?  One, it wasn't a P foundation, a non-profit entity trying to convince the government they had a problem.  It wasn't the Rockefeller Foundation.  It was none of those foundations.  Here is a federal government entity saying we need to acknowledge we have this problem, and let's see what its nature, its shape, etcetera, is.  He signed it in '57 [1957].  It became the law of the land.  We, we came back and worked it real hard to get it done, and he signed it.  And we used the fact that the we got the Kansas Fair Employment Practice Commission in existence in his home state to convince him that we ought to study it at the national level.  They agreed to do that, and after they agreed to do that, then here comes the riots in the '60s [1960s], okay.  And for the first time, the government studied the problem with its own agency, the Civil Rights Commission.  They were the ones that came out with the Kerner Re--they were the ones that, that worked with the Kerner [Commission] Report to see to it that it dealt with the problem.  Now, had it not been for that, then the chances of the '64 [1964] Civil Rights Act ever becoming the law of the land, it would not have happened.  The fact that the '64 [1964] Civil Rights Act became the law of the land is because a federal government agency called the Civil Rights Commission (chuckle), okay, worked with the Kerner Commission to put that report together and justified the need for a '64 [1964] Civil Rights Act.  A lot of, a lot of so-called knowledge civil righters don't know that.  That's how that happened.
Story_ID: 17861
Speaker 1: I want to talk about your football career--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --just in case you--just a little bit. 'Cause this is--so anyway, you, did you get recruited?  Tell me, you joined the--well, how--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, what happened, okay, okay, when I--.
Speaker 1: --'cause you came out, and I mean I'm just trying--?
Speaker 2: In my senior--in my, in my sophomore year [at Washburn University, Topeka, Kansas], I began to crank up the yardage as a ballplayer.  Now, remember that in World War II, there was only one National Football League, all right.  All of those military bases had football teams.  So when the war was over, Paul Brown, who put together the Cleveland Browns, Paul Brown and some other investors said, "Hey, there's room for another national--for another football league."  So he and a group of investors put together the American Football League.  The first wave of players from the American Football League, believe it or not, came from small colleges, small white colleges and small black colleges.  So here is the National Football League with practically no blacks in it at all and only recruiting primarily from the Big Ten [Conference] colleges and the Pacific Coast colleges and others.  Paul Brown and a group of new investors after the war, said, find all these guys that played (laughter) at these military bases, and let's put together another league.  So they put together what was the old, I call it the Old American, All American Conference.  And who was it?  San Francisco 49ers.  They didn't start out in the National League.  They were a part of the, the original American Football League.  San Francisco 49ers, the Los Angeles Dons, the Chicago Rockets which went out of business, the Buffalo Bills were a part of that.  The Boston Patriots were a part of that, the Brooklyn Dodgers were part of that, also, the New York Yankees were part of it, the Florida Seahawks, yeah, Florida Seahawks, and the Houston, Texas Rangers--no, no, no, the Oilers.  They've still got the name, the Houston, Texas Oilers, and others.  I was offered a--a contract at the end of my freshman year to join the Dons.  And I said, "Nah, I'm staying in school."  I had a good season my sophomore year.  At the end of the season, I was offered a contract, again by the Dons, and this time, by the Green Bay Packers.  Said, "Nah, I'm staying in school." [Elijah] Scott and them had convinced me, stay in school.  So at the end of my junior year, I got offers from, from the same clubs again, plus, the Winnipeg Blue Boomers, which was a Canadian club, to come play.  And I'd had a good year in my junior year, on the ground and pass receiving.  And (laughter) they had offered me $5,000--$5,000 (laughter).  The second time, the second time, they got up to eight thousand and the next time, it was ten thousand.  So I'm saying, if they'll offer me ten thousand at the end of my junior year, then it'll be a twenty thousand dollar offer, no less, at my senior year.  In the meantime, the scouts are coming.  Almost every time I played the scouts were coming to look (laughter).  I watched the phone.  I know it's gonna ring at the end of my junior year.  I was among the top--senior year, I was among the top ground gainers and pass receivers in small college football.  So I know this phone is gonna ring.  I sit there all of November and all of December and no phone rang.  Finally, between Christmas and New Year's the story broke, the leagues are merging (laughter).  And the Dons are going out of business and the Rams are picking up their, their players.  The 49--the 49ers are joining the National League.  The Chicago Rockets are turning their players over to the Chicago--Chicago had three clubs then.  They had the Chicago Bears and the Chicago Cardinals.  So they picked up the Rockets.  Anyway, there were a surplus of players on the market who all had anywhere from one to three years of pro experience.  So here I am coming out of college in 1950 with nothing but college experience and military experience.  Well, there was no market for my skills.  So the phone never did ring, and I just sit there and watched it.  Finally, I sent my kids out to visit with their grandmother, who lived in a little town called--just outside of [Lake] Elsinore [California], called Perris, California.  And when I got there, lo and behold, here's a great big banner--head--head story about the Rams practicing over in Redlands [California] where Redlands University [sic, University of Redlands] was.  And that was about thirty miles from Mama [Edna Miller Fletcher]--my mother's home.  So I got in the car, drove over and watched them practice for two days.  The third day I walked out, and Joe Stydahar was the head football coach.  And I said to Stydahar, "What's the chances of trying out?"  Kind of the same thing I did down in [Fort Knox] Kentucky (laughter).  I said, "What's the chances of trying out?"  He said, "Who are you?"  And I told him.  He said, "Oh, yeah, we got some numbers on you, but the one we were really interested in is Bill Litchfield.  You played against him down at Emporia [State University, Emporia, Kansas]."  I said, right.  He said, "Well, I'll tell you what.  You report tomorrow and get your health examination.  If you pass the health examination, then I'll issue you a uniform."  So he issued me a uniform, and so I was one of history's first walk-ons (laughter).  He issued me a uniform, and I played the entire exhibition season with the Rams.  And then they put me on waivers, and I was picked up by the Baltimore Colts to be the first black to play with the Colts.  And, of course, the, the reasons that both of them put me on waivers is the fact that I've got this scar that run from here to here, and he said, and they said, "We can't really build an offense around somebody whose, who has that particular wound."  So I never really got a chance to prove the extent to which I was skillful enough to play in, in the big leagues.  They, they said, "You know, your, your war injury is, is one that we can't build an offense around.  We can't build a pass attack around you.  You can run, you can catch.  You can do all that, but if you get hit real good, that'll be it."  And sure enough, I got hit real good, with Baltimore, and I hit one of those rubber sidelines, you know, those--the marker.  I hit the side of it, and broke those a loose and that was the end of my career.
Story_ID: 17862
Speaker 1: Now, you also said that it was, it was difficult, the team members, you know, traveling with the team--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, in those days, in those days, a lot of the clubs would have two blacks so they could room together (laughter), okay, and, and many, if not most of the clubs, were made up of boys from the South.  And the idea of, of having the camaraderie that they have now was, you know, like breaking an egg for the first time.  They just wasn't accus-accustomed to it.  Not so necessarily with the [Los Angeles] Rams.  The Rams, for reasons that I've really never sat down and analyzed, their, the welcome mat was, was, was wider and longer (laughter), so to speak.  And it didn't take long.  The minute you proved--I think it's a fair benchmark, the minute you proved you belonged there, there was a different level of, of camaraderie and respect.  If, if it appeared that, you know, you really didn't--and when I say, belong there, I mean your skills justified your being there, then the Ram, the Ram players would, would, would develop that camaraderie.  I'll give you an example, I'll give you a good example.  When we went down to play Houston, we played the Baltimore Colts--I'm sorry.  When we went down to play the Colts, an exhibition game, in, in Amarillo [Texas], we, black players, had to stay in private homes.  We couldn't stay in the, in the, in the hotel.  However, all team meetings were in the hotel on the top floor.  The Rams leased that top floor for all of our team meetings and tape and that sort of stuff.  They wanted our--there were five, five--six blacks with the Rams then.  They wanted us to use the freight elevator.  Don't (laughter) use the elevator in the lobby.  Use the freight elevator.  It will take you up to, the room on the top.  And please, don't come through the lobby.  Well, we decided (laughter) that we'd go through that lobby.  So we walked through the lobby and got on the elevators.  And when we got on the elevator, the elevator operator ran off and wouldn't touch it.  Now, in the meantime, we got on the elevator first, so we were in the back.  And as, as we got on the back of the elevator, many of the linemen, big two hundred and eighty pound (laughter)--ninety pound linemen, who were all white, got on last.  So when the manager came to insist that we get off.  He looked and said, you, you get--Gil Boulee (ph.), which was one of the toughest middle linebackers you ever want to see.  He was from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  He said, "Nah, we ain't gonna let them off" (laughter).  And by that time, the whole, everybody on the front, said, "Nah, they're not coming out.  They're our team.  We're not, they're not coming off."  He said, "Well, I'm not gonna move."  They said, "Well don't move it.  But they're not coming off."  So we stayed there.  We, we just stayed.  We wasn't about to get off anyway.  So we stayed there.  They went and got Joe Stydahar, and he was raising sand with Joe.  We told you to tell them not to come through the lobby.  We told them to tell you not to come in here.  And Joe looked in at that line and realized that's his first line, that's his first team line (laughter).  So, he said, why don't you take them on up and we'll, we'll, we'll take care of this when we get up.  So when we got upstairs, Joe's in a crack.  He doesn't know what, what, what, but he'd better not, he'd better not say anything that would, would diminish the impact of that incident.  So at that point, we began the--we began--now, I don't, I'm not sure any other club--maybe I'm wrong.  I wasn't on enough, but I'm not sure the players on any other club would have dug in the way, those, those white boys with the, with the, with the Rams.  Now, they'd just won a district title, and they'd just gotten beaten--I forget who beat them by a touchdown.  So this was a good strong defense, and they knew it in, in the league competition.  So that, that, that left a real impression on me.  And I have a great respect for those guys to this very day, but they, they dug in and said, no.  And it was, it was, it was bad because in the exhibition game that next night, we beat the Colts sixty-five to nothing (laughter).  If the game hadn't a ran, we'd still be running touchdowns (laughter).  That whole team was worked up, not just the blacks, the whole team was worked up.
Speaker 1: So now, when you--what year was it when you stopped playing then?
Speaker 2: I--.
Speaker 1: You stopped playing with the Baltimore Colts.
Speaker 2: I, I stopped with the Colts at the end of the '50 [1950] season, and then went up and, and took a shot with the Winnipeg Blue--not the Winnipeg Blue Bandits, but the Hamilton Tiger Cats, and again, my war injuries prevented me from being able to stay around.
Story_ID: 17863
Speaker 1: So you then came back to--?
Speaker 2: I came back, I came back to Kansas [after the end of his professional football career].
Speaker 1: Kansas.
Speaker 2: --thinking that all of this experience would equip me to be a high school football coach.  And so I enrolled at, at, K-State [Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas] to do some catch-up work so I could get me a teacher's certificate.  And during that period, I carried ice.  I was an ice man (laughter), although I'm college graduate (laughter), with some pro football.  The best job I could get was carrying ice.  But I carried ice throughout the day, and in the evening, I went over to K-State, which is only eighteen miles from Junction City [Kansas] and, and got my--did the work I needed to get my Kansas State teachers certificate.  And in those days, we had a problem because in Kansas in those days, they, the football coaches, athletic coaches had to teach an academic course.  And physical education was not considered an academic course.  So the problem with, with them preparing me to coach is that I'd have to teach an academic course.  And the problem was that there were white girls in the academic course (laughter), and they could not agree to have a black man teaching white girls.  So they kind of waived the requirement that I teach an academic course and let me fully qualify by doing my practice teaching in gym.  And then I, when I came out and, and got that, I went to apply for two or three coaching positions.  And one was in Effingham.  I'll never forget.  I went up to Effingham, Kansas to, to get a coaching job, and they were so startled, they didn't know what to do.  So they used that academic thing as an excuse to not give me the job.  And, and my--the guy that was a mascot on our football, who taped our hands (laughter), and he took theory, practice of coaching, and he got the job (laughter).  And I told him, he looked in the room and saw me, he said, "There's no point in me being here.  I'm gone.  You're gonna get it."  I said, "No, don't leave.  Make sure you go in for your interview."  Sure enough, they gave him the job, and he was so embarrassed over it, he didn't know what to do.  He said, "I used to tape that guy's ankles."  He was the one that taped his ankles and prepared them for the game.  He was All-State and a little All-American and he has some pro football behind him, but I get the job?  And all I was, was his mascot?  He, but he got the job.  So (laughter)--.
Speaker 1: So was this time, at this point, were you working as an entertainment booker or was that--?
Speaker 2: Well, no, that happened--.
Speaker 1: That happened in the service?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, when, when--once I couldn't--there's a piece in there you don't have.  Once I, it was evident I wasn't gonna get a coaching job, I did something else.  I learned to cut hair.  And so I went out to the nearest veterans hospital at, on the base at Fort Riley [Kansas], and became, learned how to barber.  So I (laughter) became a barber.  And I cut hair at military, at, at Fort Riley, at Winters, at the Fitz--Winters Veteran Hospital [Topeka, Kansas] and over at Camp Funston [Kansas]  I learned how to cut hair and did that for a while and also went back to carrying ice.  So, now, I carried ice and cut hair and cut hair and carried ice until it was evident I wasn't going anywhere.  And when it became evident that, that I could get caught up in that trap and never, and never get out of it, I went back and looked at my college experiences and a governor's race was coming.  And I had been a Collegiate Young Republican, and then went on to, to be a bonafide young Republican.  So I said, let me get back to Topeka.  So I packed up and moved my family back to Topeka and started--went by, down to see ole man [Elijah] Scott, the 'Brown vs. School Board of Topeka' lawyer.  He sat me down, and said, "Let's, let's analyze our skills.  Let's analyze your contacts.  Let's see where they are.  Let's see where all these guys that were in college with you when you were a young Republican, let's see where they are today at the state House [of Representatives] and (unclear), and let's get a look at who's running for governor."  And a young guy by the name of Fred Hall was running for governor.  And he said, "How would you like to go into Fred's campaign?"  I said, "That sounds good, but how long gonna get paid."  He said, "Don't worry about it.  Let's see, you'll meet Fred, and let's see how it goes."  So I met Fred, and I liked him right away.  And then he told me, he said, you know, Fred is behind a move to get the Fair Employment Practice Commission initiated in Kansas.  He was, Fred was the lieutenant governor, and he had set the stage for it to happen.  So, he said go over to Alf Landon.  Now, Alf Landon owned, Alf Landon, who lost the presidency, owned the Topeka television station and--.
Story_ID: 17864
Speaker 1: So you were saying Alf Landon, when he took you over?
Speaker 2: Yes, he, he convinced Fred Hall, who was his choice for governor [of Kansas] to, to interview me and see if he could, he could use me as a part of his election team.  And, of course, southeast Kansas, interestingly, is kind of like the South in this, in this country.  Southeast Kansas is where the coal fields are.  Well, when the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe [Railroad] and the MK & T Railroad and others came on stream, they believed in vertical integration, including owning their coal fields.  So they brought recently freed slaves out of the South into southeastern Kansas where the coal was.  And the first thing they did, and this comes back to a question you asked me a moment ago, the first thing they did was join the Republican Party (laughter), all right.  And when they joined the party, they went after filling out all the wards and precinct assignments and it became a pattern that the vice chairman of all county and Republican committees would be black.  So we were raised to believe that you can't be a spectator at the political process.  You got to be involved.  And the plum for a black when I was coming up was to be the vice chairman of the senior party.  I was elected vice chairman of the senior party in 1954 when I helped Fred Hall win the nomination for, for governor.  He won the nomination because he carried southeastern Kansas.  And he carried southeastern Kansas because he carried the black vote.  In other words, he ran flat all over the state in, in terms of the white vote.  He either won by a small margin or lost.  The only areas where he won big was in southeastern Kansas, and he won big in southeastern Kansas because he carried the black vote down there, all the way up to Kansas City [Kansas].  Now, that made me politically.  At that point, I automatically became the vice chairman of the senior [Republican] Party.  And thus, in a position to place people all over state government.
Story_ID: 17865
Speaker 1: And then what did you do at that point [after becoming vice chairman of the Kansas Republican Party]?
Speaker 2: What I did at that point was, was accept an, an appointment as the community and public relations person over at the highway department [Kansas Highway Commission].  Now, what was interesting about that is that--[Dwight D.] Eisenhower was governor--President, and his major domestic policies, if you remember, was urban renewal and the National Defense Highway, which we now call the Interstate Highway System.  Well, since Eisenhower was President, Kansas was gonna get its money first, (laughter) all right.  And I went over to the highway department.  I wanted to go on the penal board.  I wanted Fred [Hall] to put me on the penal board.  I went over to Lansing [Kansas] where the Kansas state prison is, and, and, and at the request of a couple of prisoners who were in there from Junction City [Kansas].  An old guy who was doing a life sentence, who name--we called him Coastline, Coast Symphony, through a connection in Junction.  I was Topeka [Kansas] at the time.  He said, "You got to get over here."  So I went over, and said, "What's up, Coast?"  Coast said, "Please don't take that penal, the word is out that you're trying to be on the penal board.  Don't take that place."  I said, "Why not?"  He said, "These guards are treating us bad enough, but they have promised that there'll be the, the damnest race riot you ever want to see in this prison if you go on the penal board."  You're too young to remember, but in '54 [1954] and '55 [1955], there were a wave of, of riots in prisons all across the country, state prisons.  So the Leavenworth [Kansas] Republican Committee, which was very important in Fred's victory for governor, called and told him, if you put him on the penal board (laughter), we guarantee you there'll be a riot here.  So Fred said, "Come over to the office."  And I went over.  And he said, "Art, can I tell you something?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Politics is not about sociology and social justice.  Politics is about economic equity."  I said, "What do you mean, Fred?"  He said, "It's about who is going to benefit from the taxpayer's dollar," (laughter) and said, "If you'll understand that, can I make a recommendation?"  I said--said, "I'm gonna put you in the highway department."  "Highway department?"  Yeah, said, "I'm gonna put you over there, and I'm gonna put you in as the deputy public relations person.  And your assignment, among other things, will be to help prepare the RPFs [request for proposals]."  I didn't know what request for proposal even meant.  "Your assignment will be helping to prepare the RFPs and then mailing them out."  He said, "Now, I want you to watch and see who bids and who wants those RFPs, and see who bids and see who gets the contracts and relate that to who worked in my campaign.  And if you're as bright as I think you are, you'll begin to understand why people engage in politics.  It's about economic equity and nothing else.  They want their piece of the taxpayer's dollar."  So I sat over there and did that.  And lo and behold, all those young guys that worked with me to elect him governor, the youngest at the time in the history of the state, hardly any of them wanted a job.  They all wanted a contract.  They wanted to be right of way buyers.  (Laughter) They wanted to, to, in some how, work on those highways.  Now, Kansas has, at the time, still does, four federal highways going east and west and four federal highways going north and south, with all the state highways tying into them.  I watched guys who went to college with me buy up the right of way on all four of those corner--wherever, (chuckle) wherever they, they joined, they bought those corners.  And they sold some to Holiday Inn.  They sold at least another corner to (chuckle) a service station and another corner to something.  They became multimillionaires.  I saw two of them, one that I played football with, get a charter to start a bank, a small bank.  And lo and behold, most of the people who got contracts from the state government banked with Don Concannon.  Don Concannon is a multi-multi-millionaire today.  But he didn't want no job.  He wanted Fred elected, and what did he want out of Fred after he to him elected?  A bank charter.  (Laughter) And he got a bank charter and made loans to people who got contracts to work the highways, made loans to people who got contracts to store wheat.  You probably don't remember the soil bank program, but--and, and other similar programs.  But when all the, the silos along the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe highway filled up with wheat, then Congress passed, the agriculture and the Congress passed a law that made it possible for farmers to keep their wheat on their farm, and they put them in these big tanks that you see now.  Don Concannon made the loans to all them farmers (laughter) who was gonna store wheat on, on their land, on, on their land.  And, of course, the next thing you know those farmers finally sold the wheat to the banks.  The banks set up satellite corporations and sold the wheat to, to the agriculture department and/or the agriculture department helped them sell the wheat abroad.  That's when I began to say, hey, wait a minute.  This, in the final analysis is all about taxpayer-based economics.  And, and right now, it pains me to tell you, we don't understand taxpayer-based economics, and yet taxpayer-based economics, and by that I mean those kind of tax incentives that are given to people so they can keep the money and put it in the economy rather than send it to federal government.  One piece of the system we don't understand right now as African Americans, how does the tax-based economy work?  And, and until we finally get, get the milieu of that, we still gonna be playing a practice game rather than understand what it's really about.  But that, that's what I learned from Kansas politics, that social justice is a wonderful thing to pursue, but you can't, you can't define it.  You can't get a common definition of what it is, one, and two, even you could, you can't measure it.  And if you can't measure it, then you're gonna have a tough time convincing anybody we ought to do it.
Speaker 1: So now during this time--so you're learning a lot about the government contracting process.  You're learning a lot about just politics, period?
Speaker 2: I went inside the government to get my Ph.D (laughter) in government operations.  Let me say that again, to get my Ph.D in government, and you say, give an example.  The bill is nothing but a license to do something.  When Congress or a state legislature or a city council passes an ordinance, that's simply a license to do something.  That's an admission that you got a problem and a license to do something.  Now, what do you do before you can do something?  You got to write rules for carrying out that bill.  Now, what do you do?  You got to write a regulation to implement the rules, and after you write the regulation to implement the rules, you got to write guidelines to start the process.  So just a bill is some empty words.  It's a license and that's all.  You all--it's--I say it's imperative to go inside government and see what happens in the executive branch.  We know the judicial branch is gonna judge what the executive and legislative branch does.  The legislative branch is gonna pass a bill that license the executive branch to do something about it.  If you really want to know how government works, it's an appointment in the executive branch that carries out the mission or implements the license that the legislative branch gave them, and you got to implement it in a way that the courts will say, you are doing, one, one, that bill is constitutional and one, you are carrying it out in the fashion in which is consistent with the governing process.  That's, that's what we, I hate to say it, that's what we clearly don't understand yet.  And most of us still think if you get the bill on the books, you solve the problem.  You get the bill on the books, you just got a license to do something about the problem.  And then that, doing something, is kind of in a box.  (Laughter) you, you're put in a box to do it.  And, and the things you do have to be constitutional or you don't get a chance to do it.
Story_ID: 17866
Speaker 1: [Fred] Hall was, he was a, he was a good mentor in many ways?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  He was.
Speaker 1: But then he lost.
Speaker 2: He got beat because (laughter), because we managed to get him to, to call on the vote--Fred was Lieutenant Governor.  He was president pro temp of the, of the [Kansas] Senate, just like it--the Vice President here in [U.S.] Congress.  Fred told us, you've got to use your NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapters to make sure that all of the members of the Senate who has any kind of black population in his district is aware that the, the balcony is gonna be full of, of blacks from his area when I call for a voice vote (laughter) on the '52, 1952 Fair Employment Practice Bill.  We did that.  And in the past they had just let there be a voice vote.  And then the chair would say the nays have it or the ayes have it.  Fred said, "I'm gonna ask for a roll-call vote, and you make sure that that balcony is full of blacks from each one of these senatorial districts.  And they're gonna have to stand up this time and answer up or down."  Well, there's no way they were gonna stand up and answer with up or down.  And--and I should pause and say they, they had a little trick in Kansas.  They'd always pass the bill over in the House, knowing it was gonna die in the Senate.  All right, it would die in the Senate because of a voice vote.  Not so this time because of a, a roll-call vote.  Not so this time.  Fred said, "It's gonna be a voice vote, but you will have to get your folks there, and when I call for that voice vote, they have to stand up and vote one at a time.  You've got enough votes, there's enough votes there on that floor to carry this bill."  He did it.  The bill carried, and that's how we got the Kansas Fair Employment Practice Commission in place in '52 [1952].  He used that as his launching pad for his run for governor.  Now, what was interesting is that Kansas is divided right down the middle of [U.S.] Highway 81.  West of 81 is agriculture, east of 81 is, is industrial and thus, unionized, although Fred was a Republican, the unions knew that they needed to put money in both Democrat and the Republican party.  And since Kansas has always been Republican, they put more of their money in the Republican candidate than they did the Democrat candidate.  The right wingers in Kansas realized that Fred's--Fred's vote was coming from the west, and his money was coming from the east.  So they realized that they put a right to work on the ballot (laughter).  So they, they divided him.  And if he voted to keep unions, if you voted to keep unions, he got his money from the west--from the east.  On the other hand, if he voted to kill unions, there went his money, but he carried the west.  But there wasn't enough votes in the west for him to make it.  So he vetoed--he's the first Republican governor that had to veto the right to work.  Now, the reason they made him veto--they put him on, on the spot over right to work was because of mine and his relationship.  They said he is allowing Art Fletcher to run Kansas.  And, of course, I helped him get elected, I was getting everything I wanted.  Now, that was a time that I got into the booking business.  While I was running the PR [public relations] piece over at the highway department, I started--I went to the National Guard and cut a deal with them and said, here's the thing we can do.  If you--National Guard had big dance floors, big armories with good dance floors so, so my deal was a simple one.  If you will let me lease the National Guard for dances, those kind of public dances, then you take the parking concession.  I take the door and the indoor concession.  Or you take the indoor concession, and I take the parking.  When the first band I brought that really blew them away was Ray Charles, I brought Ray Charles to Junction City, Kansas, and at 2 o'clock in the morning, they was still lined up trying to get in (laughter).  Bookers back East found out about, that all the black entertainers.  And I cut this deal with General Nichols who was a National Guard general in Kansas.  And he told the National Guard generals in Nebraska, Iowa (laughter), Oklahoma, Colorado that here is a great moneymaker.  So I was able to pick up Count Basie, Jimmie Lunceford, Duke Ellington, you name them, and bring them to the National Guard armories in cities and states that were contiguous to Kansas.  And, and also able to go to, get small colleges with small gyms--a small gym was thirty-five hundred to five thousand, and, and with the [Harlem] Globetrotters in those areas.  So I quickly understood--the point I'm coming to is I quickly understood that in the final analysis, if you're gonna be an effective politician, you'd better take advantage of your positioning so that you can make yourself some money and at the same time serve the people in a way that there's no doubt that you're there to accomplish your objective.  So that's, that, that's what I did.
Speaker 1: So, but when he lost, that was devastating?
Speaker 2: (Laughter), when he lost, they wiped me out.  They ran him out of the State of Kansas, and--(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: You were persona non gratis?
Speaker 2: Ooh, (laughter), and they would wait till I'd sold (laughter)--I never will forget Salina [Kansas].  I, I had sold the house out and Bill Doggett was big, big, big.  Everybody wanted to hear Bill Doggett.  I'd sold the house out, and was counting my money (laughter).  And the city council called a session and cancelled my dance permit.  And after you've paid your guarantee, you can't get your money back.  So they had to cancel--I had to cancel, and just a series of those, made it very plain to me that I wasn't welcome in Kansas anymore.  And that, plus a couple of bad spells with the winter.  I had, I, I had lined up the Globetrotters to play in some of these small towns.  And we had snowstorms and floods, one right after another that wiped out those audiences and thus, wiped me out.  And at the same time, they were, they would cancel--they'd give me a permit and then cancel it the day the event was going, gonna happen.
Story_ID: 17867
Speaker 1: So that, that bad period, cause you moth--your wife also--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, that bad period [falling out of favor in Kansas politics] created real conflict within the family.  My wife couldn't believe that they had turned that hard on me.  So she filed for divorce, and it became evident to me at that point that--and then she began to slip mentally.  And it became evident to me that I had to get out of Kansas.  And I had a friend of mine, a school teacher, in fact, a university professor, call Fred Hall.  And Fred Hall was at Aerojet-General [Corporation] in Sacramento [California], called Fred and said, "Fred, you'd better get Art Fletcher out of here.  These, these, these folks are not gonna forgive him for helping to, to elect you."  So I packed up and went to Sacramento, California and left the house and the car and everything with, with Mary.  And then she suddenly decided that divorce wasn't what she wanted.  So she called Fred and Fred sent her a trip ticket and Aerojet would move you out there then.  And they moved her out.  And we went back together to try to finish raising the family.  At that point, she had gone all the way over.  So I had to put her in a mental institution in California.  She stayed for, oh, about sixty days, and then they let her out.  And she made it for about another sixty or so, and then she had to go back.  And then she, when she came out the last time, that's when she took her life, October the 2nd, 1960, she jumped off the Bay Bridge [San Francisco, California] and, and took her life.  And I ended up trying to raise the kids by myself until Bernyce [Hassan-Fletcher] and I married in, in '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: So, now--.
Speaker 2: And we held the family together by--I went back in, and my mother [Edna Miller Fletcher] and I opened a barbeque business.  Mama had one down in March Field Air Force Base [Riverside, California], and I used to go down there and smoke her ribs for her every weekend.  And finally I decided that--you've heard of Port Chicago [California] where, where they blew up the boats and--well, I put a barbeque house in Port Chicago.  And then put another one over in an area called Walnut Creek [California], which was a mistake.  They, the people in Walnut Creek didn't want a black business in Walnut Creek, and so they boycotted me.  And I had sold the place in Port Chicago.  So I went back to doing nothing but teaching school full time, and pulled the family together, the three boys and one of the girls.  And we would go up into the hill and clean the homes of people who rided--resided up there when I taught school throughout the day, throughout the week, and then cleaned homes on the weekend or smoked ribs or whatever they wanted for their special parties.  And we made it that way.
Speaker 1: And then that period lasted then till 1960--?
Speaker 2: That period last till 1965, Bernyce [Hassan-Fletcher] and I married.
Story_ID: 17868
Speaker 1: And I had been asked to run, to be responsible for the program that did--dealt with so-called emotionally disturbed children.  The State of California passed a bill to get so-called emotionally disturbed kids out of the normal classroom into an area by themselves.  And the district, the superintendent of schools asked me if I'd take that program.  And I always kid people about saying, when I read the mandate and I looked in the mirror, that was me (laughter).  So, so I agreed to take it.  And the reason I agreed to take it is because there were no guidelines.  You could do whatever you wanted to do to see if you could educate them.  So I took that assignment, and moved my kids into a bungalow at the end of the, at the end of the playground by, by, by myself.  And when I did that, I could teach them.  So I used a little book that you're familiar with called 'Think and Grow Rich' (laughter).  And then I put the kids on a learning contract in which they would agree to learn so many words, spell so many words, write so many sentences, write so many paragraphs on Monday, we'd evaluate the performance on Friday, and then concoct a new contract, concoct a new contract each week.  And I--they gave me twenty-seven kids in that class and twenty-one of them finished high school.  And a couple of them have Ph.D's (laughter) and others, they heard about that, that the superintendent of schools, who was a black associate superintendent of schools for the State of California, whose name escapes me right now, but the legislature had just passed this bill, and nobody knew how to put one of those classes together--Dr. Lawrence.  So Dr. Lawrence had me to come and address the Northern California Teachers Association on that particular act.  And when he did, and he heard about my program, he asked me if I'd come and run a workshop for the Northern California Teachers Association.  And I ran that workshop and showed them how to organize such a class, and how to take advantage of being allowed to play all over the field in terms of, in terms of that particular approach.  Now, the thing that excited him is that when I, when I talked to kids in the morning, in the afternoon, I went to their homes, to whoever was the guardian or the parent.  And within, by the time the second visit--no later than the third visit, they, somebody would produce a government document of some kind they had to fill out and asked me to read it and fill it out for them.  By that time, they'd gotten confidence in me.  And at that point, I could then put the pressure on them, and I had a fourteen-point commitment piece, that committed them to get the kid ready to go to school, get him up on time, make him clean himself up, clean his bed, get his breakfast and that sort of thing.  When they brought the first Great Society adult training program to the East Bay [San Francisco Bay Area, Califorina], all of my parents enrolled, every one of them.  They all enrolled, and it startled the school system.  They, they couldn't believe that kind of fallout would go from a program that had no intention whatsoever of motivating anybody to go back to school.  Well, Dr. Lawrence found out about it, and he came and asked me to run that workshop for the Northern California Teachers Association.  Well, when I got through with the workshop, that very day, he was coming back here to go to the Department of Education.  At the time, it as Health, Education and Welfare and it was the Labor Department.  And so when he got over to the Labor Department, he told the Labor Department about this, this unexpected flow of adults from this unique little group into the first training program to come into the [San Francisco] Bay Area.  And he came back and said, they told him they had a project in Pascal, Washington (laughter) and wanted to know if I would take it.  And Bernyce [Hassan-Fletcher] and I were dating then.  And I told her about it, and I wouldn't send them a resume.  And Lawrence saw me two or three times, "Have you sent that resume?"  I said, nah.  So Bernyce said, "Why don't you get him off your back.  Go ahead and send the resume."  So she typed the resume up for me, and I sent it up to Pasco, Washington.  And lo and behold, the day they got it and read, the headhunter who was looking for somebody for that project was over in San Francisco [California].  So they picked up the phone and called him and said, "We got a guy, we got his resume.  While you're down there, why don't you interview him?"  Well, the man upstairs was in the plan because Tom Berkley who's since passed, recently, passed a year ago, owned a paper called the 'East Bay Advocate', I think it was.  But I used to write a column for him.  Well, he heard about--he knew all about my program at Berkeley, at, at Burbank [California].  So that issue ran a center spread on how that program had worked.  So I stopped by his office on the way to San Francisco, and he handed me the paper and said, look at this.  I opened it, and there was the center spread.  And I read it, and he, he gave me a half a dozen more copies or so.  And I got on the, on the metro and went on over to, to the interview.  When it was time for the interview, instead of having the guy do--I just handed him the paper.  And he looked at that center spread.  And while he was looking, I went downstairs and got me a cup of coffee, and when I came back up, he was on the phone calling Pasco, said "I think we got our guy, if we can convince him."  So they (laughter), I, I agreed to go for the interview.  Well, when I got there, East Pasco is in the middle of nowhere.  It's desert sand, tumbleweed, just like I was raised in Arizona (laughter).  And so when I got off that plane, I was at home.  And I took a look, and I said, "This is it."  So I went for the interview.  I took, I took the job with every intention of, of carrying that baby out in, in grand style, only to find out that they weren't serious about the project (laughter), okay.  Now, the reason they weren't serious is that in the State of Washington, you have to have a school maintenance election to pass bonds to buy books and all that good stuff every two years, which keeps the people involved in the education process in, in a very unique way.  Well, East--the City of Pasco had just finished building Columbia Basin Community College.  It was brand new.  And they needed a reading laboratory and other materials that the government would give them, and therefore, they wouldn't have to go to the taxpayers under the bond program.  So when they put the proposal together to bring the East Pasco self help project on, on, on board.  They called it the high-rise project, when they brought it on board, they had no intention of it ever getting started.  They were waiting for the federal government to send all the books, the reading laboratory and all, and put it out at Columbia Basin Junior College.  Then they hired somebody to run the project.  And I took it and went up there, organized that East Pasco self help community by turning it into block clubs and finding out how many churches were over there.  And I decided anybody who gets elected to anything in the church is a leader.  So if he, he gets elected to, to run the choir, he's a leader or she's a leader, whatever.  Anyway, I showed them how to do a block club audit, block by block, and determine, telling people about the program and, and get a feel for what kind of culture was there.  Instead of getting three hundred and eighty people who wanted to enroll, over five hundred wanted to enroll (laughter), all right.
Story_ID: 17869
Speaker 1: So you, so you were saying that the [literacy] program [in Pasco, Washington] was a success and you had five hundred, and then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, once, once it looked liked it was on the road--well, first, (laughter), I used the Machiavellian stroke on them.  When I finally agreed to take the project, the first thing the people wanted me to do was move that reading laboratory back over to East Pasco [Washington].  Instead of doing that, I had to hold them off, and I got the Catholic church in that area to donate a bus.  And I bused the adults from East Pasco to the community college [Columbia Basin College, Pasco, Washington] so they could benefit from the reading laboratory, only for them to discover that so-called main line students couldn't read either (laughter), and the more they learned that those whom they thought were well educated and could read, the more they began to realize that they weren't as bad off as they thought they were, all right.  So putting all that on the college campus, community college campus, played right into my hand.  I had a couple of things happen.  I asked the school system to send me any adult--youngster who's doing well in basic education, to see if they wanted to come and tutor someone in my classes who wasn't doing well on basic education issues, such as reading and writing; got more than I bargained for.  They lined up to come over there and do it.  Flip side, I got the people who were teaching my classes to find anybody who had dropped out of school, was doing well, dropped out because of pregnancy or something, but had caught on and was learning and could tutor a kid who might be failing.  So here I got high school kids coming over to tutor adults who were trying to learn to read, write and calculate, communicate, think, reasoning, use good judgment.  And I've got people in my classes tutoring kids who wasn't doing well.  So I had built a collaborative with the school system.  And they, they, they tracked it for me.  As, as, as a result ninety-three percent of the three hundred and eighty heads of households enrolled in my program stayed through the end.  It became the high water mark.  It became the high water mark for programs in the Pacific Northwest.  In the middle of that, the [U.S.] Labor Department cancels my contract.  I had three more years to go--two more years to go and they cancelled it.
Story_ID: 17870
Speaker 1: Bernyce [Hassan-Fletcher] and I--and Bernyce had joined me, when they were gonna turn the neighborhood [in East Pasco, Washington] into an urban project, my, the, the enthusiasm in my classes just went down the tube.  So I had to come back in and lift their spirits again.  One of the things I did to lift their experience is to give them a quick and dirty one-on-one, on urban renewal requirements.  Now, I've known--remember now, I'd served in Kansas government before I got out there.  So the government process was not unique and new to me.  So I helped them understand what had to happen before their neighborhood could become an urban renewal or a model cities neighborhood.  And one of the criteria was one person, either the city or one corporation, has to own all the land.  They're not gonna deal with a whole lot of different people.  One person or one entity has to go in there and buy up all that land.  I did an audit and found out that the land belonged to the brothers and sisters who lived over, and the way they got it is in order to induce them to come to the Pacific Northwest to build the atomic energy facility for World War II, the Interior Department [U.S. Department of the Interior] would sell them a trailer site for twenty-five dollars, twenty-five dollars.  The brothers bought a trailer site every time (laughter) you looked around.  Consequently, when we counted up who owned trailer sites, they owned the whole neighborhood, except, about 80 percent.  So what I did was formed a, with, with Bernyce's help, we--and she knew co-ops.  I might, she, she--I met her at the co-op.  She used to see me coming in with my five kids and, and hold my bad checks until they would clean up.  And I met her at the co-op.  So when we moved up, I quickly realized that with her knowledge of co-ops and my ability to organize, we could take that whole training class, three hundred and eighty people and turn them into to a co-op.  And I had them all buy five dollars worth of stock in the co-op, and then we gave them, for a dollar's option, we gave them, we took an option on each trailer site they owned.  Consequently, they owned it.  Well, when the power structure across town saw what I was doing, they cancelled my contract (laughter).  They said, "We'll get him out of here." We did car counts.  We did--had the household audit, so we knew what the brothers and sisters spent their money for.  So we decided first to build a tight--a, a service station.  First, I didn't do it for my--I said, "Y'all vote a committee to go over, once you know what we're gonna do, and vote a committee to go over to the state house and file your charter papers so you'll see how it's done."  So we got in the car and drove over.  And I let them file the papers and so they could understand how to incorporate themselves, then brought them back.  They reported to the people.  Then we went back and got our audit and said, what do we spend our money for?  A number of things.  One was transportation.  So they decided the first thing they wanted to build was a service station.  So we went to the city council and got the city council to put a hose across the road, get the car count and justify a service station; took our findings to several chains, Texaco responded, said, we'll, we'll, we'd like to have that corner; said, you can have it if sign a letter to, that you'll lease the building for thirty-five years.  If you'll lease it for thirty-fives years, give us your building plans, we'll build it.  They looked, that's all you want?  That's all we want.  They gave us the letter.  We carried it to the bank, and I had each craftsman--the co-op had craftsmen.  They had paint--they had paint finishers, plumbers, pipes.  Each craftsman cost twenty-seven--their building plans called for twenty-seven thousand dollars worth of material.  Twenty-seven craftsmen signed a note for a thousand dollars a piece for twenty-seven thousand at a Mormon bank.  See, Mormons believe in self help, at a Mormon bank.  When they signed the note, they put the money in escrow so we could draw it down as we began to build.  We built it, all right.  People in the tri-city area--newspapers started running articles on it.  People in the tri-city area [Pasco, Washington; Kennewick, Washington; and Richland, Washington] heard about it.  And the, the road builder, one of the top ones came over and said, is this a 501(c)(3)?  We said, yeah.  Can I get a tax write-off if I help you?  Sure can (unclear).  He said, "I'll flatten the land for you tomorrow" (laughter).  He then said, and when we get through, if we got any leftover blacktop, said, if you want to blacktop it.  Well, he passed that around, and the next thing you know, we had more people donating stuff than you could shake a stick at.  [President Richard] Nixon heard about it.  He'd been running around talking about black capitalism.  He heard about it, and he sent somebody over there to get a look.  And he was, they were amazed.  In the meantime, they killed [Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.], and there was all kinds of bad stories in the paper, op-ed points about Martin.  So I decided that I would embarrass them in terms of badmouthing the, the Great Society programs, although I'm a Republican, all right, and it's a Democrat program, and it was working.  But it was working economically, which is not what they intended, okay.  And so I decided to, to embarrass them by announcing that I'd run for Lieutenant Governor [of Washington].  And in the meantime, Weihauser [Timber Company] had heard that we owned that land, and they came and said, can you build us a warehouse along that road.  I said, sure, said, but there're some conditions.  What are the conditions?  We get the first right of refusal on every job in there.  We're, we're your partners on this.  We'll--they didn't call it an LLC then, but that's what it, would have turned out to be, a limited liability corporation with us being partners.  In addition to that, if you're gonna lease anything, we'll put together a leasing company, and you lease all the forklifts and various other things from us.  And if you do that, then we'll build you the warehouse that you want.  And while we were in the process of getting ready to do that, Johnny--Johnny Green Giant called.  At this point, they see that these poor folks who I was supposed to train to work for somebody else (laughter) were getting ready to own a chunk of the rock.  They cancelled my contract.
Story_ID: 17871
Speaker 1: Once they cancelled the contract, then I--and they killed King [Martin Luther King, Jr.], and they're writing all them bad stories, I decided I'd run for Lieutenant Governor [of Washington] and use that project as an example of what can be done when the people are organized.  I would only campaign on college campuses.  There're forty-two college campuses in the State of Washington.  I would only campaign on college campuses and, and teach courses on how to use your skill in running some aspect of the Great Society, of a Great Society program.  So we got Montessori kids learning Montessori to come over, and, and teach Montessori learning systems.  We got accountants to come over and teach people how to keep their books, the whole thing.  By (laughter) running at those college campuses, I put together about forty-two hundred kids who ran my campaign for lieutenant governor.  When I filed, it was the biggest joke in the State of Washington and across the country too.  Everybody laughed.  What's the matter, and a Republican too in the State of Washington, with a, with a black population about sixty-five thousand.  Who does he think he's fooling?  I won the primary two to one.  I beat Bill Muncie two to one, carried every county in the state, including King County, the state, the one he was supposed to carry.  He was supposed to carry King County 'cause he's a big sports figure.  He drove those motorboats and had a, a sports show every day.  So when the Republicans decided at the last minute that they had to stop me, they went and got him, and got him to run.  The last hour, he filed (laughter).  And they just knew they were home free.  Beat him in every county in the state.  Now, they got me on the ticket.  They don't know what to do.  They don't know what to do.  I said, I'm gonna run my campaign by going right back to all those college campuses and thank those kids for, for electing me lieutenant governor.  Long story short, I lost the general election.  A million two hundred thousand people voted.  I lost by forty-six thousand votes in 1968.
Story_ID: 17872
Speaker 1: At that point [after losing the race for Lieutenant Governor of Washington], [President Richard] Nixon said, go out there and, and--he's talking this black capitalism thing.  Let's go out there and see what, what it's all about.  In the meantime, Dan Evans, who was then the Governor [of Washington] really put the pressure on him too, to bring me back here.  Now, I was supposed to be the administrator for SBA [Small Business Administration] since I was doing the black capitalist thing.  But what happened was the late John Towers had cut a deal with the Hispanic vote in the State of Texas to give that SBA to a Hispanic kid from San Antonio [Texas] by the name of Hilary Sandoval.  So Nixon and Towers bumped heads over that, and then Towers won out and Sandoval got it.  So then Nixon wanted me to take a couple of other slots, and I said, no.  And then they finally offered me one that I would take, which was the Assistant Secretary for Employment Standards at the [U.S.] Department of Labor.  Now, I took that because during the interim, when they closed my contract down, I worked for the Hanford Atomic Energy Commission [Richland, Washington] contractors, and I went all over the country recruiting blacks to come out there, only to have everybody in, in my portfolio turned down.  My white counterparts would recruit at white universities.  I'd recruit blacks from white universities.  His portfolio would get jobs; mine wouldn't.  So I knew that volunteerism didn't work.  I knew that if, in fact, the '64 [1964] Civil Rights Act was going to work, we'd have to go from volunteerism to enforcement.  Now, in order to go from volunteerism to enforcement, you have to have a standard that you're trying to reach.  The '64 [1964] Civil Rights Act deliberately passed by the [U.S.] House [of Representatives] and the [U.S.] Senate, both parties, made sure that enforcement standard was not a part of the act.  And you say, how did they do that?  One, if you read the '64 [1964] Civil Rights Act, there is no definition of discrimination.  It just says you can't do it, whatever it is.  Two, that you can't measure it when you find it.  If you do, that's a quota, and a quota is illegal.  So in '64 [1964] when [President Lyndon B.] Johnson signed off on the '64 [1964] Civil Rights Act, he knew it was unenforceable.  He knew it.  Everybody in the House, Democrat and Republican knew it was unenforceable (laugher).  And everybody in the Senate, Democrat and Republican, knew it was unenforceable.  Yet, our black leadership throwing that thing around as if we had accomplished something, only to discover they had a piece of paper that was worthless, okay.  That's what happened.  Now, I happen to know that.  Why?  Because I had worked in the executive branch of government in Kansas way before I ever came here.  And I knew that without a definition and without rules, regulations and guidelines and without standards that are measurable, particularly where the workforce is concerned, you ain't going nowhere.  Now, Nixon didn't know I knew that (laughter) when he hired me and nobody knew.  So I always had the feeling that I was given a job at the Department of Labor that no one thought I could do.  Why?  Because no one thought I knew what's required to get into the enforcement mode.  And let me make the point that, at this point, as long as you can't enforce it, then (laughter), you can't implement it.  So I didn't use Title VII of the '64 [1964] Civil Rights Act.  I used procurement law.  How did I learn about procurement law?  That job that Fred Hall gave me, okay.  And so what I did then was allocate hours in each contract, since I was an assistant secretary for the Contract Service Act, and if I didn't sign off on the wages and salaries in that Act, then nobody could start to work.  So I (laughter), what I did was issued the revised Philadelphia Plan.
Story_ID: 17873
Speaker 1: I issued the revised Philadelphia Plan.  You say, why was it revised?  Because the original Philadelphia Plan had no enforcement measures.  It was a volunteer program in which you depend on the contractor's good will to the degree that he'll create or she will create an environment where goodwill will pervade and your coworkers will work with you, in spite of your color or your gender.
Speaker 2: And the Philadelphia Plan had come out of--
Speaker 1: The Philadelphia Plan came out of the [Lyndon B.] Johnson administration.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, again, they knew it was flawed, all right, even though--.
Speaker 2: Who was involved with that?  Do you--?
Speaker 1: Who was involved with, with?
Speaker 2: With the original Philadelphia Plan?
Speaker 1: With the original Philadelphia Plan.  I think Cliff Alexander had something to do with it, but I'm not sure.  But he, it was, he got--when he tried to implement it, the, the--I'll call his name any minute, the, the, not the inspector general.  I'll call his name in a minute, killed it.  The, the Congress's budget office killed it because they said it violated the quota provisions in Title VII, all right.  And for some reason Cliff and, and his brain power or either Willie Wilson with the Labor Department, wouldn't let them put an enforcement provision in it, all right.  So when I come along, I clearly understand that if it isn't enforceable, it isn't going anywhere.  I also understand that you can't use Title VII of the '64 [1964] Civil Rights Act.  You got to use procurement law, and you can use procurement law and get away from the no quota provision by setting aside hours for minorities and women to work, without ever telling the contractor how many minorities and women to hire to work those hours.  It's up to him or her to decide.  They have to decide, they got to have that portion of the contract finished on a date certain.  And there's twenty-seven, twenty-eight, twenty-nine or a hundred thousand hours in the contract for that particular work, and we provided them with information in the census tracks that they recruited from.  We identified the households in which minorities who had met their qualifications lived.  How did we know?  'Cause they had gotten money from the Department of Labor to train them.  So we didn't tell 'em to hire them and not them where to hook--look.  We told them to hire them and here's the census tracks to look in.  Now, if they're hired, by the time you finally get there, if some other contractor has beaten you, then you do something else in procurement law.  And what is that?  You ask for a contract change.  It's called a change order.  And the change order is based on the fact that when you looked--and they got to give us a report.  How many hours you spent looking, what was the salary of the person, that you spent looking and--how many hours and what was his sophistication.  How did we measure that?  Their--contractors always ask for change orders.  So we don't have to go outside that contractor to, to find out what some other contractor did.  When's the last time you asked for a train--change order?  Well, we asked for a change order because a certain brand of paint that we agreed to put on that wall wasn't on the market when it was time to put it up.  So we had to find another brand.  And we came and got your permission to find another brand and then we went searching to find that branch, and then we did it.  Now, how many hours did you spend searching?  What was the skill tech of the professional person doing the searching, and what did you pay him?  We want you to compare your seriousness over here with your seriousness or lack of seriousness over here.  So a lot of the brothers and sisters had good faith effort.  There was a lot of you know what, not so.  It is a bonafide part of the contracting process, and if you understand how a contractor, what he has to do to go through the process of proving that he made a good faith effort, you'll see, we only applied contract law in an area that had never been tried before.  And, and those contractors who came in and tried to fool us on good faith effort, the minute we made the comparative analysis and then threatened to debar them for five years, from ever contracting again, that's when they got serious.  But it was all contract law, had nothing to do with Title VII and fluffy social justice.  It's all contract law.  And it's all about hours and the amount of money in each contract tied to the hours for paying each craft.  That's how it was done and, and [President Richard] Nixon bought into that the minute he realized that it was based on pure procurement contract law and economic equity.  We're paying more taxes into the system than we're getting out by way of job opportunity.  That's when he bought into it.  Otherwise, he would never have bought into it.  And that basically is the reason the courts have not killed affirmative action for thirty-three years, and I got a sneaking suspicious they're not gonna kill it this time.
Story_ID: 17874
Speaker 1: One of the problems, my brothers and sisters don't know it, is the hang up over Republican, all right.  I, I'll give you an example.  civil--affirmative action has been an issue for thirty-three years, thirty-three years.  During that thirty-three year period, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] has had a workshop of some kind on affirmative action for thirty-three years.  You know how many times I've spoken to them?  (Holds up two fingers) All right.  Urban League, you know how many times I've spoken to them.  (Holds up two fingers).  You don't do that to the original source regardless to what he--and, and it works.  It has worked.  When I lost it in 1969, African American and women participation of an 86 million workforce was less than 20 percent.  Today it's 49.9 percent.  Something worked.  It makes sense to want to talk to the person who jump started it to find out what in the world he was thinking about, why did he know it would work, and, and why hasn't the court, as of this moment, declared it illegal?  Okay, it's not declared illegal because they would almost have to kill Davis-Bacon.  For your information, the Davis-Bacon Act is the Act that [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt put on the books to make it possible for unions to participate in the government's economy.  That's how Roosevelt paid off the unions for voting for him in 1932.  Unions are written in the government contracts.  All I simply did is expand Davis-Bacon to include taxpayers.
Story_ID: 17875
Speaker 1: it's a fantastic legacy.  It just--.
Speaker 2: Well, yes, that's, that's, that's.
Speaker 1: But why do you, why is the yes and?
Speaker 2: Ah, a legacy is as worthless as the words on a piece of paper if people don't know how to put that legacy to work to get on with the job, okay.  And I have serious problems with people who are just satisfied with a legacy.  I think it's, it's, it's--you need to go back, you, when you hear that phrase, if you don't know your history, you're gonna leave, live it again, I insist that you use your history to write a new legacy and, and to get on with what must be done to continue the war, what, what we've won in terms of the Civil Rights Movement.  What we won was, if, if you look at a war, a war consists of battles.  Who won this battle, that battle and the other one, and finally, who won the war.  Well, achieving economic equity is, is a war that isn't going anywhere (laughter).  It isn't going anywhere.  So you have to know then and since you understand that government creates the culture.  You, you'd like to think that somehow the, some other source such as the private section or something like that creates a culture, but not so.  The culture before we were taken off the, taken out of the chains, the culture was written in the law.  We were what?  Two-third or three-fourths of a human being.  That's justified the culture.  In order to change that culture, we had to change the law.  So we, World War II, you heard me tell you a little, earlier, the World War II generation won several key battles.  One was the battle to vote.  We won that battle, and in the process elected, as of our conversation right now, there are over 8,000 African Americans elected to public office.  When we started that battle, there were less than a hundred.  We won that battle.  The next battle we had to win was the battle for education.  The way we can look at that is when I started affirmative action in, in '69 [1969], we had less than three thousand black doctors.  They could only go to two (laughter) medical schools, all right.  Today that number is approaching twenty thousand, and they can go to any medical school where they pay their tax dollars, okay.  The next battle had to do with employment, okay.  We won that battle.  Today we make up, 50--49 percent, almost--minorities and women make up 49 percent of the nation's workforce.  Home ownership went from below 10 percent in '69 [1969] to 49 percent today.  We won the, the housing legislation war.  We won that battle.  We won the battle to enter, public access.  Any hotel or restaurant you want to go through, you--if you got the means to go there, you can go.  And if they dare segregate against you, and engage in a bad earning practice, it's gonna cost them some money.  And all of these gonna cost--so we won those battles.
Story_ID: 17876
Speaker 1: So now, and, and now, the key piece that we're not even aware of, but a battle we got to win, is the Community Reinvestment Act.  Now, why the Community Reinvestment Act?  Cause it's our neighborhoods they're getting ready to redevelop.  And we own the land as well as the buildings on the land in those neighborhoods.  And we don't even know that the bill was written for us.  That bill was written in 1977 so the churches who had the seed money required to put together what is called an intermediary, a bank--let me explain the difference between the two of them.  A bank is regulated and can only make loans when you meet certain standards, credit worthiness and all that good stuff.  A bank can own an intermediary.  A church can own an intermediary.  A intermediary is everything that a bank is, except it's not a bank by definition.  So what that means then is that a bank-owned intermediary can make loans in less than a--bankable community.  Our communities are not considered bankable by normal banking standards.  But the '64 [1964], the '72 [1972] Community Reinvestment Act said, you, as a banker, can take one of my--as a church leadership, leader, you can take one, a month's worth of my tithes that I put in your bank and put them in a holding company, a bank-held holding company, which is a synonym for intermediary.  That bank-held holding company can make loans to individuals or corporations who don't necessarily meet safe, sound banking standards.  Now, the government knows that depressed neighborhoods do not satisfy the definition of safe, sound banking standards.  So they say, but we've got, we've got to make sure that those neighborhoods are revived.  So we'll first authorize the revision of those neighborhoods under a bill called the Community Reinvestment Act.  Then we'll put in place a vehicle that makes it possible to invest in those neighborhoods while we pull them up to safe, sound banking standards.  Now, every black Congressman on the [Capitol] Hill [Washington, D.C.] should know all the details of the Community Reinvestment Act.  Every church denomination, which takes up millions of dollars every year and puts it in the bank should know every detail of the Community Reinvestment Act.  All the sororities, all the fraternities and all of the basic black organizations should understand the entities involved in implementing the Community Reinvestment Act.  Now, I can you who is, who is aware of it.  The Catholic church is making sure that Hispanics understand the Community Reinvestment Act (laughter), all right.  And any other Catholic minority, they're making sure they understand it.  The, the Mormon church is doing the same thing.  In fact, the great faith-based initiative is really a Mormon initiative, all right.  You got about nineteen Mormons on the Hill in the [U.S] House [of Representatives] and the [U.S.] Senate.  Now, they're not saying anything about it, but the faith-based initiative is a Mormon initiative.  Why?  Because the Mormon have proven you can take church assets and engage in economic development.  They've got a long history of it.
Story_ID: 17877
Speaker 1: We don't need the bank to tell us, okay.  I'll tell you one, who I told about it.  And he jumped on it, and a year later, he left the Congress.  His name was Floyd Flake.
Speaker 2: That's, that's right.  And--.
Speaker 1: Floyd, Floyd--.
Speaker 2: Because Floyd has done it well.
Speaker 1: Oh, Floyd did not know, Floyd knew, knew nothing about, Floyd knew nothing about Regulation Y [Bank Holding Companies]--what a, a, where a holding company could invest.  And that's the physical description of the properties, okay.  They--first they said it was the burned out areas.  Then they said, well, wait a minute, if that's the case, what about Main Street, all those stores that are boarded up on Main Street?  Although it wasn't burned out, Main Street U.S.A. fits the description of one of those areas.  They said, okay.  So we'll add Main Street.  Nobody looking, then what?  Broadway isn't in that good a shape either.  So why don't we reshape (laughter) the definition to include Broadway.  What happened?  Is in the '70s [1970s] you see all these tall buildings in downtown U.S.A., the seed money came out of Regulation Y.  Now, [William] Proxmeyer said that isn't why I pushed to, why I agreed to Regulation Y.  I agreed to Regulation Y so we could rebuild those neighborhoods.  So he fought from '72 [1972] to '77 [1977] and finally got the Community Reinvestment Act back.  That was his last great achievement before he left.  The banks said, you know, if the rules aren't written yet and the guidelines aren't written, we ain't gonna write them (laughter).  And we won't tell anybody about it.  Now, the banks are reaching--are getting compliance for the Community Reinvestment Act, but doing what?  Teaching creditworthiness.  Every time you turn on, on the television, you see where the banks are ready to come into somebody's neighborhood and teach creditworthiness.  They actually get compliance standards.  They actually receive--there are five standards: unacceptable, needs improvement, acceptable.  A bank can get acceptable for financing the conduct--and conducting creditworthiness acts.  Since, since the Credit Act is on the book--since the Credit Act is on the books, the banks can get credit for teaching churches how to run workshops and seminars for doing that, without ever making a loan, without ever making a loan.  Now, they can get superior for making a loan.  They can--no, they can get outstanding for making a loan.  Outstanding is to make a loan for a mortgage.  A mortgage means you're in debt for thirty years (laughter).  So they can get superior for making a business loan.
Story_ID: 17878
Speaker 1: Can you talk about your time with UNCF [United Negro College Fund]?
Speaker 2: Yes, sure I can.  Once I went to the, once I went to the Assistant Secretary of Labor, I realized that I had an education that you don't get in the classroom.  See, when you're in charge of the nation's workforce, and you see I had eighteen laws that controlled the nation's workforce.  So I read the history of those, of those eighteen laws.  For an example, I read the history of blacks who worked in the electrical power, the gas power and the telephone, and the, and in the telephone industries.  Well, we actually studied twenty-seven industries that blacks were, were working in, okay.  Once I knew that, then I knew I knew something that black institutions of higher learning didn't know.  So I looked for a way to share that knowledge with them.  And the platform for doing that was to take over the United Negro College Fund.  But I was way more ready than they were to, to, to, to do that.  And I got a grant from the Loose Foundation to train all business managers and presidents of the black institutions of higher learning on a new thing that had just came on the scene then called 'Management by Objectives'.  So I did that, and the black leadership of those schools weren't ready for that yet.  So I was kind of out of step with what they were ready for, and it created the kind of conflict that we were like ships in the night sailing past each other.  They weren't ready for what I wanted to do, and I got frustrated because I couldn't pull 'em along.  So it ended up with me being at odds with, with the, the key leadership of those, of that entity, and this is gonna blow your mind.  I helped to initiate A Mind Is a Terrible Thing to Waste'.  They had a different phrase, and I changed it from their phrase to the one that's marketing now.  The black leadership in the church--I'm sorry, in the, in the UNCF thought that was too negative (laughter).  And so my real big falling out with them was over authorizing the use of that without going to the three different boards of the, that made up the United Negro College Fund at the time.  And the pressure on me was that Young Rubicam had said, the television stations have already donated the time.  You either need to get on in October or forget about this year cause the giving season starts in October and it's in, over in December.  So you either get on board now or forget about it.  And so I went on and signed on and cut the first tape and started it to rolling.  That upset, that upset them to no end, and from that point on, we, we were never on the same page.
Story_ID: 17879
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the work you've been doing with, you know, Art Fletcher and Associates and also was your support of [President Gerald] Ford, was that sort of critical, his nomination for President?
Speaker 2: Well, there was two, two reasons.  One, when Senator [Sam] Ervin from the South, from South Carolina tried to put a, a holding order on my budget to keep me from implementing affirmative action, Ford was the minority leader in the [U.S.] House [of Representatives] and [President Richard] Nixon brought Ford and the Republican leadership to the House--I mean to the White House for me to explain affirmative action to them.  Then he instructed Ford to go back, if he would, and kill that resolution which had already passed the [U.S.] Senate and was over in the House.  And the conflict in the resolution was the words in the paragraph and the title were in conflict.  And the reason for the conflict is that they were trying to hide the fact that it was a civil rights issue, all right.  Ford, when Nixon had me come over and explain that conflict and indicate that the title--see, the statutes say the title and the paragraph have to be one and the same.  There can be no conflict between the title over the paragraph and the language in the paragraph.  The title over the paragraph pretended, the title over the paragraph pretended that it wasn't about civil rights, that economic equity is not about civil rights (laughter), all right.  And Ford--Nixon couldn't explain it well enough.  So he said, "Art you come over here and speak to my Thursday morning leadership committee.  And when you get through speaking to them, then I'll take over."  And when I got through speaking to them, then he directed Ford to see to it that the House didn't vote for the paragraph that had been sent over to the Senate until the Senate took it back and cleaned it up so that the paragraph and the language were consistent.  They couldn't do it.  So since they couldn't do it, the last Friday before the Christmas holidays, they had the vote, and they lost.  And so the key--the way they were gonna kill affirmative action was to hold up any money that was in my budget to carry it out (laughter) okay.  When they couldn't clean the title and the language up, they lost the resolution and I went on with affirmative action.  And, and Ford was, drove--he led the move in the House that pointed out that conflict, and lined up all the Republicans in the House to vote against any effort to carry out that intent until it was clear that what I was talking about was employment.
Story_ID: 17880
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, your, your thoughts about the Republican Party and, and its move currently?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I have serious, serious, serious problems with the fact that they are failing to realize that human capital is a national security issue.  I convinced [Richard] Nixon that human capital was a national security issue thirty-three years ago.  It's more of a national security issue now since 9-11 [September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks] than it was before then.  Now, what am I saying?  I'm saying if that's the case, then home-grown human capital is more critical than ever.  You don't have--the, the possibilities of, of there being terrorists espionage against America's security and stability today is, is remote to say the least.  And so my attitude of, of this administration, challenging affirmative action seems to me to be way off the charts.  Now, let me give you an example.  Sixty-eight major 'Fortune' 500 companies have signed an amicus curie brief supporting affirmative action.  Three chiefs of staff, generals, who are in charge of the whole military operation have filed amicus curie briefs supporting affirmative action, okay.  Four, four-star generals have filed amicus briefs supporting affirmative action, all based on the fact that human capital is a national security issue.  But that's not all.  I understand some neighborhood of fourteen thousand budding law students are in agreement.  So with the nation saying we need to unit.  We need to be together and we need human capital, a quality of human capital, the likes of which we've never seen before, and such talent and, and gifts and the ability to do the things that we need, one, to compete in the global economic warfare and or global military warfare.  We need quality human capital.  And to be a, attempting, as is being done at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], to cut our access off, not only to graduate schools, the Michigan case wants to cut our access off to undergrad school.  So I, I don't see how in the world we're on the same page when if, if the case can believe that there's no way America in the immediate, short or long-term future, there's no way America can remain free, can remain strong, can remain secure, can remain stable and assured of a promising future without a work force that's second to none.  Now, if that's the case, then you need an educational system that's second to none.  And we're getting, we're, we're not getting ready.  We're in global conflict, economic global conflict, the likes of which you've never seen.  There is no way--and I don't understand what's going, there is no way that a white male work force or an all-white workforce, male and female, can hope to compete against a billion Chinese.  That's not gonna happen.  Likewise, with Indians, there's a billion of them, all tuning up to dominate the United States in the global market between now and the end of this next century.  And to be bringing a case before the Supreme Court on the issue of affirmative action is next door, to me is almost espionage.  Now, I know why they're doing it.  The reason they're doing it is because one of the best fundraisers that the right wingers have is an attack on black hopes.  In the '70s [1970s], in, in the '90s [1990s]--twenty conservative think tanks raised a billion dollars, one billion dollars, to attack affirmative action and any other piece of labor legislation that would improve our economic and thus social quality of our citizenship and that sort of thing, a billion dollars.  In one, two-year period, they raised over ten million dollars just to attack affirmative action.  So I happen to know that one of the best fundraisers they have--in other words, they can get George Will or one of those conservative writers to write an anti-affirmative action piece, put a cover letter on it; send it into the zip codes, okay, that they already know where they are.  And they know they're gonna get a check back for five, ten, fifteen, twenty or twenty-five dollars.  Twenty million, they can raise twenty million in almost a weekend by simply publishing a negative article on affirmative action, preferential treatment or, or some silly example like this one up in Michigan, and know that they can raise millions of dollars.  So a great deal of it is attacking affirmative action is one of the best fundraisers that the right wing element has.
Story_ID: 17881
Speaker 1: Listening to you, Dr. Fletcher, it's hard to understand what has happened with the disconnect in the black community.  Why--it seems, you know, here's the Republican Party which you're saying that you're staying with then to fight from within.
Speaker 2: From within.
Speaker 1: There's the Democratic Party that people feel that blacks don't appreciate--a lot of people think that, you know, black Republicans have no effect and are ineffectual or turncoats.  And yet when I hear, you know, the story you're telling, it appears that there needs to be a meeting of the minds and that it won't happen, that both sides will continue to go, to be postured within party politics.  And so what do you think the answer is, you know, for the black community?  Everyone's talking about parity and equity--you know, economic parity.  But how do you see that happening and why, and second, why your continued allegiance to the--to today's Republican party?
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm going Biblical on you now, all right.  Moses in Deuteronomy, which is the history of Moses's life, Moses says we're responsible for five generations, not just one, okay, five generations, not just one.  In Timothy I and II, Paul said, my journey is over, Timothy.  You have been struggling with me all along.  I'm getting ready to go.  I'm handing the torch to you.  You must carry on.  You know the price we paid to get here.  You know the struggle that's been going on after we got here, and because you paid that price to put the, launching pad for the future in, in place, you cannot retire.  You must stay the course.  You know what has to be done to extend the mission one more generation.  I know what has to be done to extend the--the progress we've made one more generation.  But I'm not just talking about it.  I'm creating a vehicle to do it, okay.  I've created a vehicle that I call Friends of America's Future.  And Friends of America's Future is dedicated to developing a workforce that's second to none and proving beyond any question or doubt that they can't develop that workforce without us.  Now, what else am I doing?  I'm doing thirty-six city tour.  I just tested marketed it the other day, and I'm gonna kick it off for sure the minute the courts hand down a decision.  I'm going to every city that has a Federal Reserve Board Bank.  That's where the new frontier is, the Federal Reserve Board Bank.  It's responsible for the Community Reinvestment Act.  There are twelve Federal Reserve Board cities where the governors reside of the Federal Reserve Board Bank and thirty--twenty-six where the district reside.  Together those thirty-six cities and the banks that make the loans to keep business alive and make the loans to bring new businesses on shore, know more about the human capital in each of their areas than anybody.  And they don't make the loan until they know that the chances of the workforce being hired to work in that plant either exists in the regions where they make loans or can be attracted there.  Okay, I'm gonna make sure--and those banks have the Community Reinvestment Act to implement, the Fair Lending Act to implement.  They have HMDA, Home Markets Disclosure Act to implement, and, and, and the brand new, New Market Tax Act to implement, all of--all these the vehicles that we should use from now to the year 2025 to be able to get this whole struggle behind us.  Now, I'm doing that tour out of my pocket, okay.  The other thing I'm doing is taking the ten most in--the ten most telling speeches I ever wrote and putting them in one book.  And the title of that book is going to 'The Man, His Mission, His Achievements, the Results'.  And I'm gonna get, let people read those ten speeches to see what was on my mind, every inch of the way, every time I went inside the federal government, this is what--there's a speech that deals with what was on my mind when I did it and what I did after going in.  Now, what do I want that to be?  I want that to become something of a road map so that we begin to measure our own performance when we go inside government regardless to whatever level.  If it's a city level, why are we going in?  What assignment am I taking on, and what license do I have to get on with it?  I'm not gonna talk about.  I'm gonna show how I did it.  And I, and, and what I'm finding is that we have the human, the--the human capital now to do that.  For an example, we had twenty-one, twenty-three thousand MBAs, okay, who understand that strategic planning is the core to everything.  So I'm saying as I, as I do these thirty-six cities that, I'm saying to them, the first piece we need since the New Market Tax Act is the wave of the future, and since the New Market Tax Act, in fact, encompasses almost all of it, then let's get busy holding some workshops and seminars to see exactly how we're gonna take advantage of the New Market Tax Act at your front door and move forward with it.  My problem and your, your probably--you're, you're identifying the problem is right on target.  But my problem is, we don't have an agenda, and we don't use the basic planning document to draft that agenda, and that basic planning document is something we participate in putting it together, and it's called a budget.  It's called the budget.  And we're sitting on the committees that, that decide on what the budget is, why it is, and what's to happen with that money.  It's no mystery.  So since that's the case, it's time for us to focus in and use the budget the same way every other--the way the farmers union uses the budget to plan its roll, defense department contractors use the budget to plan their roll, highway contractors use the budget to plan their roll.  You name me a trade association, and I'll point out to you a trade association that uses the federal budget, the state budget, the county budget, the city budget to carry out its mission.  We haven't done that.  And we behave like, that, that all this is--it's not a mystery.  We simply plan ourselves in with documents that we have elected and put in office to help prepare, come back to the community and hold a workshop every ninety days, every ninety days in your congressional district or if you're a city councilman or--hold a workshop and explain what's going on with that budget and then explain to the folks, this is how you mobilize and organize yourself outside to make it possible for me to have an impact inside.  That's what I'm gonna be doing.
Story_ID: 17882
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns about the black community as you sit here today?
Speaker 2: If, if it lingers the way it is, it's gonna be disastrous, okay.  If, in fact, it decides to use the budget as, as--the public budgets, in particular, 'cause public does--budgets are their tax dollars.  If they use public budgets to develop strategies and tactics to get on with it, then the future could be bright cause it's not that hard to convince white folks that they can't get much further without us if any further.  Circumstance has proved that for us.  We just haven't convinced ourselves that that's the case.  And that, and I'm saying--I'm talking about 2020.  I'm talking about 2020.  They, you say, wait a minute, about that budget thing, the budget is prepared ten years in advance as we live out--say, a three--2003, the, the budget for 2013 is being, that year is being added on right now.
Story_ID: 17883
Speaker 1: What is the definition in your mind of a black Republican?
Speaker 2: I don't have a definition for a black Republican.  When people ask me, am I a black Republican, I say, "I happen to be black and I'm in the Republican party, but that's all."  If you're talking ambitions and desire and experiences, I've never had a white person yet ask me if I was a Republican or a Democrat when they got ready to discriminate against me.  They could care less.  So, and we have to get over this business of assuming that, that, that party label results in some different kind of behavior once somebody's elected.
Speaker 1: But what about the ideology of the black--of the Republican Party appeals to you that you feel that it's worthy of your--?
Speaker 2: No, it's not ideology.  It's the fact that they gonna be spending my money, and your money and I need to be inside to see what I can do direct, to direct as much of that money to African American communities as I can.  It ain't got nothing to do with ideology.  The Democrats, though, when you get through listening to, to all this love thy neighbor that the Democrats get into, and you look over at their behavior, it ain't that much difference, if any.  The, the, the great, the great savior, [President Bill] Clinton, okay--who wiped out, practically wiped what everybody, every black thought was wonderful to some degree, which was the welfare system?  He wiped it out.  Who abandoned Lani Guinier who has one of the civil rights legal minds you can think of the minute he thought there was gonna be some flack on her, and then he walked away from her.  She's supposed to have been a lifelong friend.  He walked away from it.  Who said, mend it, but don't end it, but can't tell you what he mended?  Clinton.  They said, we're gonna amend the affirmative action program so it won't be whipped out.  I guarantee you, you can spend the next week trying to find out where's the mend that saved it.  They can't tell you.  They can't tell you.  You can ask any of these black appointees that weigh in, his administration plus those that are in this one, how, what is your strategy for implementing programs in a way that it benefits us right along with the rest of the folks?  What is your strategy for doing that, Democrat or Republican?  You know what, you ain't gonna get a answer.  Why?  'Cause they didn't go in with the idea that they could actually implement a program for both of us.  Now, why can they do that?  Because of the national security issue.  If we don't take advantage of the fact that national security is the issue today and national security rests on a quality workforce, if we miss out on that, then the Civil Rights Movement was for naught.  It was a waste of time.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 17884
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: What, what do I want my legacy to be?  I want my legacy to be one in which I changed the nation's culture.  That's hard to do.  Most people who change the nation's culture get killed.  [Mahatma] Gandhi was killed for changing India's culture.  [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was killed for trying to change the nation's culture.  Jesus Christ was killed for trying to change the culture of his time.  I went into the United States government and used power, not influence, power, to change America's culture.  How do I know it changed because I look in one place to make that determination, the shape, quality and quantity of its workforce.  That workforce is now almost 50 percent minorities and women.  It would not have changed had it not been for the fact that I came up with the riddle of how to enforce, stop relying on goodwill and all that good stuff and enforce the law.  Affirmative action enforcement process that I set in motion made it possible to set standards for enforcing all the civil rights legislation.  So my legacy should be one in which he came up with the enforcement process.  Whenever I say anything about affirmative action, I never say affirmative action quick.  I say the affirmative action, and I'll underline enforcement, the affirmative action enforcement process.  They didn't mind putting the statutes on the books, didn't mind that, Thirteenth, Fourteenth, Fifteenth Amendment, had no problem putting the statute on the books.  What they did have problems with is coming up with the rules, regulations and guidelines and the case law to make it enforceable.  I came up with that secret.  I want to be remembered as the person who devised the way to enforce the law in behalf of African Americans, in behalf of women and other racial minorities and, and the physically impaired.  That's my legacy.
Story_ID: 17885
Speaker 1: When you think of yourself as the young boy, when you were talking early, you know, who I asked you is--the young boy who was very introspective and see where that young boy has come in the span of seventy--?
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight years.
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight years, what are your thoughts about that journey, the journey that you've had in your life?
Speaker 2: Well, the important part of that journey is when I adapted the idea in 1965, when I adapted the idea that I was put here to help God manage his universe, and he had gave me the talents to do that, and then bought into it, and made it happen.  Then that's when I realized that the journey, that, that the journey was gonna be fruitful in terms of accomplishing the mission that I was put on earth to do.
