Story_ID: 42635
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interview today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Monica Fountain [wife].  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure, my name is John Wesley Fountain.  It's J-O-H-N, W-E-S-L-E-Y, F-O-U-N-T-A-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is there a story behind your name, John Wesley Fountain?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I like to tell people it's either John Wesley, the reformer or John Wesley, the outlaw.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) The gunfighter.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is September 29, 1960.  My place of birth is Chicago, Illinois.  I was born at Presbyterian [Presbyterian Hospital] or what is now Rush Hospital on the West side.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a tenured full professor at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].  I'm also a journalist and an author and a book publisher.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Ooh, what is today's date?  It's April 16th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are on Michigan Avenue at The HistoryMakers' headquarters.
Story_ID: 42636
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we get started, we--before we go into depth, we start with five lightweight question that just require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  I think so.  Chicken curry.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is fall.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Cancun, Mexico.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have a couple of them, but they've--the one that has carried me through my career is "Never internalize their disrespect".
Story_ID: 42637
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But we keep 'em separate until we bring 'em together.  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Gwendolyn Marie Clincy.  That's her married name.  Her maiden name is Hagler.  It's G-W-E-N-D-O-L-Y-N, middle name Marie, M-A-R-I-E, married name Clincy, C-L-I-N-C-Y, married [sic, maiden] name Hagler, H-A-G-L-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth is August 4, (ha, ha, ha), she was born in 1943, August 4, 1943.  And she was born in Cairo, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's C-A-I-R-O.
Speaker 2: -R-O.
Speaker 1: Like Cairo.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, except it's in Illinois, so they call it Cairo [pronounced Kayro] (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: My mother's side of the family, I can go--my mother's father is George Hagler, G-E-O-R-G-E, Hagler.  And he was raised by his grandfather whose name was Burton Roy, B-U-R-T-O-N, R-O-Y.  Burton Roy is significant for our family because he was born a slave.  And he raised my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was your grandfather's maternal grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about slavery that are passed down?
Speaker 2: Just the, not very many, just the story of my grandfather, my great, great grandfather remembering hearing the fighting going on during the Civil War and being set free and migrating North.  But, but not a whole lot of other details.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there, did he talk about where he was a slave?
Speaker 2: Did he talk about where he was a slave?  Atlanta [Georgia].  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was in Georgia.  Okay.
Story_ID: 42638
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how the family got to Cairo [Cairo, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I don't know how the family, I don't recall how the family got to Cairo.  But that is where we, that is where my grandfather [George Hagler]  was born, and that is where, Cairo [and] Pulaski, Illinois is where he grew up and where he met my grandmother, Florence Hagler, F-L-O-R-E-N-C-E.  And they married when they were about 13 or 14 years old and were married until she died a few years ago.
Speaker 1: Now, here's a question you probably get all the time, but are you any relationship to the fighter, Hagler [Marvin Hagler]?
Speaker 2: We are related in some way.  He's definitely, or we're definitely part of the same Hagler clan, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Can't you tell by the head?  No, I'm just kidding (laughter).
Speaker 1: I don't want you to punch me (laughter).
Speaker 2: Nah, nah, nah.
Speaker 1: All right, yeah, I thought I'd ask anyway, so, yeah.  All right, now what did your mother's [Gwendolyn Clincy] people do for a living in Cairo and Pulaski?
Speaker 2: In Pulaski, my great, great grandfather, Burton Roy, essentially was a farmer.  They did sharecropping, and for the most part, my grandfather tells me that is what, what they all did.  And it was how they made a living and it was how they got by, were able to feed their families.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now did they own their own land?
Speaker 2: He did own his own land, and the family still owns a parcel of property that is, that he purchased, and--there in Pulaski, Pulaski, Illinois, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother know your great, great grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, she did.  She did.  And he was a, he was a preacher.  I come from a long line of preachers.  We were, as they say, born into the Church of God in Christ, commonly known as the "sanctified church" that was started by Bishop Charles Harrison Mason.  And so they were very religious people who believed in going to church, believed in serving God and brought the children up in the same, same way.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was your mother part of a large family?
Speaker 2: My mother is one of six children.  She has four sisters and one brother.  My grandparents had six children.
Story_ID: 42639
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did she [Fountain's mother, Gwendolyn Clincy] say about growing up in Cairo [Illinois]?  What was it like?
Speaker 2: Well, she didn't live very long in Cairo because the family was part of the great migration to Chicago [Illinois].  And she does talk about living in what was known as the, the ABLA Homes [Jane Addams Homes, Robert Brooks Homes, Loomis Courts, and Grace Abbott Homes], a housing projects on the Near-West side of Chicago.  And it was quite a different place than when you talk about housing projects today, especially for those of us who grew up in the '60's [1960s] and '70's [1970s] and saw the deterioration that happened in places like Cabrini-Green and Stateway Gardens and Robert Taylor Homes.  We have a very distinct idea or sense of what the projects meant, and it was not the kind of place that you wanted to live.  It was lots of dysfunction and criminal activity and so on.  And that's, not to paint it with a broad stroke, but that was just what was happening when I was growing up.  The projects that they described were--[coughing].  The projects that they described were pristine places with emerald lawns where most of the families had two-parent households.  And she talks about sometimes they would lay on the grass at night and sleep and folks didn't lock their doors and so on.  So it was a, it was a much different place.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, now, I've heard that before from other people we've interviewed, even about Stateway and Robert Taylor and how they were safe, had recreation centers.  The kids would, from other neighborhoods would actually attend and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know.  So, yeah.  So--
Speaker 2: It was a real sense of community I think back then.  And they knew everyone, everybody knew them, and I write about it in my book 'True Vine.'
Story_ID: 42640
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your mother's [Gwendolyn Clincy] family transition out of the projects into a home at some point?
Speaker 2: They did.  That was always their goal.  Their goal was to, as part of the goal for many blacks who moved from the South to the North, even from the Southern part of state because--and so much of Cairo or Pulaski, Illinois felt like it's, felt like the South when I went there.  But that was their, that was their goal.  And my grandfather [George Hagler] was a letter carrier.  And he did a number of other jobs before settling in at the Post Office, but always worked with his hands and was someone who loved and cared for and took care of his family and believed that that was what men did.  And my grandmother [Florence Hagler] was a seamstress, and she worked at Kuppenheimer, a factory on the West side of Chicago, made clothes, and she also made clothes for the family at times when I was growing up, made me entire suits to wear.  And so they, they saved, and they pinched until they were able to buy a house.  And they moved from the projects farther West to "K-Town" [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois] My grandfather bought an initial property on 16th and Komensky, 16th Street and Komensky Avenue, and ultimately bought two buildings so that he had a total of five units.  He had a three-flat apartment that had three bedrooms in each of the--two to three bedrooms in each of the apartments.  And he bought a two-flat that had the same.  And his idea in buying both of those properties, which the family ultimately called the "compound" because just about everybody in our family at some point lived in those two buildings, his vision and his, his idea of taking care of his family was that he had five daughters and that they would always have a place to stay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he had a collective sort of mentality around how to hold his family together.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 42641
Speaker 1: So, now, tell us, now, those who are not from Chicago [Illinois], what is K-Town?
Speaker 2: K-Town is an area on the West side of Chicago that is more commonly known as North Lawndale.  The 'Chicago Tribune' did a series some years ago in the early '80's [1980s] called 'The American Millstone.'  And that series of stories focused on North Lawndale, on my community.  And the reason the 'Tribune' called it the 'American Millstone' was they said, essentially, that we were the millstone draped around America's neck, that we would never amount to anything, we didn't have middle-class values and so on.  And the residue of that series, I think is still, still alive and well and left a bitter taste in the mouths of people who grew up and lived and loved that community because it was some of the most biased reporting I have ever seen.  And I'm a journalist for more than 20 years, and even as I read the, reread the opening piece for that series, I mean that is essentially what they said, almost in those words, except it was worse.  And so that is, that's the community I grew up in.
Speaker 1: And when was this written?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: This was in, I think 1984, and so after the series runs, of course, I was there when that was going on.  And they didn't talk to me, and I know, as a journalist or even a team report, of reporters, you don't get to talk to everybody.  But when you're writing stories that represent a community at its whole, it is important, it is responsible journalism to get at least the other side.  And there is always at least one other side.  And, but a few years after that series ran, I walked in the 'Chicago Tribune' newsroom as a full-fledged reporter.  So my presence alone, for me at least, says that what you said, your thesis, your conclusion, your analyses was completely wrong, 'cause I went from K-Town to the 'Tribune.'  And so, K-Town also gets its name--we grew up on the, I grew up on the street called Komensky, named Komensky.  But there were a group of streets that began, just West of Pulaski Road, that all begin with the letter "K".  There's Kedvale, Kostner, Keeler, Kolin, Karlov, Komensky and other streets.  So it gets the name "K-Town."  We used to joke as kids, sometimes that the "K" in K-Town stood for "kill" town 'cause it was, it was, a high concentration of poverty, hyper-segregated community, high crime.
Story_ID: 42642
Speaker 1: But even that said, there was a, before things turned almost completely South, there was always a sense of community and a sense of caring and good times had, you know, throughout K-Town [North Lawndale], which is a part of ghetto life I think that so often gets missed, missed by the media and not the understanding.  We don't get the understanding that the vast majority of crime that's being committed in the community is being done by a small group of people.  And, but it's where my grandmother lived and it's where, you know, Mr. Newell who lived on our block and had a, an apple tree, would, in the fall, when the apples were ripe for picking, the whole community would come and gather around Mr. Newell's apple tree in his backyard.  And the older boys would climb up in the tree and shake the tree, and people would collect the apples and make apple preserves and so on.  And it was a great day.  It was a place where we had block club parties.  And I can still see, you know, the Southside Movement Band, and one of the guys who lived on Komensky, his older brother played drums for the Southside Movement.  And there'd be dancing and racing in the street and the grills would be smoking and hot dogs.  And, so there was fun to be had which is why, one of the reasons I felt I needed to write my book 'True Vine' because I wanted to crystallize that time in history, that it is so important for us to tell our stories with an insider's point of view rather than as an outsider coming in and interpreting or reinterpreting our stories, which is, you know, quite frankly, I think the beauty of HistoryMakers, that it does tell the stories straight from the horse's mouth.  And that's priceless.
Story_ID: 42643
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you--I'm gonna ask you more about K-Town [North Lawndale] when we talk about growing up, but did your mother [Gwendolyn Clincy] get a chance to finish school on the West side?
Speaker 2: My mother, my mother got married when she was 16 years old.  She married my father [John Fountain] who I'm named after.  And she had me when she was 17.  And she had to quit school because she was, she was pregnant, and she and my grandmother [Florence Hagler] tell me that, you know, there were issues with, of course, even with her being married, with being a pregnant married young woman going to school.  It was not the kind of image that the school wanted to have in front of other students.  And so she had me and she was just going to not go back.  And my grandmother said, "Gwen, I really need you to go back and finish, finish high school."  And because my grandmother asked her to do it, pleaded with her to do it, she did it.  And so she did graduate from high school.  And she later took some classes at Malcolm X College [Chicago, Illinois] and a couple of other colleges as well.  My mother has always been one of the smartest people, the smartest people I've ever met.  She is a voracious reader.  I remember as a kid having conversations about current events.  She was always a newspaper reader, always insisted that we read.  And it was funny that sometimes I'd go to school, and teachers would be talking about history and bringing things up, and I'd raise my hand and I'd answer the question.  They'd say, "How do you know that?"  Because my mom and I talk about it at home.  And so it really, it really--she was, she was my first teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what high school did she--
Speaker 2: Farragut [Farragut Career Academy].
Speaker 1: Farragut.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 42644
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, let me go to your father's [John Fountain] side and then we'll get 'em together.  Can, your father's name is the same as yours?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He's a senior.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His place of birth is Evergreen, Alabama.  And my guess-timation on his date of birth, September 19th?  Sixteenth.  September 16th.  It would have been 1938, is that right?
Speaker 1: Okay, 1938.  Now--
Speaker 2: The reason it's difficult for me to answer that is my father was not a presence in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have two memories of him.  One is, I was four years old and he was being taken out of our apartment in handcuffs.  The next memory I have of him is I'm 19 years old, and--I should say 18 years old, and I'm standing over his casket.  He's been killed in an automobile accident in Evergreen, Alabama.  He, he was an alcoholic, and just simply chose not to be a presence in our life, in my life and my sisters'.  And so his mother's name is Autherine Jackson, A-U-T-H-E-R-I-N-E, Jackson.  She's deceased.  I don't know her birth date.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting name.  You know, it's Autherine Lucy in the Civil Rights Movement.  That's the only other Autherine I've ever heard of.
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: Is there any relationship?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I know very little about that side of my family.  I know uncles or cousins that I've had, I got the opportunity to have a good conversation with my father's mother before she died.  And she was able to fill in some holes, just at least for me emotionally and a little bit about who he was and his issues.  But the history was something.  His father wasn't, wasn't in his life, and I don't think she told us who he--she didn't even tell us who he was.  So it's just--
Speaker 1: This is your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where is Evergreen [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Evergreen is South of, it's in Southern Alabama, South of Montgomery, South of Montgomery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Maybe you should do the interview (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, it's good to have somebody that knows some of the answers.
Speaker 2: My wife is a stickler for detail.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Evergreen is South of Montgomery.  So he had, had his family migrated to Chicago at a certain point or did he come up by himself or what?
Speaker 2: I, I know that there are family members who came from Evergreen, but I knew, I know more about other people's families than I know about my father's family.  I don't know very much about them.
Speaker 1: So there're some other family members of his that are in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: My, my grandmother's, my father's mother's sister, whose name was Margarite Stallworth, she lived on the West side of Chicago.  And she's the only one that I remember as a kid ever having contact with and her sons who are older than I am, James Stallworth and Clyde Stallworth and Peter Stallworth.  But--okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: But it wasn't a real close relationship, I guess.
Speaker 2: No, no.  I mean they were virtually non-existent in my life.
Story_ID: 42645
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when your father [John Fountain] was arrested, did he spend a lot of time in jail or was it--
Speaker 2: It was, my mother [Gwendolyn Clincy], my mother, the way I explain it in my book ['True Vine'], and the way she explained it to me was, back then when she explained to me, and the way she explained to me later, is he was abusive.  And that night when he had come to the house, knocked on the door, I ran to the door.  I, I knew it was him.  I don't know how I knew as a kid it was him.  And I said, who's, who is it?  And he said, Dad.  And I was about to open the door, and my mother said, "John, come away from the door."  But I opened the door.  It was my father.  And he came in and he sat in the living room.  I remember as a little boy, climbing up on his lap, and he always chewed cinnamon gum.  And later, there was always this other smell with the cinnamon gum, but as a kid, I didn't know what it was.  As a grown man, I know what it was.  It was liquor.  And I remember asking him that night, "Dad, do you have any more gum?"  And he gave me some gum.  And my mother said, John, come here for a minute.  I want you to take a note to your aunt who lives downstairs.  She lived on the second floor.  And my mother gave me a note.  And even back then, I could read.  And, and I usually read the notes when I was taking them to my aunt, and for some reason, I didn't read the note.  She said, "take the note to your aunt and come right back."  So I ran down the stairs, took the note, knocked on the door, gave my aunt the note and ran back upstairs and sat there and talked to my father.  Now, even now, I sense that there was tension between my mother and my father.  But I didn't know.  And then a short while later, I hear some feet coming, you know, footsteps, and a pound on the door.  And it was the police, and they took him away.  And she said, she didn't want him to hit her again.  And I don't think I understood.  I don't think I could have understood it then in terms of--I just saw police taking my dad away.  But years later, I looked back and I think how powerful that was and empowering it was for my mother to do what she needed to do to protect herself, and not only to protect herself, but to protect her children.
Speaker 1: Now, this, from what I understand about Chicago [Illinois] history, and unfortunately, I've met women that have been abused, that's remarkable for 1964 for the police to come and escort a man away for simply hitting his wife.  So there must have been, you know--in those days, it was simply, treated as just, you know, it could happen at anybody's household, and it wasn't a lot of attention paid to it.  In fact, the police were guilty of doing a lot of that themselves.  So it must have been a number of incidents that led up to them responding that way, just taking him out of there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know.  You know, one of my earliest memories of my mother and father is we're standing at the top of some stairs in our apartment, and they're tussling.  And it is almost like a movie as I'm looking as a kid.  And I just know they're towering above me.  And I am terrified that he is going to push my mother down those stairs.  And so that's all I remember.  But my mother has since told me as a man that he was very abusive, and, which is not a surprise because, in part, because of who he was, his own demons that he wrestled with and, among them, the alcoholism.  And so I think that is sort of, you know, it's par for the course in terms of the dysfunction that goes along with those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 41050
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, your father [John Fountain], that night when you were four, the police took him away, and you didn't see him again until he passed away?
Speaker 2: My mother [Gwendolyn Clincy] says that there was a couple of other times that I saw him, but I don't remember seeing him.  And in fact, the pictures that we had of him disappeared, and I know they didn't just walk away.  I suspect my mother put them away, and, and so after a while I forgot what he looked like and forgot what he sounded like.  I knew he was out there somewhere.  But I think one of the things that happens with, in some cases when adults don't get along or decide they're going to get a divorce or separate is that there is such a rift of bitterness between them that it is--and pain as well, that it is very, sometimes, difficult for the mothers to even have the children--and I'm not justifying it, but to have the fathers be, participate in the child's life.  And so it was very difficult for me to even broach the topic of, "I want to see my father; I'd like to contact him" and so on.  But that said, he never called.  I think once in high school he called me, but I ran track, I played basketball, ran cross country.  I was "Boy of the Year" in seventh and eighth grade.  I was a great student, participating in lots of things, and he never showed up, not once; never bought me a birthday card, never called me and said happy birthday.  And so, you know, clearly the responsibility was squarely on his shoulder.  And for whatever reason, he decided to not, to not be a presence in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is there a story about how your parents met?  And he's a little bit older than your mother.
Speaker 2: I never asked, and she never told me.  I think I will ask her, you know.  I don't know how they met.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a bit older than she is, and she's in high school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 41051
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about growing up, I mean, who was the primary male figure in your life then growing up?
Speaker 2: The primary male figure in my life was my grandfather [George Hagler].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a pastor, and even before he became a pastor, he was simply a family man.  I shouldn't say simply 'cause that's a big thing.  And he always worked.  You know, one of my memories of him is coming home at the end of his, delivering his mail with his U.S. Postal bag slung over his shoulder, whistling.  He was a, he's a gentle man.  He's still alive.  He's a gentle man who was tough too.  He didn't play.  And we did what he said as his grandchildren.  But he was somebody I could model, and I modeled the way he walked, the way he, he stood with his shoulders squared and I think to some degree, his jovial nature and his, his fondness for joking around and also his commitment to family.  So he was the most significant male in my life.
Story_ID: 41052
Speaker 1: So when you think about growing up, from all you know, like who do you think you take after the most amongst all those influences?
Speaker 2: Probably my grandmother [Florence Hagler] because my grandmother, she's the one I quote the most.  She's the one who is ever with me when I have important decisions to make.  In terms of my whole paradigm for understanding how I see life and my place in it, and ultimately what I want to do and to be said of me when I'm gone and the fact that I know that I'm, I believe by my faith that I'm destined to spend eternity somewhere and that it's important for me to, even with faults and even with mistakes, to try and be a certain kind of person and to try and make a difference.  My passion for caring for people--
Story_ID: 41053
Speaker 1: Now, your grandmother [Florence Hagler] came, now, where did she come from?  Did you tell me already and I just forgot or she's--
Speaker 2: My grandmother is from Tennessee.  Which town?  Dyersburg.  My wife says Dyersburg.
Speaker 1: Okay, but she's from Dyersburg, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did she grow up there or did she grow up in Chicago?
Speaker 2: My grandmother grew up in Tennessee, but she, by the time she was 13, she was married to my grandfather.  She met him while visiting folks in Pulaski/Cairo, Illinois.  And so to some degree, she, she grew up in Cairo because she was a teenage mother, teenaged, married woman, married.  And, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did she have a chance to go to school at all?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was not, didn't have a formal education.  She later went back to school and earned her GED.  And I remember her being very excited about that, about the opportunity to go back to school.  And she was, at one point in my life, my best friend.  And she would share with me sometimes--she loved her family, and there's nothing she would trade for that.  She absolutely adored her family.  And she was enterprising.  She could make anything with her hands.  And she was a missionary.  She was in the church, she was a church mother.  And, but she--I remember her expressing some disappointment or, you know, questioning, not with regret, but wonder, about education, what, what--not necessarily what she might have done, but the fact that she didn't get it because life happened and children and family and other things demanded her time.  And she did go back to school and earn her GED, and she was ecstatic and happy and proud about having done that.
Story_ID: 41054
Speaker 1: Now, she [Fountain's grandmother, Florence Hagler] was the seamstress with Kuppenheimer?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, Kuppenheimer is, they have a reputation for quality clothing.  I've got a trenchcoat I found in Dayton [Ohio], believe it or not, and it said--somebody said, what kind of--and I said, "That's a Kuppenheimer.  It came from Chicago."  That's a, this thing is really put together.  So I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, she was a wonderful seamstress.  I remember she literally made me three-piece suits.  She made, you know, gowns for her granddaughters to be married in.  When we were having Tom Thumb weddings at church, she sewed all of that stuff.  She made tons of quilts.  You know, when I spent the night with my grandparents [Florence Hagler and George Hagler], I would awaken to the sound of the sewing machine rumbling, and if the sewing machine wasn't going, she'd be singing or praying out loud, and she'd be sitting next to her quilt with her thimble on her thumb and just, just sewing and making these, this just sort of, this beautiful artwork in these quilts.
Story_ID: 41055
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were surrounded by some productivity and industrious grandmother [Florence Hagler].  Your grandfather [George Hagler] is like, building something for his family.  Do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I do.  I have one brother [Jeffery Clincy] and two sisters [Gloria Fountain and Meredith Clincy].
Speaker 1: Okay, and where do you--you're the oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest, yes.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest, okay.  All right, so, okay, so the household would have consisted of your mother [Gwendolyn Clincy] and your grandparents and your--or did you live with your mother separately from your grandparents in another place?
Speaker 2: No, I lived with my mother.  For a while after my father left, we lived with one of my aunts when I was very small.  And then my mother remarried in 1967 and, which is where she gets her married name, Clincy.  She married my stepfather, whose name is Eddie Clincy, E-D-D-I-E, C-L-I-N-C-Y.  And he was born and raised in Isola, Mississippi, I-S-O-L-A, Mississippi, in the Mississippi Delta.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So when, well, so you lived with your mother and your stepfather during this period of time?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you and your brothers and sisters.  And your brothers and sisters are products of the second marriage?
Speaker 2: My, my youngest sister and my brother are products of the second marriage.  I have another sister who's two years younger than me.  And her name's Gloria, and she and I have the same mother and father.
Story_ID: 41056
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, now, well, tell us about growing up?  You grew up in K-Town [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois], right, as you were saying.  Describe, kind of describe your neighborhood and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, my neighborhood was initially, when I was growing up a place of green lawns and some big shiny cars.  It was a place where boys played, played baseball or strike out on a building.  We would make a box and throw a rubber ball and play strike out.  We would play games like "Johnny Come Across" or tag football.  There were a lot of boys in my neighborhood, probably more boys than girls.  There were at least 25 boys on my block, at least 25.  And we all knew each other, and, you know, most, most of the time we got along.  Sometimes there were fights, but nobody got shot, nobody hit anybody with a brick or anything like that.  The most that happened is somebody got punched.  And some guys, you know, had a scrap and wrestled on the ground before somebody broke it up.  The smells were of, the best of smells were when somebody pulled out their grill, and there's barbequing, especially on the fourth of July, Memorial Day, or Labor Day, the smell of a fresh snow cone, the sound of the watermelon man who had this truck, don't know his name.  We just called him the watermelon man.  And he hit the corners, "Watermelon Man" [calling out].  And we'd started running down the street, and he had all kinds of fruit, and, of course, he had watermelon.  And the sounds of the ice cream truck, the chimes, hitting the corner and the sound of children's chatter and laughter, the slap of the rope, double-dutch, girls jumping double-dutch and singing the songs.  And the bounce of the ball on the street as we were playing, playing another game; the slap of hands as we would play hand games.  It was fun, it was fun initially, early on.
Story_ID: 41057
Speaker 1: So where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to elemen--I went to Mason, Roswell B. Mason, M-A-S-O-N.  And I went there from Head Start through eighth grade.  My mother [Gwendolyn Hagler] tells me that I was part of the first Head Start class.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that would have been around, right, 1964, LBJ [President Lyndon B. Johnson] you know, started Head Start.  So you would have been, did you start when you were like four?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Four years old, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I remember, and Head Start was, still, still remember Head Start--that's amazing.  But school was fun for me.  I liked it.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any particular subjects that you liked the most in school?
Speaker 2: I liked reading.  I really loved math.  I loved science, and I just liked being there.  I liked being around other kids and, yeah.  Occasionally, got into a little mischief, but it was, it was just me joking around more than anything.  I wasn't a bad kid.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, once again, everybody's not from Chicago that reads this, but--that sees this, but this is, on the West side, the school is what, about 100 percent black?
Speaker 2: Probably, 99.9 percent black (laughter).  We might have had one, one white student, one or two white students at Mason.  But, of course, by the time I got to eighth grade, we probably had zero white students.
Speaker 1: And what about the teachers?  Were the teachers integrated?
Speaker 2: The teachers were black and white, yes, yes.
Story_ID: 41058
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: Wow, yes, I have a teacher I'm still in--I still converse with, I'm still in touch with and see her every once and a while.  It was my, my third grade, my second grade teacher.  Her name was Ms. Cartwright.  And she was tough, but she was kind and loving, and she always, she also made a point of getting to know the parents and coming around to the blocks and, you know, hanging out.  You know, she wasn't hanging out with us, but we saw her outside of the classroom, and it really made a difference.  And, you know, one thing we used to say is, "Ms. Cartwright don't play."  And she didn't play.  And I remember once I would, I had this habit of getting my work done first.  There were two reasons I wanted to get my work done first.  I wanted to get it done first so I could point to all the other kids and say, "I'm done, I beat you."  And the other reason was so that I could distract the other students and, with my jokes and it was my way of having fun.  And Ms. Cartwright said to me one day, she said, John, she said, "Boy, you need to be quiet, stop talking."  And she had to say it one too many times.  And then she said, "I'm gonna call your mother this evening."  And I begged her, "Please don't call my mama" (laughter).  And I was on pins and needles that whole evening.  And finally the phone rang.  And I figured from the silence that it must have been Ms. Cartwright.  And needless to say, she never had to call my home again.
Story_ID: 41059
Speaker 1: Now, church was a big part of growing up I know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the family church?
Speaker 2: True Vine Church of God in Christ.
Speaker 1: Okay, Church of God in Christ.  Now, there's a--I don't know if you--you probably do know it, but what is the history of the Church of God in Christ and its significance to black people?  There are a lot of members on the South and West side of Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yes.  The Church of God in Christ is a Pentecostal church that like Pentecostal churches in America, grew out of the Azusa Street movement [Azusa Street Revival] in California.  And our founder, the Church of God in Christ was Bishop Charles Harrison Mason, and who believed that in order to be saved or to received salvation that one of the signs was that you spoke in tongues when you received the baptism of the Holy Ghost.  And, and so the Church of God in Christ headquarters eventually became Memphis, Tennessee, and they began springing up across the country and internationally.  And it was at one point, the largest Pentecostal, fasting growing Pentecostal church in America, probably the world.  And we were the "Sanctified Church," we quickly became known as the "Sanctified Church" because they believed in living free from sin meaning that they believed in abstinence from pre-marital sex, from alcohol and the use of tobacco, foul language and so on.  And we called it the way of holiness.  And so to grow up in the Church of God in Christ, we used to sing the song "This is the Church of God in Christ"--it was our national song.  "This is the Church of God in Christ, this is the Church of God in Christ, you can't join it; you've got to be born in it; this is the Church of God in Christ."  And that born into it was about being born again, accept, accepting Jesus Christ as your personal savior and being "born again," as the bible calls for.  So growing up in my church, it was very nonsensical (laughter).  And it was very, very intense on Sunday mornings when they, when the organ revved up and the preacher was standing in the pulpit and the call to prayer.  We believe in dancing and singing and speaking in tongues.  And we got the name "holy rollers" because sometimes women in our church would dance and caught up in the spirit, and sometimes, they would fall on the floor and the old mothers in the church would run to the back and get a sheet and throw it over the, over the sisters to keep them from being exposed, obviously.  And so there's this visual of sisters rolling around in the church, in part.  So we get the holy rollers.  I think it's been poked fun at, and having been an insider, I don't necessarily agree with that.  But I do understand.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, those are all the things--that's a pretty good description 'cause you've given us all the different names of the Pentecostal church and how it relates to the holy rollers and the sanctified and all of it, all of the--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --yeah, I've heard all of those descriptions of churches, but I--a lot of times you hear these things, and you're not sure what the denomination is or what.  They say, well, they're sanctified or they're holy rollers.  They're, you know, Pentecostal or whatever, yeah, so.
Speaker 2: I put it like this.  If you came to a "Sanctified Church."  If I--we went to Baptist churches, and after the Baptist church, after the church was dismissed or during offering or something sometimes, people would go outside and smoke a cigarette and come back in the church.  That was sacrilege in the "Sanctified Church."  And it's sort of the idea was, oh, my goodness, those Baptists (laughter).  We don't do that here.  We're sanctified.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, this is dramatic stuff.  This is big drama and it's compelling, singing, dancing--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --people speaking in tongues and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 41060
Speaker 1: Well, what was your, what's your interpretation of that?  What is speaking in tongues?  I mean what did they tell you in church that was?
Speaker 2: In church, they told us speaking in tongues was a sign that was one of the manifestations of the spirit of, the holy spirit of God.  And as a kid, I'm not sure what I believed.  I just, I was, I was a kid who always asked questions.  And even when I saw my aunts dancing, and I saw people speaking in tongues, and I saw some of my cousins, nothing ever hit me.  And I wasn't about to jump and dance or, or to try and do what they were doing because I just--I wasn't sure.  And, and so much of what is--we talk about, we talked about it in church growing up, being spiritual were things that you really couldn't see or you really couldn't touch or things that required faith more than they required your sort of logical reasoning.  And I was trying to rationalize or trying to, trying to figure out, you know, what was what.  And it didn't, it just didn't, some of it just didn't make sense to me.  The, the greatest part that made sense to me, the most tangible thing of that for me, the whole church thing, was when I would spend the night at my grandparents' [George Hagler and Florence Hagler] house.  There was such a serene, such a serenity, such a, such a great deal of peace I felt walking through their doors.  And my grandmother lived what she preached.  In other words, I saw her speaking in tongue and dancing and praising and singing at church.  She did the same thing at home all the time.  It was the same thing, and I, and I saw, I saw in her a genuine love for this God that I could not see and a faith that believed that God for her family.  And it was this quiet strength that she exhibited.  She was the most forgiving person I've ever met in my life, the most loving person I've ever met in my life, and if there was a God and if there was a such thing--such a thing as a holiness and sanctification, she helped me to believe that because I saw it all over her.  And that's what she said it was.  So that was the tangible part of my faith.  The other thing that, to coincide with that is, as I got older I began to pray with my grandmother and some of the older women in the church, the mothers in the church, we called them the mothers in the church, little old church mothers who would go from church to church within our district of churches across Chicago [Illinois], the West side, and they would pray for an hour every Tuesday and Friday morning.  And it was not form or fashion.  I was 95 percent of the time the only male in attendance.  And, and I saw this same kind of realness reflected within them.  And that really made what I saw as a kid become real to me, and not the sort of, you know, hocus pocus kind of doubt-filled observance of this, of what to some would just seem like to be a frivolous ritual.
Story_ID: 41061
Speaker 1: Now, how do you account for that kind of thinking [about the drama of the Pentecostal Church of God in Christ]?  I mean so many people claim, and as you well know, having written columns about this now, so many people claim that all these, the frosting is the real part and the (laughter), it's more real than the other part.  I don't, I guess I'm, I don't know if I'm putting it right.  But the fireworks, all the Jesus speaking to 'em and the speaking in tongues, all that is more real and you see the works as the works as being the value of what they're doing rather than the rest of it.  I mean were there influences around you that, that--I mean who was around you or what did you, I guess, encounter that made you question some of the more sensational aspects of the church?
Speaker 2: I think the thing that made me question some of the kind of sensational aspects of the church was just my nature.  I'm very inquisitive.  You know, if I had been one of the disciples, I would have been Thomas and said, "Lord, let me see your hands; let me see the nails" (laughter).  And I don't know why I am that way.  It's part of my makeup as a journalist.  I tell my students the saying in journalism, "If your mother says she loves you, check it out.  She might not be your mother."  But to corroborate information, I need to be convinced.  And I don't know where that comes from.  I don't know if it's related to the fact that, it goes back to my father's absence, and something that was real to me, that's just sort of disintegrated and overnight was gone.  And there were no answers for me, but lots and lots of questions that I wouldn't get answers to until many years later.  The other part of it was, if people were saying that God was all powerful and God was loving and God was kind, my question was, "Why are people getting killed?"
Story_ID: 42646
Speaker 1: All right, so we were talking about the church [True Vine Church of God in Christ] before we broke.  So you began to really question what was going on in the church when you were a little older, you said?
Speaker 2: Well, I always questioned what was going on in the church, you know.  There were times when we would have month-long revivals, and that essentially meant going to church every day of the week for a month.  And the idea was, for evening service, the idea was, we have this term in the sanctified church, of "tarrying for the Holy Ghost," and you go to the altar, and you clap and you call on the name of Jesus until you begin to speak in tongue or dance, exhibited the signs to the Saints that you have been filled with the Holy Spirit.  And my cousins would do it, and I'd be standing there, trying to do what they told me to do, but determined if God existed, he was gonna have to knock me down or let me really feel something (laughter).  And it never happened for me, and I think they, some of my family deemed me to be a irredeemable sinner (laughter).  But I needed proof.  I needed something to happen to me.  I was not going to be a participant in any kind of mass hysteria if that was what it was.  And, and I had, I had one of my cousins, I love him dearly--I won't say who he is, but he would say, sometimes when the service was real high and the music was high, he'd say, "Watch this, John, watch this".  He'd run out in the middle of the aisle and start dancing and spinning around, and look up at me and wink (laughter).  So I wasn't gonna participate in that.  And so I always had my doubts, even though I believed God was real.  But there was, there were contradictions.  To be believe that God is real and all-powerful and to live in the ghetto and to see poverty and to live poor, to believe that God is rich and mean to not have enough food to eat.  It didn't add up.  And so it left me with more questions than, than answers.  And consequently, I think it ultimately, as a child, just afflicted my faith.
Story_ID: 42647
Speaker 1: Now, you grew up, your--now, did you have to face personal, like poverty like that?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --with a grandfather [George Hagler] as a postman?
Speaker 2: Yes.  One of the things that happens, I think within families is when you have family units, even when you think you're a close family, no one knows what happens in other people's houses, unless people say something.  And my mother [Gwendolyn Clincy] was a very private person.  And sometimes there wasn't food to eat, and I remember writing my book 'True Vine' and reading some early drafts.  And someone said to me, "If you had a stepfather [Eddie Clincy] at home, how could you really have been that poor?  I don't believe it."  There are some things I could have said and what I'll say is this.  Sometimes he didn't bring his money home which was not like, unlike some men.  And it's still not unlike some men.  And, and so there were times when we had nothing to eat.  There were times when my mother made do and making potato patties, fried potato patties and my sister and I, I say we were so poor at times we thought a ketchup sandwich was a treat.  And that was the reality.  We lived in an apartment that at times was infested with roaches.  It was infested with mice.  And I didn't know as a child how to say that to my grandparents.  And I don't know that it was necessarily my place to say it.  I didn't wanna embarrass my mother.  I knew she was embarrassed enough, and prideful.  And so we suffered silently.  And it was, at one point in my life when I was going to church, people thought that I hated going to church.  And that wasn't it at all.  I learned to scowl.  I learned to sort of keep people from asking me questions by, by frowning and being sullen and silent.  And what I was really doing was masking my pain.  And you, I couldn't say, I felt like I couldn't say what was really going on and the kind of difficulties that we were having.
Story_ID: 42648
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So I imagine you--well, you say you liked to read.  Now, what were you reading when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: What didn't I read?  I read everything from comic books, Spiderman and Captain America to Ele--to childhood stories, to--my mother [Gwendolyn Clincy] took us to the library.  I read newspapers.  We, my mother's rule was, one of her rules was we had to be in bed by 8:30.  And by 8:30 at sometimes, depending on what, what time of year it was, it was still light outside.  And I can hear still the kids playing outside (laughter).  But her rule was, in addition to being in bed by 8:30, was that we could still read as long as we were in bed.  So that's how I amused myself.  I amused myself by reading.  And, and really fell in love with this notion that reading allowed me to go places in my mind.  It allowed me to have these wonderful experiences and to see a different world, and it became my pastime.
Story_ID: 42649
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, did you do any, can you recall when you ever, when you wrote your first piece of any significance or when did you, you know, become interested in writing?
Speaker 2: I've always been interested in writing, from the time I was a little boy to my ability to articulate the written word by my ability to write.  I've always been a writer, poems, songs.  When I was in fourth, fifth grade, I was writing songs, I played guitar.  And I had my sister and my cousins participating in a talent show.  They were my back-up singers for a song that I had wrote that we performed in front of the entire school.  I just loved writing.  There was something about this ability to create from within, to go into this kind of, to this space, to this place within you, within your soul, within your heart, within your mind and to bring something to life that people are amused by or that they appreciate.  In seventh and eighth grade, we used to write, do creative writing and write these stories for class.  And we would sit around in a circle, with my classmates and our task was to read the stories that we had wrote.  And I was writing stories about talking leaves and all kinds of things.  And I'd be reading my stories, and I'd look up, and I'd see people smiling or laughing and sometimes kids, hardly able to sit still, they were enjoying it.  The power of that was, was incredible, it felt incredible to me.  And so I always wanted to write a better story or to have that effect on people.  And so I've been writing for as long as I can remember.
Story_ID: 42650
Speaker 1: Who taught you how to play the guitar?  How did you get involved with the guitar?
Speaker 2: I taught myself how to play the guitar.  I had an uncle, one of my, my aunt's husband who played guitar.  And he showed me a few things.  But my grandfather [George Hagler] was old school.  And when he started his church, True Vine Church of God in Christ, his idea, his, his mentality was let everything that have breath praise the Lord, and if you play an instrument, bring it to church and learn how to play here.  And all of us, all of my cousins were, just about all of us, 15 of us, everybody played something, even if it was a tambourine or you play the organ or you played the piano.  And there's something about growing up around music and being in the midst of church that is filled with song.  And we used to sing these congregational songs that essentially, you know, they amount to, the gospel music was same as blues chords.  And you just jump in and you, over time, start sounding better.  And you figure some things out (laughter).  And so that's how I, that's how I learned to play, playing in church, Sunday after Sunday.
Speaker 1: All right, now, how'd you get your guitar?  I mean, and what would have made you--I mean I'm thinking about the days, those days.  Now, this is '70' [1970], you're 13 in about '73' [1973]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When did you start playing the guitar?
Speaker 2: I started playing the guitar when I was probably about 10 years old.
Speaker 1: About 10, okay, this is 1970.  Then the most popular guitar player around, I guess, that black folks would notice would probably be Jimi Hendrix, maybe or--
Speaker 2: Jimi Hendrix, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, there were a lot of good, to tell the truth, there were a lot of bands then with guitar players.
Speaker 2: Isley Brothers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Isley Brothers.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, and we even, my friends and I, some of my friends who lived across the street from me, Elvis Hayes and his brothers, I mentioned his brother, his name was Willie Hayes, he was a drummer for a group called the Southside Movement.  And they were a musical family.  Their father played the guitar.  Elvis, who was my age, played the bass.  He had a brother, Lester, who played the lead guitar, and he had a brother, Leon, who played drums and a little bit of bass.  So Leon and Elvis and I got together and formed a group when I was about 12 years old, 11 or 12 years old, called the 'Funky Souls.'  And I don't know how my mother tolerated that noise and us so-called "practicing" in our apartment.  But she did.  And, so it just, we just loved to play.  And I think back then in the '70's [1970s] everybody's, for so many black kids, the idea of--we saw the 'Jackson Five,' and we saw this whole Motown thing coming up.  And I don't know that we ever thought we were gonna make it big, but it was like so much fun.  And when you pulled out your instruments, and you were playing for anybody, you know, sometimes we'd just take our instruments and play on the porch and people would gather around.  And it was, it was, it was a real sense of satisfaction doing that.
Story_ID: 42651
Speaker 1: Now, did--I know on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] and some places on the South Side, that some of the Blues musicians would actually practice on the porch--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the community would gather around, Magic Slim out in Roseland would play and other musicians who lived on the West Side would play there and over in what they call, over on 12th and Roosevelt Road--
Speaker 2: Maxwell Street.
Speaker 1: Maxwell Street Market, yeah.  Did you, do you remember all that sort of thing when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I do, I do.  Music was ever present.  And, you know, no-name guitarist, people, there was a brother who lived over behind us, behind Kominsky on Karlov who played.  And, you know, there were other folks who played guitar.  There were other folks who played, who played instruments.  And, again, growing up in the church, it was just, music was--if you take music away from, from the history of our church, of the Church of God in Christ, I don't know that you have any, any real soundtrack.  I mean it was, whether it was congregational songs or hymns.  But, you know, the twangy guitar, that bluesy sound and growing up, there was a brother whose name, we called him "Guitar Jones."  He's now a pastor.  And he played a double-headed lead guitar.  And, man, that guy could work that guitar, and all of his sons play an instrument.  And it was, you know, you could go to just about any family and essentially have a band in-house because we all--everybody played something.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were there restrictions on what kind of music you could play or what you could play being a member of the Church of God in Christ?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, there are restrictions on the kind of music you can play as a member of the Church of God in Christ.  But many musicians had the benefit or the good fortune that the sanctified folks didn't listen to, or at least they weren't supposed to listen to, rhythm and blues (laughter).  So sometimes, when the service was real high, and they were dancing, some organists would play some riff from the, from some R and B song, and the folks would just keep on dancing (laughter).  They wouldn't know what it was, and so you could incorporate some of that.  But you didn't mix the devil's music with God's music.  You didn't do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your group 'The Funky Souls,' now, did they, did these Funky Souls appear in church?
Speaker 2: No, (laughter) we wouldn't have been welcomed in church.  We'd had to change our name to the 'Holy Souls' then.  The 'Funky Souls' wouldn't have been welcomed, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I just thought I'd ask that.
Story_ID: 42652
Speaker 1: Now, so, you personally growing up then, you're between--I mean there's the popular culture world that seems to touch us all in some way or another.  Then you've got your own world of the Church of God in Christ, that only the people that are in there are really being--you know, it leaks out into the popular culture world some, but mostly concentrated in the--so how did you deal with that?  I mean did you find yourself--'cause you're obviously influenced by the Funk world 'cause you've got the 'Funky Souls.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So,--
Speaker 2: Well, I had a praying grandmother [Florence Hagler], but I had a mother who loved playing bid whist (laughter) and loved 'Diana Ross and the Supremes' and 'Gladys Knight and the Pips.'  And that was the soundtrack of my childhood.  I loved Motown.  When my mother was, before she got remarried and she was working as a telephone operator at Illinois Bell, we would get ready in the morning before the sun came up.  And she'd turn on the hi-fi stereo in the living room.  And WVON would be blaring with the sounds of Motown, and, you know, I always had a little pep in my step as I was getting ready.  I loved music.  She had a collection of 45's [45 rpm records] and 'Martha Reeves and the Vandells' [sic, Vandellas] and 'The Temptations,' and my mother was just, she loved music.  And I loved music.  And so inasmuch as the church folk--and my mother went to church and she was a Sunday School teacher.  But my mother wasn't as strict in terms of not allowing me to listen to music.  I had cousins who could not play the quote, unquote "devil's music" in their house.  But in my house, I could do the Boogaloo, I could do the Funky Chicken, I could do the Twist and, in fact, I did all of that.  And, and, you know, I have a memory of my, my mother and my aunt when, back when Tom Jones was big and used to come on television.  And it's funny now, and I look back.  I thought it was funny then 'cause I didn't really understand it.  But Tom Jones would be dancing in the middle of his show, and the women on the TV would be going crazy.  And then my aunt would hit the ceiling with her broom, and my mother would stomp on the floor to say, yeah, I saw that.  And they'd run out in the hallway and it was just, there was kind a liberty that I felt with, in my own home, even though there was this rigid structure within my larger family within the church.  And I knew, I knew that never the two shall meet.  I understood that.  But it was like having a foot in both worlds, and so I got the best of the gospel and, and I love gospel music.  But I have a deep appreciation for all kinds of music.
Story_ID: 42653
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to high school at Providence St. Mel.
Speaker 1: Providence St. Mel, all right.  Now, did you have to be recommended for Providence St. Mel, or how did that come about 'cause that's not a public school?
Speaker 2: I was in eighth grade a Mason [Roswell B. Mason Elementary School], and I had a principal whose name, the principal was Mr. Riley.  And he was a, a big man, tall and big and wide.  And we all feared him.  And he called my teacher one day and said, come down, have John come to the office.  And so I go down to the office.  And I think I'm trouble.  I, though I don't know anything I've done.  And he says, "John, I've been looking at your grades and your test scores."  He said, "where are you going to high school?"  I said, Farragut [Farragut Career Academy].  It was the school that was in the district.  He said, "John, you can't go to Farragut.  You can't go to Farragut.  I'm gonna talk to your mother [Gwendolyn Clincy] about you going, taking some tests to go to another school."  And he subsequently talked with my mother and suggested three schools.  One was Lindblom [Lindblom Math and Science Academy].  The other was St. Ignatius [Saint Ignatius College Prep].  The other was Providence St. Mel.  And I took the test at St. Ignatius, and fell short in one of the subject areas.  And so I wasn't immediately admitted.  I took the test at Lindblom and passed, but I was a really small boy, even in eighth grade.  And my mother was very concerned about me travelling from the West Side to the South Side, especially with the gang issues.  And I took a test at Providence St. Mel.  And my cousins, I had a couple of cousins who were attending St. Mel.  We had (unclear) had heard good things about it.  And even, and her main concern about Providence St. Mel was, was how am I going to afford this school when we can barely sometimes eat.  And ultimately, she made the decision that she was going to do what she could and sacrifice to send me to St. Mel.  And so that's where I went.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother had to pay for it.  It wasn't a--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you didn't get a scholarship or anything?
Speaker 2: No scholarship.  I was in work study, and so I did work for part of my tuition.  And between my mother and my stepfather [Eddie Clincy] and my, and my extended family, my grandparents [George Hagler and Florence Hagler] and my, my aunt, one of my aunts, they managed to pay for it for four years.
Story_ID: 42654
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where is Providence St. Mel located in regards to where you live?
Speaker 2: Providence St. Mel is, it's in East Garfield Park [Chicago, Illinois].  I lived in North Lawndale.  So it is probably about, St. Mel is about 24 blocks from my house, something like that.  And so to get to Providence St. Mel, I'd have to take a bus or be dropped off, although I, sometimes, you know, in, after I became a junior and senior, if I didn't have money to, for the bus, I would simply walk home with a friend.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that's in Chicago, maybe two and a half miles maybe?
Speaker 2: Probably.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think 10 blocks here make a mile.  So, okay.  All right, so, okay, was that a culture shock.  Now, this is a Catholic school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a Catholic school.  It wasn't as much a culture shock for me, I think going to Providence St. Mel, because my mother [Gwendolyn Clincy] was always, she was strict and required that I do my school work.  And so working hard and academic expectation was not a shock to my system.  Neither was behaving properly, and so it wasn't a shock.  In fact, for the first time in my life, I felt free to be as smart as I wanted to be.  I felt like I could, being smart was cool.  It was the expectation.  It was celebrated not only by teachers and the principal, Paul Adams, but also by your colleagues.  Nobody would want to beat you up because you got good grades or you were smart or, or came off as being articulate in the classroom.  And, in fact, that was all encouraged.  It was a safe place, without drugs, without gangs.  It felt--quite frankly, there were times that I and my friends didn't even wanna leave school.  It was a safe haven.
Speaker 1: Okay, it doesn't get much better than that.  (laughter)
Speaker 2: He would have to make us go sometimes, say, get out of the building (laughter).  You guys gotta go.
Speaker 1: Did you know Paul Adams very well as a student?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Paul Adams knew all of his students.  He knew all of us, and he and I are--I hesitate to call him a friend.  We are friends, but it's much more than that.  And he has been like a father to me in terms of inspiration and education and being in my corner.  And, but he knew all of us by name when we came into the school.  And he would look at us and say, you know, after he determined what we said we wanted to become when we grew up--and I thought I was going to become a lawyer.  That was one of the things as a kid that I wanted to do because as a kid, I had saw, watched 'Perry Mason' on television.  I said, "Man, that guy is cool.  He gets to wear good suits and never lost a case; maybe I could do that."  And I liked debating as well.  And so Paul Adams would look at me and say, "Mr. Fountain, how are you, my attorney."  And he would call us what we said we wanted to be.  And it was empowering.
Story_ID: 42655
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, this is what I intended to ask before was just somewhat along the lines of the popular culture discussion.  Did you get a chance to move about the city [Chicago, Illinois] much 'cause, you know, you hear these stories of people that spend their whole lives in the neighborhood and they never get out of the city?  But the kind of thoughts and questions that you're asking, it would seem to me that you probably got out and saw more of the city.  So did you take trips downtown frequently or to the South Side or to, you know, out of town?
Speaker 2: When I was growing, when I was growing up, we--my family did do family outings routinely.  I mean my family as a, I mean my larger family, my grandparents [George Hagler and Florence Hagler] and my aunts and my uncles, we would all load up in cars, and we would drive down to Kankakee, Illinois to, they had a Redwood Inn which was a buffet.  And we'd go down there to eat or my, my grandparents would take us to Memphis, Tennessee for the annual holy convocation of the Churches of God in Christ.  And so we'd make this trek, this drive from Chicago down to Memphis, Tennessee to participate in this, in this really wonderful celebration that took place every year within our church.  And they took us, I remember going to New York to the World's Fair and I remember going to Riverview [Riverview Park] in Chicago, the big amusement park.  And we would--and so there was that outside exposure, which I never really thought about having given me, you know, my first taste of the outside world beyond K-Town [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois].  But I tell you, growing up in K-Town, there is this kind of stifling feeling of being on the West Side of Chicago when I was growing up, this kind of invisible, sort of fence or bubble that you're in.  Growing up, I never felt like, I never felt like Chicago was my city.  And it's strange.  I felt like I knew the West Side and occasionally, I ventured to the South Side, but I didn't really know the South Side or feel a part of the South Side.  And I certainly didn't feel a part of downtown and these big beautiful skyscrapers and whatever happened down there, it just, it--anytime I went there, happened to find myself downtown, it just felt like not my world.  And as I got in high school, when I was a freshman, I got involved with "Project Upward Bound" at Northwestern University.  And Project Upward Bound required that on Saturdays, every Saturday during the school year, that I travel from the West side to Evanston, Illinois.  And I remember going to Evanston and particularly, we spent six weeks during the summer on the campus of Northwestern University, living in a dormitory.  And it was my first exposure to college life or to a campus, to campus life.  But much more, I saw clean streets and a kind of functionality that I didn't see any longer in my neighborhood.  There was a sense of peace in the streets.  I didn't have to look over my shoulder or wonder if I was going to get robbed or stuck up or robbed or mugged.  And, and it felt, it was the first time I felt like, "Wow, there's another world."  And feeling that for the first time let me know that I had to strive to do better to move forward.
Story_ID: 43666
Speaker 1: So I neglected to ask you about the neighborhood organizations and gangs growing up and some of the institutions that are on the West Side, especially Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois], I'm thinking about the Better Boys Foundation, the director of the Better Boys Foundation is somebody we've interviewed.  Useni Eugene Perkins who actually wrote a book that was published, I think when you were about 12 or 13, called 'Home Is a Dirty Street,' about life over there and about Collins who was the, George Collins, the Congressman from the West Side.
Speaker 2: Cardiss Collins.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Cardiss Collins, some of the other figures, you know, from the West side.  So did you go to the Better Boys Foundation or--
Speaker 2: Rarely did I go to the Better Boys Foundation.  One of my concerns, and I should say one of my mother's [Gwendolyn Clincy] concerns was, was the existence of gangs who tended to congregate at some of the community centers.  And it was just where they were.  And so you had to be very aware.  I grew up, I grew up on Komensky Avenue and 16th Street.  And Komensky is one block West of Pulaski.  Pulaski Road was back then and still is, the dividing line between two major street gangs.  And you don't have to necessarily be affiliated with the street gang, with one of the street gangs to be seen or, or deemed to be in that street gang and therefore get attacked.  And so we didn't use the parks very much and Douglas Park or Franklin Park for the same reasons, that there were gangs that were existent, and that was where they hung out.  And so we were, to some degree, confined to our blocks.  And as I said, there were so many boys on our block that we could literally have a baseball--two baseball teams with substitutes or football teams with substitutes.  And our stepfathers or our fathers would get out there and play with us, and sometimes the mothers who were good at playing softball would get out and play.  And so the block became our safe haven.  If you got in trouble and somebody was chasing you, if you could get back to the block, there was a degree of safety that you could have because the block was insular.  And as much as gangs existed all around us, and we knew them, and we knew, we went to school with kids who were gang members, bona fide gang member, but on our block, we never had any gangs on 16th and Komensky.
Speaker 1: That's interesting because I know, that does, when you talk about being trapped, I guess the gangs, you know, make being trapped a certain reality 'cause you know you can't go certain places without getting beat up, right?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  That is the reality.  You cannot go certain places without the risk of getting beat up.  And back in my day, you could be playing basketball in the playground and some guys would walk up to you and say, "represent".  And there was some thought that, okay, you look at them, and you think they're representing one gang, and you "represent" that way, and really they're not that gang.  They're another gang.  And so there was always the risk that if you represented and that meant saying what gang you stood for in that, in the vernacular, what you rode with, you know, you ran the risk of misrepresenting and therefore, getting beat up.  And so I think one of the things that helped me, because gangs at one point were actively recruiting young men, one of the things that helped me is that nobody wanted me in a gang.  I was a little guy (laughter).  Nobody want, wanted me.  And so I didn't have to worry about being recruited, you know.  But I had to worry about venturing into territory that was, that was controlled by one gang who lived on the other side of Pulaski Road.  And, in fact, one of the times in high school that I did venture across Pulaski Road into a local community center for a dance, I was strong arm robbed for my jacket, even with the presence of my basketball teammates because the individual who did it called for his gang members and there was nothing else to do except give it up.
Story_ID: 43667
Speaker 1: Now, did you have to worry about the police growing up on the West Side?
Speaker 2: I had to worry about my mama [Gwendolyn Clincy], growing up (laughter).  I didn't worry about the police.  My mother has always, she has been a proponent of, you know, of, of me looking a certain way.  And what I mean by that is some of the things that boys wore, I couldn't wear.  Some of the places that some boys in my neighborhood went, I couldn't go.  The night I did get robbed of my jacket, I had to beg my mother to let me go to the party, and she then against her will, let me go and only let me go because I was going with some of my teammates, and they were driving.  And then her first instinct proved right because I did get robbed.  And I had curfew so I wasn't out at certain times of night.  She didn't allow me to hang on the street corner.  And when I got to high school because I was a very active student, involved in everything I could be involved, in track, cross country, basketball and Project Upward Bound and going to basketball camp during the summers and so on, I would literally leave the house during the school year by 7:00 o'clock, and I wouldn't get home sometimes until 10:00 o'clock at night.  So my time was occupied.  And by the time I got home, I was so tired from running or so tired from running stairs or running around the park or doing practice, that there was nothing for me to get involved in.  And, and there was a clear breaking point from the boys I was in eighth grade with when, once we got to high school.  My life took a totally different track than theirs.  In some ways, I was still living in the community, but I was, I was commuting.  I was gone, I was always gone.  And that helped save me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I didn't encounter, I didn't encounter one incident with a police officer as a young black man growing up on the West Side of Chicago.
Story_ID: 43668
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were growing up, well, you were a little kid, just to backtrack a little bit, when you were, I guess when you were like eight years old is when the big riots took place on the West Side.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you're--and that's in 1968.  So you're eight years old.  Did you witness any of the--
Speaker 2: My book 'True Vine' opens with, graphically, with me watching the West Side go up in flames.  We lived on the third floor of my grandfather's building at 1654 S. Komensky.  And from the third floor, I could look out across that part of the West Side and see the glow of flames and smell the smoke.  And I remember that day, people running from Kuppenheimer, white workers and being chased and beaten and their purses snatched and so on.  I remember gun shots and the sound of breaking glass and a real sense of unease, terror almost, and the lights in our apartment being turned out as we sort of, as I, on my knees, looked out of the window and smelled, smelled the smoke all night long and heard the sirens.  I remember getting up that next morning and going to the store and rounding the corner at Komensky and 16th Street, getting up to Pulaski Road and seeing the National Guard who looked like giants to me with their guns poised and not knowing then that Mayor Daley [Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley] had given the order to police also to "shoot to kill".  And, but it was, and the smell, the burning and seeing the carnage.  And then fast forwarding from that night and knowing that some of the stores that burned down that night are still vacant lots on the West Side today.  And for me, it represented the beginning of the end of, in terms of the economic vitality of a community and a severe blow to the West Side.  And things were never the same.  They were never the same after that night.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've, when you come to Chicago and drive down Madison on the West Side, there's still--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --one empty place after another.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I remember there was a Holland's Restaurant on Roosevelt and Pulaski Road, and it had these big windmills.  That's how you knew it was Holland's.  And Holland's was one of the few things that survived, and those, those windmills, but it was chaos.  It was chaotic that day, that night.
Story_ID: 43669
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any sense of the significance of Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and what he, when was gunned down that day in '68' [1968]?
Speaker 2: I, my--I knew as a kid that something bad had happened.  They kept saying the word was Dr. King, they killed Dr. King.  Dr. King has been assassinated and, which was a really big word for me, assassinated.  And all I knew was, I knew of Dr. King, but not completely of his, of his significance.  But I knew that he was a black leader, and I saw people crying.  I saw people--angry is not the word.  It's enraged.  And there was a sense there that, that the world had almost stopped, you know, on the West Side.  And everybody was nervous about what was to come before all of this happened.  And the workers, as I said, described the workers who were attacked coming from Kuppenheimer 'cause to get to the Pulaski Road bus, those who road the bus, they had to walk down 18th Street, and all the way from Kuppenheimer which was right at, right at--about four blocks away.  They had to do a, at least a four to five block walk to the bus line.  And they were just, they were prey.  And it was, it was bad, it was real bad.
Speaker 1: Did you know anyone that was hurt in the riot?
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't know personally anybody who was hurt.  I mean I, I know what I saw, and I saw people, you know, who weren't doing anything.  They just happened to be white.  And, you know, the folks who were, the folks who were the attackers were teenagers, you know, older teenagers, young black males.  And so I saw that.
Story_ID: 43670
Speaker 1: Okay, now, back to, we'll go flash forward back up to high school again, but I just wanted to--I had neglected to ask you about, you know, the dynamics of growing up in terms of the gangs and all that on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], and that's Lawndale, so I thought I'd ask.  But, okay, now, Providence St. Mel, so you continue to get good grades at Providence St. Mel?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Did you find the work difficult at all?
Speaker 2: I found the work, not difficult.  I found that, you know, to do well I had to study.  And one of the, one of the beauties of Providence St. Mel was, you know, I grew up Pentecostal, and here I was at a Catholic school.  And so I had to go to Mass (laughter), and I had to be introduced to the Sisters who were at Providence St. Mel, to the nuns.  And they were, you know, the classic sort of notion of who they are as educators, they fit the bill.  They were strict.  They were tough.  They weren't afraid.  And they demanded excellence, and it was really empowering to meet these, these women, Sister McCayland (ph.), Sister Joanne and Sister Pat, Sister Carmel, and we had a class called "Word Power" where we would dissect words down to the Latin root.  And they also insisted that we read literature that was applicable to us, things that we could relate to.  And so they turned us on to Dick Gregory's 'No More Lies,' and I started reading that, and I was like, wow, I--they're speaking my language.  And they turned us on to Ralph Ellison's 'Invisible Man' and Richard Wright.  And I got to see me in the pages of the literature that I was reading and got to make sense of me in the pages of the literature that I was reading.  So that later, years later when I went to the University of Illinois, intent on being a lawyer at University of Illinois in Champaign [University of Illinois at Champaign-Urbana], I had to write an essay for freshman writing class.  And I wrote an essay called, 'I Am a Shadow.'  I read Ellison's 'Invisible Man,' and I said, you know, despite that notion of the invisibility of black men, I'm not invisible because when I walk into a room, sometimes I feel like people are afraid or people shun me or people mistreat me.  So if I'm invisible, nobody would see me.  They wouldn't be afraid of me.  I feel like a shadow.  And I wrote this piece, and my editor, my, my teacher read it and copied it for all the freshmen writing classes.  And she called me to the side and there it was again, this, you know, this idea that everybody was reading, reading my work and I was in the cafeteria.  And one of the guys one wasn't in my class said, "Man, I read that piece you wrote."  And, you know, having that impact as a writer was really empowering.  And so my teacher called me to her office and said, you really, really have a gift.  You ought to think about becoming a writer.  And I said, okay.  And I decided that I would pursue a career as a journalist.
Story_ID: 43671
Speaker 1: So you did have a notion in high school of black authors 'cause you read--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Dick Gregory, Ralph Ellison, and--
Speaker 2: Richard Wright.
Speaker 1: Richard Wright, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, that's interesting, at that time--I wonder if they're still reading that kind of literature at Providence St. Mel.  I hope they are, but, you know, it's often, you now, a disconnect in high schools where you don't get any black literature.  But these are, these are white nuns, I take it, who are--
Speaker 2: They were, they were radical, the most radical people I have ever met.  And they were like, you know, we want you to be politically aware.  We want you to be involved in the system.  We want you to make change, you know, think for yourself.  That was radical stuff.
Speaker 1: Do you think when you look back on it that these women actually came to Providence St. Mel to actually act out some of their political idea in teaching black youth?
Speaker 2: I believe so, you know.  I think when you are committed to teaching, it certainly isn't the money.  It wasn't the money.  And I'm sure that they could have done something else with their life, but there was a kind of commitment to education and specifically, a commitment to educating children in an all-black Catholic school on the West Side.  And, and that really came across, that, that they cared about what happened to us and our futures, and they demanded, they demanded it, that we learn.  And it was--I didn't know then that I was gonna become a journalist.  I had no idea.  But my political thought and my, the way I see the world, the way I see myself in the world and trying to make a change through the writing that I do, and my love of the English language, and especially the written word and my, my striving for excellence as a word smith as a journalist, that thirst, that power was something I tasted in those classes with those sisters.  I call them "Soul Sisters."
Story_ID: 43672
Speaker 1: Okay, now one of the reasons why I asked about Better Boys Foundation was because of the arts activities over there with the Lamont Zano Theater and the writing classes with Useni Perkins and all of that.  Was there any institution outside of the school where, you know, creativity like that was fostered, that you could attend, that you could risk and go to?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing is, when I was at [Providence] St. Mel, I was busy.  Between St. Mel and church, my time was all accounted for, and Project Upward Bound on Saturdays.  So it was Project, it was Providence St. Mel, Monday through Friday, basketball, cross country, track, and anything else that was going on, and on Saturday, it was Project Upward Bound.  And on a Sunday, it was True Vine Church of God in Christ.  So I had a full schedule, and there were times that I might have been interested in going to the community centers or like Better Boys Foundation or Marcy [Newberry] Center or some of the other places.  We did occasionally go to the "Off-the-Street Club" when I was younger.  But inasmuch as my mother feared about the gangs, I knew when I was, I knew, you knew who the gang members were.  And so that was always a concern about going to these places where you might encounter trouble.
Story_ID: 43673
Speaker 1: Okay, and in terms of the, I guess some of the activists on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] in those days--I know the [Black] Panthers were killed when you were, Fred--
Speaker 2: Hampton and Mark Clark.
Speaker 1: --Hampton and Mark Clark were kill in what, '69' [1969] over on the West Side.  I don't know how close it was to you.
Speaker 2: Not that far.  Between, between my house and [Providence] St. Mel.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, did--now, so that was, I know that was a big case in Chicago on the news a lot in those days.  And those kind of, that, and I guess, Lu Palmer [Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer], the black journalist was fired from the 'Chicago Daily News,' I think, for supporting the Panthers.  There were so many things going on.  Did you, I mean how did the news affect you?
Speaker 2: I think the news affected me in the sense that I was aware and had been aware for a long time what it means to be black in America and to be black in Chicago.  And I wasn't quite sure what my role was going to be in terms of contributing to any discussion or contributing to, you know, the further freedom of our people on a political or social landscape.  I knew I wanted to make a difference.  You know, you mentioned Lu Palmer, you know, that voice was incredible.  I can't tell you, I guess maybe I can put it in words, what it meant as a black male to hear another black male talking seriously about issues, roaring, so to speak, like a lion and unflinching.  And later Vernon Jarrett, you know, someone who said what he meant, meant what he said.  If you didn't like it, so what?  It is so empowering for me when, it was empowering for me when you kind of felt, I kind of felt growing up in Chicago sort of again, confined and like Chicago wasn't my city, that, yeah, I occupy part of the West Side, but never feeling completely empowered.  And so when you hear these voices, it's like fresh air and water to your soul because it gives you hope and says, "You can be who you are."  And, yeah.
Story_ID: 43674
Speaker 1: You said at some point, I think earlier that your mother [Gwendolyn Clincy] attended Malcolm X College [Chicago, Illinois].  Did she, just the very name of the place, "Malcolm X College" implies like social change going on there.  And I know for a fact that a lot of organizations started there, like the "African American Police League" and the other black formations during those days.  Was she involved in any of the [Civil Rights] Movement activities at all?
Speaker 2: My mother was not involved in any of the Movement.  She was involved in trying to raise her children (laughter).  And, but that said, she is an activist at heart, and always talked to us about, talked to me about having a strong sense of what was right and what was wrong and about social inequality and about standing your ground and being principled and talking about the history of our people from slavery and beyond.  And, you know, she gets, as a kid, she got fired up about stuff and especially as it related to the African American community.  So I got, you know, that fervor, that passion, certainly comes from her.
Story_ID: 43675
Speaker 1: Okay, so now how old were you when you wrote the essay, "Shadow--
Speaker 2: 'I Am A Shadow.'
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was 18 years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're a senior by this time, I guess.
Speaker 2: I was actually a freshman at the University of Illinois [at Champaign-Urbana].
Speaker 1: Oh, freshman at University of Illinois, okay, all right.  You were out of high school by then.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But, okay, before we get you out of high school, what are we, I mean what are some of the highlights of high school when you were there?
Speaker 2: Wow, high school was fun.  High school, my freshman year, filmmakers filmed 'Cooley High' at Providence St. Mel.
Speaker 1: I didn't realize that.  You know, I saw it years ago, but I didn't realize it was shot at Providence St. Mel.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they shot it at Providence St. Mel, and I wasn't able to, I wasn't, I wasn't in the movie.  I didn't get selected because I was a freshman, and they were looking for older students.  So they used very few young students, but my cousins were all in 'Cooley High,' and just, you know, being there when they came through the school and seeing the lights and ultimately, the movie was, was really a highlight.  It was a highlight.  The other highlight was just being on the basketball team and, you know, hanging out with the fellows and getting a, developing a real close-knit group of guys that, that I still talk to today and getting to travel to Lou Henson's Fighting Illini basketball camp at the University of Illinois.  When I got to the basketball camp at the University of Illinois, I knew where I was gonna go to school.  And it had nothing to do with basketball.  I was just gonna go to the University of Illinois.  I loved it, and--
Speaker 1: And so you played ball for Providence St. Mel?
Speaker 2: I tried (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, you're saying you were little growing up.  Now, you're not so little now.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: But you were a little teenager.
Speaker 2: I grew my first, the summer of my freshman year, and, but I was a little guy.  I used to wear size--me and the littlest guy on the team used to fight for the size 22 shorts (laughter).  I can't do anything with 22's now (laughter).  They might fit my arms (laughter).  But, but I really loved basketball, and to play basketball at Providence St. Mel because it was such a small school, you had to do all the sports.  It was required.  You had to run cross country, and so to run--if you ran cross country and played basketball, you might as well run track.  So we, we did it all.  We did it all year around.  And that was really, really fun.  Another highlight was, was fighting for the school to remain open.  The Archdiocese of Chicago in 1977, '78' [1978] decided that they would close Providence St. Mel, the last Catholic high school on the West Side, said that they could not fund it.  It was losing money and so.  And, unfortunately, told Mr. Adams that they had made the decision and there was nothing he could do about it.  And anybody who knows Paul Adams knows you don't tell him that.  And ultimately, we began to march as students, as faculty and administrators and parents around the house of Card--then Cardinal [John] Cody, and began to launch a public awareness campaign and also a fundraising campaign to try and save the school.  And we did.  And so Providence St. Mel continues today, and since 1978 has sent 100 percent of its graduates to college.
Story_ID: 43676
Speaker 1: All right, so, yeah, so a lot of things were going on while you were in high school [Providence St. Mel], and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you said you were elected "Boy of the Year" or something--
Speaker 2: Seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Seventh and eighth grade.  That's back in grade school, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's in the Chicago Public Schools [Mason Elementary School].
Speaker 2: Yes, I had the highest reading score in my district.  I don't remember what it was.  But I got an award from [Representative] Cardiss Collins which was, which was a great highlight too, getting to the meet the Congresswoman.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so high school graduation, were you, did you play a role in high school graduation?  Were you a Valedictorian or Salutatorian?
Speaker 2: I was not Valedictorian or Salutatorian, had a list of honors and activities that I was involved in.
Story_ID: 43677
Speaker 1: So you came out in 1978?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So then you, did you apply to any other school other than the University of Illinois [Champaign-Urbana] or did you--
Speaker 2: No, no, I was the first senior in my class admitted to college.  I was admitted to the University of Illinois at the end of my junior year.  And I knew it was, it was the only school I ever wanted to go to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I loved the University of Illinois.
Speaker 1: Now, what was it about the University of Illinois that attracted you?
Speaker 2: Part of it was, it was peaceful.  It was a world so different from the world I knew, and it was far enough away that you couldn't just get on the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] bus like it was, or train and go like to Evanston [Illinois] like I was doing at Northwestern [University].  And part of it was just intangible.  I felt home at the University of Illinois.  Even now when I drive to Illinois, to Champaign, when I get to the campus, it's home.  It's just this incredible sense of serenity that I feel when I'm at the University of Illinois that I don't feel anywhere else.  As a matter of fact, I told my wife [Monica Fountain], bury me in Illinois in Campaign.  And, and it was--as much as I enjoyed Northwestern, the University of Illinois was the place that allowed me, I felt the opportunity to be free from my world, my other world, the world I had grown up in and just to, to fly, to concentrate on learning, not concentrate on the environment, not think about the environment; to be in a place that offered a bridge to the rest of the world.  And that's not to say that I don't appreciate the West Side and all that I learned, but I didn't have to worry about getting shot in Champaign.  It was, it just, it felt like my place, the place where I was supposed to be.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I always have this image in my mind of this bucolic place with, you know, the few times I've been there, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --big trees and the rolling grass, and it does seem like a calm environment.
Story_ID: 43678
Speaker 1: But this [University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana] is where they encouraged you to write, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you wrote the piece, the "Shadow" piece ['I am a Shadow'], you know, you were encouraged to write and this was in freshman composition, right, freshman English?
Speaker 2: Yes, freshman English class, rhetoric class, yes.
Speaker 1: So did you decide at that point that you were going to be a writer or did you take a little while, a little bit more encouragement?
Speaker 2: I decided that I would, the decision was made that I would become a writer, but somebody said that "Life is what happens when you make other plans."  And I didn't say that, one of the highlights, in some ways it was a highlight of, of my--and it wasn't high school, but my first son [John W. Fountain III] was born in 1978, August, 1978.  My high school sweetheart was, was pregnant, and she gave birth to our first son right before I went off to school.  And so when I got to school, even though I was happy to be at the University of Illinois, it was mixed emotions because now I had a son that I was incapable of taking care of in the way that I wanted to take care of him.  And I was at a place that offered me the opportunity to do better and to, to build this bridge to success.
Speaker 1: Was there any consideration of not going to school, staying there and getting a job and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I thought about it, but I also understood that I was incapable of really making a living at that time to support a family.  It felt like the greatest thing I could do was to improve my status, my lot in life so that at some point I would be capable of taking care of them.
Story_ID: 43679
Speaker 1: Now, did your high school sweetheart understand that [his decision to go to college instead of staying with his newborn son]?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did, she did, she did as much as, you know, teenagers can understand.  And so I went off to school and, and at the end of my freshman year, I was in debt and my freshman year [at University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana] was very difficult because at times, we, you know, I didn't have money, and I was working a job and paying some bills and so on.  But at the end of the freshman year, I had, I owed some money for tuition, but I figured I had a summer job, and I would pay the, pay the balance in time to return for my sophomore year.  And I paid most of the balance by the end of the summer, and I told my mom [Gwendolyn Clincy], "here's what I owe."  It was, I think about $300.00.  So I'm getting ready to go back to school, and my mom says, they don't have the money, 300, 300 bucks, which I know seems like nothing, I can--that's nothing now.  And so we asked family members, she asked family members if she can borrow $300.00 to send me so I can return to school.  And nobody would give her the money.  And, and so I subsequently didn't go back to Champaign [Illinois] and dropped out of school.  And I know now that with the financial aid for the, for that, for the next semester, I could have used to pay the debt for the previous semester.  But I didn't know at that time.  And so I dropped out of school and enrolled at [Wilbur] Wright College on the Northwest Side of Chicago [in 1979].  And I think looking back, I was so overwhelmed about not being able to go back to school in Champaign that I, I ultimately did not finish at Wright that semester.  I walked away from school without taking my finals and subsequently got all F's on my transcript.  And by that March, I was married at 19 years old to my high school sweetheart.  And she was pregnant with our second son [Demetrius Fountain].  And soon after, I was living back on the West Side, back on Komensky in one of the buildings owned by my grandfather [George Hagler] and soon thinking that life is over and done.
Speaker 1: So it seems like a, now, this is the dream deferred and couldn't get--
Speaker 2: It was more than deferred at that time.  It felt more than deferred.  It felt like the dream was over.  And--
Speaker 1: And when you're that age and something like that happens, it's--you can't see beyond it, can you?
Speaker 2: It's very difficult to see beyond it, especially when, you know, your circumstances are, you know, and your background is what it was, the fact that, you know, I had endured some difficult poverty, had not had a father in my life, and even in my mother's intent on helping me to, to not make certain mistakes, that my life, because of my own hand, had taken a nosedive with regard to my education and now strapped with the responsibility of a family at 19 years old and ill equipped to go out into the world and to, to make a sufficient living for them.  I felt in some ways like it was done.
Story_ID: 43680
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, so how did you resolve this issue?  This is 1980 or so, right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980], it is 1980.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I resolved the issue by, by dealing with it.  I don't know that I resolved it.  We ultimately, as I said, moved back to Komensky [Chicago, Illinois] because my grandfather [George Hagler] owned the apartment building.  And I could, I could get an affordable rent.  And it was very difficult during that time to find a job, especially with the job, with the skillset that I had or did not have.  And I remember looking at--I used to get the newspapers on, on Sunday newspapers on Saturday evening, 'the bulldog [edition],' now I know they call it.  And I would look for jobs and circle the ones I thought I might be qualified for and get up early Monday morning.  I didn't have very much in terms of clothing, but I, I did have a white shirt and I had a tie.  I made sure it was starched and clean.  And I'd go look, and when I got to the store, got to the place, potential employer, inevitably would be turned away and say they didn't have a job.  And, and so without a job I applied for welfare and got welfare benefits and did odd jobs along the way.  And simply just tried to make due, tried to take care of my children, be responsible--I shouldn't say tried to take care of my children.  I did take care of my children.  And I also began seeking some sense of hope, so I found myself returning of my own accord for the first time in my life back to True Vine Church [of God in Christ], which is where I would, began to pray with my grandmother [Florence Hagler] and the church mothers on Tuesday and Friday mornings.  And it became my sense of hope, my sense of solace.  And eventually I returned, decided that I was going to, especially in light of not being able to get a full-time job, that I had this time, and maybe the opportunity for me was to go back to school 'cause as much as I prayed, prayer didn't seem to be paying my bills or answering this long-term question of how I was going to take care of my family.
Story_ID: 43681
Speaker 1: And so I began to believe that maybe this was an opportunity for me to go back to school and to improve my situation.  And so I reenrolled in [Wilbur] Wright College [Chicago, Illinois] and in 1983, January, 1983, and was discouraged initially because I had to face what I had not done, having not taken those final exams and all those F's that were on my transcript and began to take it just one day, one week, one semester at a time.  And by January 1984, I was, because of the credits I had received from the University of Illinois [Champaign-Urbana], I was in my last semester before receiving my Associates degree.  And I got a call from my mother [Gwendolyn Clincy] one morning.  And she had a simple question for me.  And she said, John, have you ever thought about going back to the University of Illinois, and I about lost it and partly because I hadn't thought about it 'cause it was too painful to think because I didn't see at all that it was possible and hung up the phone, and from that moment on, began to think about the possibility.  So I decided one day to call the University of Illinois, and I called, and I said, to inquire about readmission.  And they had two questions for me.  They said, "Did you leave the University in good standing?"  I said, "Yes, I did"; said, have you earned a degree since you left the University of Illinois, a Bachelor's degree?"  I said, "No, I haven't."  They said, well, then readmission is automatic.  So it gave me another piece of hope and, in the sense that I was probably going to be automatically readmitted to school.  And so I began looking toward that end, began making trips back to the University of Illinois, looking for potential housing for my family and ultimately found that housing at a place called "Orchard Downs" which I was unaware that the University of Illinois had.  It was married student housing or family housing on the Southeast edge of campus and took a trip down there, and applied for the housing as I saw, after I saw that it was more than suitable for us.  And the gentleman told me that he couldn't guarantee it because they had an incredible waiting list, and a few weeks later called me and said, "We've got a place for you."  And I graduated from Wright College that, that May, found a job as a proofreader at Commerce Clearing House, was able to make some money, bought a car.  And on one Sunday in August [1984], we packed up and our stuff in a truck and drove to Champaign [Illinois], away from K-Town [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 43682
Speaker 1: So this is August '84' [1984], I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so you get another chance at the University of Illinois [Champaign-Urbana] and how was, what was that like?  You had two children by this time?
Speaker 2: I had three by then because I had a--
Speaker 1: Three, okay.
Speaker 2: --daughter [Rasheena Fountain] who was born in November of '83' [sic, October of 1982] right before I went back to school [at Wright College].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you have three small children, a wife [Robin].  Now, did your wife work?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't work.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, okay, University of Illinois, second time.  So who were, did you, were you focused on writing at this point exclusively, or did you--
Speaker 2: I was admitted to the, to the College of Communications.  So I knew that I was going to do journalism.  And, and so I, I was, found myself--I was older than most of the students in my program because these folks were, had come in as freshmen to the University of Illinois and my first, I was first there in '78' [1978].  So I'm coming back six years, essentially, six years later, and, and I'm working while I'm there.  I'm working as a security guard at a department store.  I worked as a, in food service at a local hospital, Cole Hospital, C-O-L-E, and as a janitor at a local bank.  And so I'm-- the responsibility of family and work and school was at times, it felt overwhelming, but having the opportunity, the second chance to be back at the University of Illinois, to fulfill this dream was, was something that kept me going.
Story_ID: 43683
Speaker 1: Okay, now, who were some of the teachers?  Were there any special teachers who were mentors to you there?
Speaker 2: There was a professor.  His name is Bob Reid.  He's deceased now, Robert Reid, R-E-I-D.  And I call him my "father of journalism" because he was not only someone who believed in me and saw my potential, but someone who loved, absolutely loved journalism and believed in the power of journalism, the power of the pen and really pushed students to excel.  His phrase was "Move beyond your comfort zone" and "Follow your passion."
Speaker 1: So he was a journalism instructor--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as such, and so what did--was there a certain journalistic philosophy that the University of Illinois [Champaign-Urbana] taught or that you picked up?
Speaker 2: The University of Illinois was, was known for its public affairs journalism, doing the kind of journalism that matters, making a difference, whether you're writing about public policy or politics or society, the key was doing the kind of journalism that matters to readers, to the citizenry.  And, so that's, that was their thrust.
Story_ID: 43684
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you focus on local stories in the beginning?
Speaker 2: In, in school, you had to focus on local stories because it was, you know, we were, were in Champaign [Illinois] and so our microcosm or our laboratory was the City, were the cities of Champaign and Urbana [Illinois], the twin cities and, of course, the University of Illinois was just almost, by itself, an entity.  And so all of our stories had a local spin.  But even with those local stories and writing about college athletics and who really benefits or writing about housing on the North End and segregation and discrimination in Champaign, they were the kinds of stories that I got to do in addition to general feature stories for the local student newspaper as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, isn't there an Air Force Base close by too.
Speaker 2: Chanute Air Force.
Speaker 1: Chanute, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, in Rantoul [Illinois].  It's probably about 20 miles away.
Story_ID: 43685
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, what specific things did you write about when you started?
Speaker 2: As a student [at University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana] I wrote about Champaign [Illinois] housing for African Americans, its history of discrimination, the need for changing public policy with regard to housing.  I wrote about athletics, college athletics, who really benefits this multi, then multi-million dollar system and how athletes don't seem to really benefit in terms of financially while universities, colleges and universities, get rich and the coaches get rich.  So those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: I can't remember the names exactly, but I remember there were several big basketball stars from the West Side of Chicago that went directly to the University of Illinois, and they didn't do very well in terms of, I mean they played well, but they didn't, their experience was horrible.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I think Efrem Winters is one.
Speaker 2: Efrem Winters was there.  He was one of the--
Speaker 1: I thinking now about--
Speaker 2: He was one of the people I talked to for my series.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a couple of other athletes who were on the football team as well.  And it's something that doesn't get discussed very much and maybe they're talking a little bit more about it these days, but you sort of see what happens to these young men when they arrive on college campuses and they're segregated, so to speak, to some degree away from, from the general college population.  They go to classes with us and so on, but because of the nature of the beast, you know, having to practice and having to travel and all the things that go with being a college athlete, I mean that, in and of itself, is a full-time job.  So you don't get to, to see very much what really happens to them.  And, you know, they live in a different world.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, and I've said to friends of mine in the basketball world that it seems like the University of Illinois is like a graveyard for black ball players from Chicago.  They go to the University of Illinois and they just get buried.  They just don't, you know, they don't, they seem to--it's something about the culture of the University of Illinois that's not as splendid as it is for somebody who wants to be a writer.  So I don't, I don't know what--how did you account for--I mean did you discover something that was going on there that was different from other places or what?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know that I discovered anything that was going on different, differently at the University of Illinois.  I think the system, in terms of college athletics, has its own issues.  And I don't think they're, they're sort of secluded to the University of Illinois.  There are lots of places that have faced NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] sanctions and so, but for me, in terms of journalism, it's not to say that as a student that I didn't encounter racism, either from students or, or what I perceived to be racism from professors.  I certainly did.  But that is not a reflection of the entire school and what I found was a place within the Department of Journalism, within the College of Communications, a place that, that raised the bar, that taught me what being a good journalist was about, that gave me the principles, the foundation of journalism and that have, that have proven to me to be foundational for a more than twenty-year career that has taken me from Champaign to the Chicago Sun-Times, to the Wall Street Journal, the Modesto Bee and the news, the Chicago Tribune and the Washington Post and The New York Times.  And, and even in overcoming and facing the racism or the issues that I faced as a student, that was training for facing the issues that I would later face in newsrooms around this country.
Story_ID: 43686
Speaker 1: Okay, did--well, what were some of your encounters with some of that racism at the University of Illinois [Champaign-Urbana]?
Speaker 2: Whether it was walking on campus and someone shouting the "N" word from a pick-up truck or white students would sometimes be friendly with us and we'd know them, and we would hang out or and have conversations.  We considered them to be friends, and on Dad's Day or Mom's Day when the parents came, we passed them in the hallway and they wouldn't speak to us.  Or being in a classroom and having a white professor, when I asked him a question, to speak to me with venom and anger and then turn around in the next breath and talk to a white student as if, you know, in a completely different tone.  And to sometimes feel like your color mattered to some people when it shouldn't have.
Speaker 1: Do you think that your face or your racial, your experience as a black person growing up on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] informed the kind of questions you were asking that may have been, made them different from the questions that someone else might ask?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  If I'm asking a question about editing or asking a question about a journalism fact, that's not sifted through the paradigm of someone who grew up on the West Side.  It is just, it is a simple question of fact, and, and it requires a simple response.
Story_ID: 43582
Speaker 1: Okay, 1983, the biggest story for any black person or everybody in the state [Illinois] actually, was the [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington campaign and his subsequent election which astonished, you know, newsmen all over the country.  So what was your take on that, Harold Washington, and did you participate in any of it?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my take on the Harold Washington election was, I was living in Chicago on the West Side, and I remember when Harold Washington visited this little church called True Vine Church of God in Christ.  And, and just his aura, and this was a--he left us with a sense when he walked into our church, and he was someone who was very personable and very down to earth, it was very clear that he was very articulate and a very learned man.  But, but he talked to people, not at people.  And he was just a friendly guy.  And when he visited, you know, my grandfather's [George Hagler] church, we didn't know that, that, we thought it was possible.  But who knew that Harold Washington would be elected mayor.  I remember watching all night, you know, the news.  And I was a student at [Wilbur] Wright College [Chicago, Illinois].  And just staying up all night, just waiting for the news and waiting for them to announce that he had been elected.  And I remember, I'll never forget the, the newsca-- anchors and being dumbfounded that Harold Washington had won.  And it is unbelievable electricity that, that just fills my soul because here's a black man who has been elected for the first time as Mayor of the City of Chicago.  It was exciting.  It was, when we got up the next day to go to, to go to school, when we went, when I went to school, I remember being on the bus.  And it was this, I wanted to get on the bus.  There was this sense that I wanted to just [yell] "Harold Washington is Mayor," just say it real loud.  But there was this sort of silence and black folks just kind of looked at each other and nodded and smiled and said, "yeah."  And it was all that needed to be said, and it was, it represented, I think, such a hope for the city and such a hope, not just for the city, but as a, as a black young man, a kind of world of possibility because of what he had done.
Speaker 1: Now, there was a, do you think there was an equal sense of excitement about the fact that he was such a progressive candidate, had a grasp of issues and could explain things so thoroughly?
Speaker 2: You know, I think, when I saw Harold Washington, and when I heard other, you know, African Americans talk about him, we got excited that he was so articulate and that he was progressive.  But that didn't trump the fact that he was black and he was all of that.  You know, that was, the fact that he was African American in the City of Chicago that has been so segregated, a place where Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] talked about as being among the most segregated and hateful places he had ever experienced when he marched here and he lived once upon a time not far from where I grew up in North Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois], same community.  And so to see a black man, I'm not sure, you know, his politics were great and his political views, but the fact that he was African American was, was something that really, that really was empowering.
Story_ID: 43583
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, as you're working at the University of Illinois [Champaign-Urbana] on your degree in journalism, was there anything that you found tough or something that presented itself as a stumbling block, you know, when you went back the second time, other than the working, I guess?
Speaker 2: It was just, I think the toughest thing the second go-round was being, keeping myself encouraged because I had done the toughest part in my mind.  I left K-Town [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois].  I'd gone from hopelessness to hope.  And I remember, I remember at one point I was really contemplating leaving the University of Illinois.  Between work and family and issues and school, it was late one night, and I just said, "You know what?  I'm done."  I was laying in bed, and I said, "I give up.  I can't do this."  And three words came to me, and they were, "God won't fail."  "God won't fail," and I held onto those words, my grandmother's [Florence Hagler] faith, and decided that whatever happened, I was gonna stick with it.  I literally decided that if it killed me I was going to do it, literally, if it, even if it kills me, I'm going to finish this.  That was, that was the toughest part.
Story_ID: 43584
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was there any special part of graduating--you graduated in eight--okay, so did you get your BA [from the University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana] in '86' [1986], was it?
Speaker 2: I got it in December of '86' [1986], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, is this a BS or a BA?
Speaker 2: BS [Bachelor of Science].
Speaker 1: BS, okay, in journalism, 1986.  Then you stayed to work on your Masters degree [Master of Science]]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So I take it you had good grades and you're in good standing and everybody, you got the encouragement of the faculty?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you have to do a thesis or something for--
Speaker 2: For my Masters?
Speaker 1: --Masters degrees, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was your thesis?
Speaker 2: My Master's thesis was on housing segregation in Champaign [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Is Champaign in that regard a lot like Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, blacks live on the North end and typically in very old housing and very little, very little has been done in terms of, in terms of, you know, public funding for, for housing, housing development.
Speaker 1: Now, were there housing covenants in the contracts in Champaign-Urbana too?
Speaker 2: I don't recall, I don't recall. Okay, so was there, so what you found out in this piece of, I guess, is investigative journalism, was it anything that people there already, I mean didn't know already or was it--
Speaker 1: Wow, that was 30 years.  I can't, I don't remember what the conclusions were.  You read the series.  [speaking to his wife Monica Fountain off camera] What did you--I don't remember.
Story_ID: 43585
Speaker 1: But I'm just wondering if the reaction was like, oh, we didn't know this or we all know this stuff already; we just don't look at it or--
Speaker 2: Champaign, the African American community in Champaign, and I don't mean this as a put-down, but this is a lot like, it is a lot like African American communities in small-town America and particularly I think in, where they have this kind of--it's a different mentality.  I don't know if things have been beaten out of them.  You know, in Chicago [Illinois], something happens, we don't take it.  You know, that was sort of what I was, what I grew up with, that we march, we protest, we fight, we deal with it, we get in your face.  We go to the City Council.  We do something.  This is the home of, you know, the Nation of Islam is here and Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] is here and [HM Rev.] Jesse Jackson is here.  And so, we have seen this kind of staunch resistance to authority.  And I find that so many, in so many communities for any number of reasons, there's this kind of complacency and not a, not a--even though I remember some activists in Champaign, they were voices crying in the wilderness, then this kind of, and there was this kind of general acceptance of the way things were.  So I doubt that even with the series, it was published in the student newspaper, and it's in the library, I doubt that there would any sort of great outcry.
Story_ID: 43586
Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything about graduation that's significant when you received your Masters [from the University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana] or before we get you to the [Chicago] Tribune?
Speaker 2: Nothing real significant.  I remember getting ready to go to graduation for my Bachelors, and it suddenly dawned on me that I was just going to get a piece of paper that said I was who I say I am and that the process had made, had brought me to this moment.  And it was surreal.  It was surreal, having come over the ground I had covered.  And the fact that when I was a freshman, on some Sundays because they served only one meal during Sunday, and that was brunch, that if you didn't have money, you couldn't eat later and so some Sundays I didn't eat; the fact that I had come back and I had cousins who were there, who were in school.  And sometimes family members would come down and buy them groceries and, and by the time I realized they were there, they were gone.  And the fact that I was graduating when folks had written me off--and in some ways, I had written myself off, it was really, really surreal and empowering and a sense of victory.
Story_ID: 43587
Speaker 1: Okay, now, had you been assured a job at the [Chicago] Tribune before you left or--
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were your prospects after graduation?
Speaker 2: My prospects after graduation, I think were good because I did internships during my summers.  And I believe what they told me in terms of getting out and getting internships, so I was very aggressive in doing that.  And so by the time I got to the Tribune, I had had any number of internships, probably four or five internships, having worked at student newspapers as well.
Speaker 1: Where were your internships?
Speaker 2: My first internship was at the Champaign News Gazette which is a local newspaper in Champaign.  My second was at Pioneer Press newspapers, a chain of suburban weeklies that is now owned by the Chicago Sun-Times, and my third internship was at the Chicago Sun-Times.  My fourth was at the Modesto Bee, part of the McClatchy chain, news chain in Modesto, California.  And my next internship was at The Wall Street Journal in their Pittsburgh bureau.  And, and I was in grad school in Political Science when I took that internship.  And that summer, was about to come back, at the end of that summer, in '89' [1989], was about to come back to, to school, and attended the [National Association of] Black Journalists Convention in New York where I encountered the Tribune folks and asked them to, asked, I was seeking employment.  And they said that they didn't hire folks fresh out of college.  My response was, I'm not fresh out of college.  I've got internships.  I've done everything you guys have told me to do.  I've got an advanced degree.  As a matter of fact, I'm in school to get another Masters degree in Political Science in the Ph.D program.  And, and, but they said they didn't do it.  So I said, "Well, I'll tell you what.  Give me an internship.  If I do well in the internship, hire me.  If not, send me on my way."  And at that time, I was considering also going to the Marine Corps to Officer Candidate School.  So I had a back-up plan as well.  And I returned to Champaign and that next week, I got a call from the Tribune saying, we'd like to offer you an internship for the fall.  And which is what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you start really as an intern--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at the Tribune.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And this is 1989.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 43588
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what was that experience like?  Who was at the Tribune then that you knew about that, did you have a sense of the Tribune and what it was like, you know, from the outside?
Speaker 2: I had a sense, but it was--
Speaker 1: Not like that.
Speaker 2: The Tribune was, my sense was right and to some degree, but, you know, you don't know an organization until you've worked there and you've gotten to spend some time.  I knew of people who worked at the Tribune.  I knew the woman who was a recruiter.  I knew of [HM] Clarence Page and there was a former colleague of mine at the University of Illinois [Champaign-Urbana] who was working at the Tribune as well, and she had been hired a couple of years earlier.  And so I knew a couple of folks.  So the Tribune, the Tribune was a different place.  It was, it was, it was, it felt very Republican when I walked into the newsroom.  And, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's interesting that, it's supposed to most, the more in depth of the two papers in Chicago that survive here.  And it's, yeah, it's supposed to be the more Republican one as well in a Democratic city, all Democratic city.
Story_ID: 43589
Speaker 1: So, well, what were you assigned to do right away as an intern?
Speaker 2: As an intern, my first story was a story about a pregnant woman who was raped by a group of men and women.  And my editor came to me in the middle of the newsroom and tapped me on the shoulder and said, "John, we've got this case.  It just happened apparently this morning.  Go down and get a pool car, the 'Tribune' car, and drive to the South side."  And so I go to the South side, and I go to the location and I'm listening to the news reports on AM radio, so I'm getting some sense of what police say.  And everybody was saying it wasn't drug related.  So I get to the scene, and I see yellow police tape.  Nobody's there.  All the reporters, if they've been there, they're gone.  And so I go up to the door and I knock and nobody answers.  And I'm gung-ho.  I'm loving being the reporter.  I'm working for a big-city paper.  And I twist the doorknob, and I say, "Anybody home?"  I don't hear anything.  So I go in, which is another no, no.  And, and it's a very dark place, dingy.  I see some evidence that police had been there and maybe I think and more tape.  And it's, it's a lot of debris on the floor and drug paraphernalia.  So I see a packet with some white substance in it, and I pick it up (laughter).  And, and I took all the, all of my notes, hop in the pool car, go back down to the 'Tribune,' and I've gotta make calls to police and get some additional information.  And so I go over to my editor, and he says, "So, John, what do you have, what have you got?"  I say, "You know how everybody's saying this is not drug related."  He says, "Yeah."  I said, "Look at this" (laughter).  He said, "John, is that what I think it is?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Throw that away and don't ever do that again."  And so despite that, that snafu, I survived and my career survived and thrived.
Speaker 1: So this is a, this actually is a crime scene under investigation--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Yes.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was under investigation.  I suspect police had done all they needed to do.  I hope I didn't remove any evidence.
Story_ID: 43590
Speaker 1: All right, so did it get any easier?
Speaker 2: In some ways, yes, in other ways, no.  It got easier in the sense that I was, I was prepared, I believe, to do, to do journalism and to tell stories.  And I got to tell some, as an intern, I think some just general interest feature stories and really got my feet wet in terms of crime reporting.  It got easier in the sense that by December of '89' [1989], the 'Tribune' offered me a full-time job as, as a staff writer.  So they did hire me fresh out of college, so to speak.  And, and it got harder in the sense of the politics of the newsroom, harder in the sense of reporting while black out and about in the city, sort of never being able to lose the fact that, that you are first black and a reporter second in some people's eyes.
Speaker 1: Did you have trouble with access to information or sites because of color?
Speaker 2: Access to some sites, when I was covering police or event involving police.  It was sometimes, I would say, ill treatment.  I remember being sent on a, to a, on a not-so-busy Saturday to write a story about a police auction.  And, and so I go in and wanted to write a feature, and I'm looking around at these interesting items that they're auctioning off, and I walk up to a police sergeant, and I don't know where this stuff comes from.  And I said, "Excuse me, sir, I'm a reporter with the 'Chicago Tribune.'  I wonder if you could tell me where you guys get these items from that you're auctioning?"  And he looked at me without batting an eye and he said, "We get the stuff you people steal."  And, and so those kinds of things even though they were not in abundance, they were always sort of out there and you having to deal with them.  Or you go out on the scene, and you, and you tell people you're a reporter with the Chicago Tribune, and then they say, you're with the [Chicago] Defender, right?  And, you know, this idea that a black man couldn't be working for the Chicago Tribune or sometimes people would say, "We don't trust you because you're with the Tribune."  So those were some of the obstacles to overcome or to deal with.  And in covering some of the stories that, as a young journalist, I was in, a nightside, general assignment reporter.  So much of what I got to write about on nightside, I would listen to the police scanner crackling late at night and shots, calls of shots fired and man with a gun and so on.  And I became increasingly interested in writing about victims of violence, specifically, murder victims.  And I found that getting those stories into the paper, specifically writing about African Americans, even when I was writing about children who were innocent bystanders, it was very difficult to get those stories into the paper and to get editors to sign off for me to do those stories.  So that was something that, that was, was, that was a labor.  But yet, something that I thought was necessary and spoke greatly to what I believed was, in part, my purpose for writing and for being there.
Story_ID: 43591
Speaker 1: Now, was there a sense of collegiality amongst the black reporters at the Tribune then.  I know there weren't many, but you had like [HM] Monroe Anderson, was he still there?
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, he had just left.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But people like, I think, Dawn Turner Trice, Jacquelyn Heard, David Rudd, (unclear) Jerry Thomas, my wife [Monica Fountain] was a reporter at the Chicago Tribune, Monica Copland was her name then, Jerry Thomas, Dion Haynes, Frank James, [HM] Geoff Brown, quite a few of us at the Tribune.  And I think generally, we got along, and there was a sense of collegiality and, and, but newsrooms can be, sometimes be kind of very polarizing places.  And in one sense, what I mean is that if, if a particular African American reporter is seen as a rabble rouser or a troublemaker or a malcontent, that reporter isn't the reporter that folks want to necessarily be seen with or to be necessarily friends with.
Speaker 1: You're speaking of other African Americans.
Speaker 2: Yes for fear they will hamper their careers or their aspirations with editors.
Speaker 1: So does that create like a tension in the newsroom with--
Speaker 2: I don't know if it, I don't know if it creates a tension in the newsroom as it does, as much attention among, a bit of tension among the reporters themselves.  I think they all realize, we all realize that we're in the same boat.  I think we do.  But ultimately, when you're in the newsroom and somebody else is writing the checks, then you are subject to, to them making decisions about, at least within that institution or that organization, them making decisions about how far you go or what you do and the kinds of stories you get to do.
Story_ID: 43592
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So you were at the Tribune for the first time from '89' [1989] to '95' [1995], is that it?
Speaker 2: Eighty nine [1989] to '95' [1995], yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and then you went on to the Washington Post.  What happened?  Why did you leave the Tribune?
Speaker 2: The 'Washington Post' made me an offer I couldn't refuse (laughter).  I had always, as a student wanted to intern at the Washington Post.  But I just thought it was too expensive to live there on an intern salary.  And the Washington Post for every journalist is, has a storied history with [Bob] Woodward and [Carl] Bernstein and Watergate and it's the nation's capital [Washington, D.C.].  So any journalist--I shouldn't say any journalist.  That's an absolute, but most of us simply dream of working for two newspapers, and they are the Washington Post and The New York Times.  And, and so when they offered me the opportunity, and especially the Washington Post being perceived as being perceived as a great writer's newspaper and with the opportunity to live in Washington, to live in the nation's capital, it was for me a great opportunity to, to take and to see where it led.
Story_ID: 43593
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were to come to the Washington Post as a, it says here, County Police Reporter, is that true?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was on the, I was assigned to the Virginia desk, and I covered Fairfax County police and courts.  Fairfax County is essentially the size of a, of a mid-sized city.  It is huge.  And, and so it was, in some ways, it felt suburban, but no less I think filled with opportunity.  My idea in accepting the job in Fairfax County and the Virginia desk was that I wanted to get a foot in the Washington Post and once getting there, you know, I figured the opportunity would arise for me to work my way to the D.C. desk, and, in fact, they said that, and to do other kinds of things as a reporter at the Washington Post.
Story_ID: 43594
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what were some of the stories that you covered that you remember?
Speaker 2: At the Washington Post?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: One of the most memorable was writing about the season of high school football team, the boys of Anacostia High School [Washington, D.C.], following them for their entire season [1998].  The reason the photographer and I, Dudley Brooks, who was also a photographer at the Washington Post, worked for the Washington Post as a photographer, the reason we got interested in following coach Willie Stewart in Anacostia is because over the years a good number of their players had been murdered outside of the school in their, in the neighborhoods where they lived.  And coach Willie Stewart was a, sort of had this historic, larger-than-life figure who saw football as a way of giving young men an opportunity to get, stay off the streets and an opportunity to go to college and ultimately, to find a way to make a living for their families.  And he said we could do it, and so we followed, we went to practice, we went to every game.  And during that season, indeed, a player was killed during, around the second week of the season.  Another kid brought a shotgun to practice.  It was a time when D.C. schools were, were closed because of a strike and because of lack of funding and not having access to schools, the football team had to dress behind the bushes.  They didn't have access to the locker rooms.  They played the first two games with 19 players who played both ways.  They had incredible athletes on the team that was there.  They had their own back story about what was happening in their lives, and they made it all the way after losing several games in the beginning, the season turns around, and they make it to the championship game.  But the story of football becomes the vehicle to talk about life.  And it was an incredible, incredible season.  A number of those young men got scholarships to college.  One of them later became an NFL pro bowler and won a championship with the Indianapolis Colts.  His name is Cato June, and, and he, and as a matter of fact, Cato in the fall will return as the head coach for the Anacostia High School football team.  So it's come full circle.
Story_ID: 43595
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before you went to the Washington Post, you met your wife [Monica Fountain] at the [Chicago] Tribune, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your current wife, so tell us how did you meet?
Speaker 2: I met my wife at the Chicago Tribune in the newsroom.  She was a nightside reporter as well, a general assignment reporter.  And there were a group of us who sort of hung out and who loved journalism and would after work hang out and talk shop.  And so we became friends.  And she actually was a graduate of the University of Illinois in Champaign[Champaign-Urbana] as well.  And we were there at the same time, but we didn't know each other.  We never talked to each other and never spoke to each other.  As a matter of fact, I saw her from a distance, I think, one time, and read some of her work in the Daily Illini Newspaper, and she said she read some of mine, but we never had a conversation.  And so I meet, we met in the newsroom in, at the Tribune  And, and it was, I wish I could say love at first sight.  It wasn't one of those things.  I don't think she loved me at first sight (laughter).  But she did feed me.  And she would, she would bring these bags of popcorn to me in the middle of the afternoon.  And I thought, man, this woman really cares about me, she's feeding me.  She's bringing me popcorn.  It wasn't until later I discovered while walking down Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois] that they were giving those free bags of popcorn away (laughter).  So, but I didn't hold it against her, and we, we decided after dating for a couple of years to get married.  And she had applied for and received notification that she was a British Marshall's Scholar.  And unbeknownst to the Tribune, I had applied for a job across the street at the Chicago Sun-Times, which was always my dream newspaper to work for.  I wanted to work for the hometown newspaper, the Chicago Sun-Times which I grew up reading.  And so at the same time that she's getting this offer from the folks at the British Marshall, from the British Marshall Scholarship selection committee, I got an offer from the Chicago Sun-Times and pay me much more money that I'm making at the Chicago Tribune and more importantly, talking about my future in journalism with their newspaper.  And, long story short, we decided that this was too great an opportunity for her to pass, and the Sun-Times said well, we'll let you spend the first--we were engaged to be married that August [1992].  And the Sun-Times said, we'll let you go on and spend the first six months with your bride and you can come back work and work with us.  And I said, we'd rather be together, and so we went off, got married and went off to England and lived in Lewes, near Brighton for a year and the rest is history.
Story_ID: 43596
Speaker 1: So you come back and you come to Washington [D.C.]--
Speaker 2: When I came back, when I came back from ninety, in '93 [1993], I came back to my job.  We both had a leave of absence.  So I came to my post at the [Chicago] Tribune and then '95 [1995], I leave and go to the Washington Post.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, what did you learn in Britain that has informed your work, I mean that you wouldn't know otherwise?  And travel always broadens, so--
Speaker 2: It was, living in England was an eye-opening experience in the sense that being exposed to another culture, we were totally immersed in that culture.  We were away from all the rest of the scholars.  We found a house on the English countryside in Lewes where there were, was a twelfth century castle and cobblestone streets.  And we were the only people color in the town, with the exception of a black Brit that I found, that, whose path I crossed later and we became good friends.  We learned to speak the language.  Yes, they speak English, of course, but in terms of our enunciation, learned to, that regardless of, of culture and regardless of so many factors that seemed to make us different that we are essentially the same all over the world.  And I remember when we were there, I saw, in terms of influencing my work, I saw, there was a story of a kid, Benji Stanley I think was the kid's name, who was shot in Moss Side, Manchester.  And I remember seeing them on television bringing these flowers and teddy bears in memory of this child.  And even though we see that in the states now, we see that in Chicago [Illinois], that was something I rarely saw.  And I saw this outpouring for this kid who had been murdered that I did not see here in Chicago.  And it, and it made me wonder why, and sensitized me I think, even more to the kind of violence that takes place in the streets of urban America.  And the other thing that influenced my work was I got to write whatever I wanted to write.  And so I wrote songs and poetry and spoken word, and I really fell in love again with this writing I had done as a child.  And it re-energized me.  It reinvigorated me.  And, and when I came back to the Tribune, I had a different perspective, and I think a fresh approach to journalism in writing the stories with the facts, but looking to tell the stories with the, with a kind of literary approach that would draw readers in even more and help me to convey the news and the message of the story.
Story_ID: 43597
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, okay, so Washington Post, you were telling us about, the story about the--did you cover a lot of sports or was it--
Speaker 2: No, I rarely, I rarely covered sports.
Speaker 1: So it was more of a human interest story about the, I mean the story about the team [the 1998 football team at Anacostia High School], but not necessarily about sports.
Speaker 2: No, it was, it actually ended up being a four or five-part series that was displayed and, in fact, the series at one point, I got a call from Matt, an editor, saying the series which I had been, we thought would run on the front page of the newspaper, they decided they would run it in the Metro section of the newspaper.  And I, and I called and--because I thought it was so important.  It was amazing to me that when I was writing, covering that story, the boys of Anacostia would sometime come to me, and they'd say, "Do you really work for the Washington Post?"  I said, "Yeah," and they said, "Really?"  "Yeah, I work for the Washington Post."  "And you guys are gonna do a story on us?"  I said, "Yeah," and they would say, "Yeah, right," 'cause they didn't believe, to some degree that their lives were worth writing about.  And that was because we didn't write about their lives.  And so when they told me that they were going to, an editor called me and told me, a friend called me and told me they were gonna run these stories in the Metro front, I called my editor, the editor of the newspaper, and I called another associate managing editor and said that this is too important a story to run in the Metro front.  I've been on the front page of Washington Post, on the front page of the Style section, and I've had the cover story in the magazine.  I'm not lobbying for me.  It isn't about me.  But it's about these kids.  It's about them seeing themselves doing something positive.  If my argument was that they were in a gang, and they were killing each other, you would not hesitate to put this on the front page of the newspaper.  And so we need to do that.  If you're talking about repairing your relationship with the community, you're talking about being there to cover the middle ground that happens in life that we don't cover, we need to do this.  And my editor said, "Thank you very much, John.  We'll talk to you later."  And I was coming to Chicago [Illinois] around Christmas at that time, and got on the plane and came on to Chicago, and got here.  And I checked my cell phone, and I had a message from an editor saying that, the executive editor agrees with you.  And we're going to pull the series and hold it for next week 'cause we're gonna run it on the front page.  And I can't tell you what that did for those boys, what that did for those coaches who spend their lives for very little money, if any at all, trying to make a difference in the lives of those young men.  Years later, after that series, I had a journalism fellowship with the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor].  And one of the, the young men I wrote about was a student then on full scholarship, playing football for the University of Michigan.  And he told me, "I still have those stories, and I keep them in my dorm room, and I read them every once in a while."  And so, for me, it speaks to the power of journalism.  It speaks to our ability as journalists to make a difference by doing stories that matter.
Story_ID: 43598
Speaker 1: So how long were you at the [Washington] Post and--
Speaker 2: I was at the Washington Post from January of '95 [1995] officially until June of 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and then you got an opportunity to--now, I don't wanna leave the Post if there's another, good story at the Post.  I don't wanna leave it until it's time, but you got an offer from, or did you apply--how did you wind up at The New York Times?
Speaker 2: In, in 1999, I was, as a reporter at the Washington Post, I was, I had applied for and received a fellowship at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor].  They invite 12 U.S. journalists from around the country, and six journalists from around the globe to study at the University of Michigan and, and so I was, I accepted the fellowship.  And so for the academic year of '99 [1999] to 2000, I was a Michigan Journalism Fellow [Knight-Wallace Fellowship], which is a pretty big deal in the world of journalism.  And while on fellowship, and actually before the fellowship, The New York Times had approached me and, about coming to work for them.  And at that time, before I took my fellowship, I really wasn't interested in working for 'The New York Times.'  I think it's a fine newspaper, obviously.  But my experience had been that when you start at a new newspaper, you have to become acclimated to a new newsroom culture and new players and a new system, and you are still starting all over again.  So I wasn't interested in doing that.  They asked me, one of the editors asked me from the Times. said, "If we asked you to come to work for the New York Times, and not take your fellowship, what would you say?"  I laughed.  I said, I'm taking my fellowship.  I get a year off with pay.  I'm gonna take my fellowship.  This is a great thing.  So, so they, you know, while on fellowship, The New York Times came back to me, and they--a number of times.  And they said, we are still interested in you coming to work for us and after your fellowship joining The New York Times.  And I said to them, "Really, there's only one job I would do at The New York Times."  And they said, "What's that?"  I said, "To be a national correspondent in my hometown."  I think they probably thought I was crazy.  Maybe I was crazy (laughter).  I don't know.  But we had further discussions, and ultimately, they came to, the editor flew out to meet me in Michigan.  And we talked.  And they brought me subsequently to New York [New York City, New York] and sent me through a round of interviews and I met all of the, all the folks and the editors at the Times.  And they made me an offer to be a national correspondent in my hometown [Chicago, Illinois], covering the Midwest which was a dream job.
Story_ID: 43599
Speaker 1: So what did you cover when you got back [from the University of Michigan]?  I think when you, let's see, 2000 was, I'm trying to think of what's going on here.  Well, tell us what's happening?  I'm drawing a blank on it.
Speaker 2: Wow, my time at the [New York] Times is a blur.  It is hard to condense.  When I, when I arrived at the Times, I spent the summer of 2000 in New York [New York City, New York] because the deal I made was that I would spend three months in New York, getting acclimated to the newsroom, getting to know the folks on the national desk.  And so I, I did that, spending my time with Metro and getting to know folks at national.  So I assumed my post as national correspondent, I think, in October, and I was off and running.  There were 12 states in my region.  I went to all of them, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin, you name it.  I've been there, small towns, mid-sized towns, Funk, Nebraska.  I've been to all of those places, Blue Hill, Nebraska, and I was covering everything from, as a national correspondent, I was, I was a generalist, so covering everything from politics to the Mississippi River flooding to towns, a celebration of the opening of a, of a grocery store in what amounted to a food desert to 9/11, being, holding up at military bases, writing stories about families and coping with their loved ones being sent off to fight and so on.  So everything to writing about, a piece in Chicago [Illinois] about "homicide salsa," a salsa that was given the name.  It was so hot that the makers had called it homicide (laughter).  And it's not the place where you wanna necessarily name your, name a food product 'homicide' in a place with, that, where people are being killed and some would be, would take offense to it.  So even some stories about gang violence on the West Side in my old community in North Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois], I went to write for the national desk.  In the post-9/11 [September 11, 2001] world, I looked out across the landscape and saw America changing and people afraid to let their kids play outside and reached into the context of my own background and said, that's not very much, very unlike Englewood or North Lawndale, places in Chicago that before 9/11, people felt the same things and began to do, to report and did produce a kind of think piece on, on how, you know, folks in, in certain neighborhoods, urban neighborhoods encounter direct domestic terrorism and what their approach is and how they live through it, live through fear rather than live in fear.  And so I covered just about everything as a, as a national correspondent.
Story_ID: 43600
Speaker 1: How did 9/11 [September 11, 2001] affect life in the Midwest overall, I mean as opposed to, I mean out in the smaller cities?
Speaker 2: In the smaller cities?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think September 11th had a tremendous impact on this country from large cities to small towns.  There was no one who was immune.  I mean, in part, it was because of the media images that were broadcast live on CNN, live on ABC News.  We watched that second airplane go into those towers.  We all stood, you know, in the aftermath of that, looking at the skies that were, that were free of planes and not wondering was going--not knowing what was going on with our country.  And I think when I, there was certainly a sense, even within small-town America that nobody was immune from this.  And there were folks who were connected in so many ways, whether they were connected to people who died in the World Trade Center or whether they were connected simply because, you know, this terrorism happened at national places or whether it was because they had in many small towns, their sons were going to go off to fight or on alert.  So it was, it was, I think the sense of tension and the sense of uncertainty for me in my travels across the Midwest in a post-9/11 world as a national correspondent, that tension and uncertainty was as palpable in small towns as it was in big cities.  I think they felt that, there was this sense that you, you know, if something was going to happen again, that it might have been a big city, but who knew.  Who knows where it would happen.  And in a place where the world is flat, even if it happens in New York or [Washington] D.C. or Chicago [Illinois], it happens to all of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I noticed in some of the smaller cities, they take security more seriously than they do in the big ones.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It takes you longer to get to the city and to city hall and different places.
Story_ID: 43601
Speaker 1: I don't wanna skip anything, but you started working on your book ['True Vine'] in 2003 or you publish it in 2003, but you started, so I suppose you started working on it as you--
Speaker 2: Many years before that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I probably have written, wrote versions of that book from the time I began journalism.  And I would get up on Saturdays and write my own, and I still do a good deal of writing.  I'd like to say that a good portion of my writing has never seen the publishing light of day 'cause writers write.  And, and I was working on 'True Vine' long before it became a book and long before I even knew the title of the book.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the impetus, I guess, to get it out as a book and--
Speaker 2: The impetus to get, get 'True Vine' out as a book was, was in part, the year I spent as a fellow at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor].  The director of the fellowship program whose name is Charles Eisendraft, was a really wonderful mentor and someone who believed not only in the power of journalism, but in the power of the journalist and the power of the storyteller.  And he encouraged me to, to pursue, you know, all of my dreams.  And, and it was also, the book was born in part because I used to, after leaving K-Town [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois] that fall of '84 [1984], I would sometimes come back to K-Town, even as a [Chicago] Tribune reporter, late at night, and I'd drive through the block.  And sometimes by the time I got to the end of the block I was in tears.  And I didn't completely understand it immediately.  But to some degree, it was, it was because I felt a sense of loss, a sense of disconnection from a past so much of it which I loved and people that I loved.  And 'True Vine' was my opportunity to crystallize in some ways forever, this slice of life, this life I knew that included [his neighbor] Mr. Newell and all the other people in the 1600 block of Komensky and the people at Mason [Elementary] School and the people at Providence St. Mel and so on.  And so, that's the other part of it.
Story_ID: 43602
Speaker 1: How is the reception to the book?  I mean once it came out.
Speaker 2: The reception to the book was good.  We, we did a good, had good publicity and did C-Span Books [Book TV] and book readings across, across the country and lots of book readings and locally and so it was, it was good.  It was good, and I still get response.
Speaker 1: And how did the members of the True Vine Church [of God in Christ] take to it?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Good question.  I'm not sure members of the (laughter) True Vine Church have read my book.  There are some who read it--what?  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: She didn't say anything.  She was just smiling (unclear) and so maybe I could see it out of the corner of my eye.  I guess that's--
Speaker 2: One of my aunts said to me, she was, she was very upset at one point because one of the members--I knew she was upset.  And so I called her to find out because she said I lied in my book essentially.  And I know I didn't.  And, and so I called her, and I had a conversation with her, and she said, "You know, one of the members called me, and they said, 'I can't believe you were like that and so on,'" and was really giving her a hard time, but joking and laughing.  And said, "I can't believe you used to whip kids like that."  And, and she said, "I didn't whip kids like that."  I'm like, "Really?  That's not what I remember," but what I understood was, and she said, as you get older you start thinking about your legacy.  But the legacy that, that, the lasting legacy about my aunt and my family that I wanted to portray and believe that I portray in that book is that it is about family, that family is essential to our lives and that she was loving and caring.  Yes, she did whip our butts, but she loved us and there were so many other things that she did, and that that is the glue that ultimately held us together.  It is, it is the family.  And the issue with writing 'True Vine' was when I began to write that book in earnest, none of my family members--thank God, had died.  Everybody I wrote about, with the exception of my father [John Fountain] was alive in my, in my immediate life.  And so when writing the book, I tried to imagine myself walking, and this was my approach, walking down the pathway of my life.  And as people walk with me or came across that road, depending on how long they lingered, I wrote about them less or more.  But there were many things I didn't write about because I don't believe that writing a book for public consumption is the place to find healing.  Writing is cathartic, but you can find that healing in pages that people never see.
Story_ID: 43603
Speaker 1: And I would have written a different book had I written that book at 25 or had I written that book at 30 years old.  But there were some things that I needed to heal from.  When I talk in the book about going back to Alabama and talking to my grandmother [Autherine Jackson], years after I talked to, after I attended my father's [John Fountain, Sr.] funeral, where I could not cry.  I felt numb standing above his casket.  There were no tears.  I didn't know what to feel.  And so I had to drive from Virginia down to Evergreen, Alabama the summer of '95 [1995], my first year at the 'Washington Post' and meet my grandmother and talk to her and find out who my father was and get some answers to some questions.  And then something happened I didn't plan, and that was standing over where they said he was buried because he had an unmarked grave and having the only conversation that I could have with my father and leaving Evergreen, Alabama a different man.  And this is so important for me in writing 'True Vine' to embrace this concept of healing and this ability, 'cause that for me, what journalism is really about, this ability to see our past, to make peace with it and to become better as human beings, not perfect, but better and to move on so that our generations can be better.
Story_ID: 43604
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you get feedback from some of the brothers you grew up with from the neighborhood [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I did, I did and they loved it (laughter).  My cousins loved it as well.  My cousins who read it loved it as well.
Speaker 1: Now, is the neighborhood the kind of neighborhood today that you can actually go back and see the places that you, I mean Chicago is better persevered than a lot of cities just because it's easier to rehab a place than to knock it completely down.  But is, are all the, is the neighborhood still basically intact?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood is still basically intact.  What you see now are a lot vacant lots.  You see some structures like the building I, one of the buildings I lived in and grew up in that my grandfather [George Hagler] owned once, is 1654 S. Komensky, is no longer there.  It's a vacant lot, but the house next door Mr. Newell who had the apple tree, one of my childhood friends owns that house and lives there and has raised his family there.  And so they have some ornate street lamps that are there now.  But it's still the same.  It still feels like the same block.  The building that I spent a lot of time in at 1634 S. Komensky is still there.  And my memories are still there.
Story_ID: 43605
Speaker 1: All right, so, now, you started teaching at some point at the University of Illinois [Champaign-Urbana].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did you start there first or did you, was there an interim? (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Actually, after I left the New York Times in 2003, I had a conversation with, with some folks at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] at the Medill School of Journalism.  And they made an offer to be a, come on as a guest lecturer for a year.  So I was a visiting scholar.  And as a visiting scholar, I taught journalism classes that were team taught, which was great for me 'cause I had spoken at universities and done workshops with high school students and so on in journalism.  But I hadn't taught journalism.  And so it was a great introduction to teaching and to creating a syllabus and to understanding curricula and a baptism by fire to the world of academe.  And the folks at the University of Illinois found out I was teaching at Medill and they're a little territorial.  (Laughter)  And they said, "What are you doing at Medill?  Why don't you come here?  We've got a position open."  And by that next fall, I was, I was a professor at, at my alma mater at the University of Illinois in Champaign.
Story_ID: 43606
Speaker 1: So, now, you didn't tell us.  Now, how did you leave the New York Times in 2003?  How did that happen, take place?
Speaker 2: My time with the New York Times, my contract was that I would spend three years as a national correspondent in Chicago [Illinois] and that I would then come back to New York [New York City, New York] and, and there, I should work until I should get another assignment or something else should happen.  But the deal was that I would go back to New York after three years.  So they asked me to come back to New York.  So my time was up, and as much as I loved, liked the city of New York, I didn't think it was the place for me to have a young family.  And, and so I, not knowing what I was going to do, respectfully declined and said, "I will be departing in June, June-July of 2003."  They said, "What are you gonna do?"  I said, "I don't know, but I can't live in New York.  It's not for me to do."  And in journalism you travel, but I just didn't feel compelled to do this.  And so my book was coming out, my, 'True Vine' had just come out, and I was doing a short book tour and had some savings and figured that I could, if ever I was going to figure out what else I was going to do with my life, beyond daily newspaper journalism, this might be a prime opportunity to do so.
Story_ID: 43607
Speaker 1: Now, when did you, now you're a licensed minister it says here.
Speaker 2: Yes, I am.
Speaker 1: And now, so you're teaching school.  Now, did you get your license prior to--
Speaker 2: Yes, I got my license in ministry in 1980--around 1985, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is some time ago.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I feel goofy for not raising this then.
Speaker 2: I was a deacon at my grandfather's [George Hagler] church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I soon became a minister in my grandfather's church as well at True Vine [Church of God in Christ].
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, so how did, I mean, okay, so.  All right, so all this time, you were a minister in the Church of God in Christ, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so do you think that affected, I mean how did that affect your work?  Are there any, I don't know of, I guess I just don't know what people do otherwise, but I don't know any other minister reporters, as such.  I don't know.  You might know some.  But how does that affect what you do, do youthink?
Speaker 2: I do know one other.
Speaker 1: Do you?  Okay.
Speaker 2: He still works for the Washington Post.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It affects my work in the sense that, you know, being a minister and a journalist, you don't separate who you are from what you do.  I don't wear the journalist hat and then somehow I'm able to separate, you know, everything else that I believe and everything else I do.  And I say, I say it like this.  Being a Christian in an American newsroom is just fine as long as you don't speak in tongues in the newsroom.  And I don't think it's any different from being a father, from being, participating in the Democratic process, whether you're a Democrat or Republican.  We all bring to us, and one of the things I tell my students, journalism does not require, it doesn't require that you leave who you are, your perspective at the curve side of the newsroom.  And I also tell them, I ask them, "Have you ever read an objective story in your life?"  And some students say they have.  I say, "That's interesting because I've never written one."  Now, I've, I seek to be fair and balanced, and I try to get other sides to the story, and there is this pure objectivity in it.  It's always out there that we're trying to get at.  But the most I can, think I can promise as a journalist is to be fair and balanced when I'm doing my reporting, through third-person objective reporting through the third-person objective lens.  And, and so the same thing that I'm required to do as a minister, as a Christian, to seek truth, to be a voice for the voiceless, to help those who are less fortunate, it's parallel in many ways to what we do as journalists, afflict the comfortable and comfort be afflicted, to be gatekeepers.  Our first obligation as journalists is to the truth.  Our first loyalty is to the readers, and journalism is at its essence, corroboration of fact, corroboration of fact.  And so we're both seeking truth.  We're both seeking light, but I don't proselytize when I'm a journalist.  I'm not trying to win souls to Jesus.  I'm trying to tell stories.
Story_ID: 43608
Speaker 1: So in terms of objectivity, I know that's something that black scholars in the '60s [1960s] wrote a lot about, you know, about, as we were entering various professions, be it sociology or, or being reporters or historians or whatever, people were always concerned that black reporters be objective, you know.  And that was always something that was thrown up in our faces.  And so much so that I think by the late '60s [1960s] were, black scholars were arguing that there is such a thing as a black aesthetic, a black way of viewing the world, and they can be fair and balanced, but we see the world, you know, a little different.  So do you, are you aware of that argument or that discussion as well?
Speaker 2: I am aware of that argument, but what some people call bias, other people call perspective.  And I think it's important is that the [Chicago] Tribune can come to my community and write a story in which they deem us the "American Millstone" and say that we don't have middle-class values and that we are the millstone draped around America's neck and we'll never amount to anything.  That's one perspective.  My perspective as someone who grew up in K-Town [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois] and grew up poor, who grew up with a father [John Fountain] not in his life, who grew up with a father who was killed by, and never gave him more than his DNA or his name, is that there is hope and that there was possibility.  And, yes, there is devastation and there is destruction.  But there is also functionality.  There is also love.  There's also peace.  And so that's what I bring.  When I am a national correspondent, and I propose a series of stories to my editors on poverty, I propose those series of stories, not because of what I learned as a journalism student at the University of Illinois [Champaign-Urbana].  I propose those stories because they come directly from my heart and soul, having been a poor black boy in America.  That's where I speak from.  Now, I don't just write, I don't editorialize.  I'm not proposing commentary.  What I'm proposing is, I know this exists, that in Chicago, that an hour's drive south of Chicago in a place called Pembroke, Illinois, people live in houses with cake dirt floors where they have tires on their roofs to keep the roofs from blowing off and they have no running water, no natural gas pipeline.  And I'm able to find a family of five who happens to be there.  We happen to arrive when they have no food except a pot of neck bones and spaghetti, and I'm able to capture that story for people to hear a different perspective and to see a different light, to see a different life, the kind of thing that can change hearts and change public policy and make things better for the least of these.  I don't write commentary to do that.  And that doesn't come from journalism books.  That comes from my perspective, and me bringing that to the newsroom.  The issue with American newsrooms is that there isn't anyone, there are few of us, people of color making the decisions everyday about what gets shown on American news channels.  It gets displayed on the platter of daily journalism.  And so if we're absent from that discussion, if we're absent, we don't bring our perspectives because everybody in that newsroom, everyone in the Page One meeting does, indeed, have a perspective.  But it's not my perspective.  And so we need that diversity.  We need to reflect in totality America and all of its diversity if we are going to purport in journalism that we do display and reflect the stories and present the stories of everyday life.
Story_ID: 43609
Speaker 1: Are students receptive to your view of objectivity in terms of how you--
Speaker 2: I think students are receptive to my view of objectivity, the students I've encountered because students today are very well informed.  We have social media.  We have Fox News and CNN, and these students are, are sophisticated in a way that I think we were not sophisticated, speaking for myself in journalism school.  They have on their hips their Blackberry's or their iPhones and access to the world, to incredible data and information, an incredible wide range of perspectives from bloggers to talk show hosts, to, from the New York Times, to the Huffington Post. And so it is so clear today that what's being presented in some ways, in some cases, has such a spin on it that the bias or at least the perspective is rather obvious.  And so, the students also know that they bring their own baggage.  We all do as writers, as journalists, and I think it's something that stares them in the face and, and certainly, they accept it as the way it is.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you're, are you currently at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you moved back to Chicago basically--well, was it to get back to Chicago or--
Speaker 2: It was, indeed, to get back to Chicago.  Chicago's a great microcosm laboratory, and it's just where my heart is, and, and continues to be where I wanna do my work.
Story_ID: 43610
Speaker 1: You wrote a series of articles in 2005 that criticized the black church.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, and you've also gotten into the area of hair, too.  So you're, you know, this can be a tangled, you know, swamp here, you know.  So anybody that criticizes the black church knows that you can get a lot of trouble.  So how did you come up with that idea.  Now, you're of it, but you're criticizing it too.  So what's your criticism and what happened?
Speaker 2: My criticism of the black church, and I guess I can call it criticism.  I guess in actuality that's what it is, but it is, in another sense, my soul's cry.  I love the church.  And the church has been my anchor, but I also see--I'm still the same boy who grew up in the church and who saw things that didn't make sense.  And I want it to make sense.  I wanted it to make sense to the degree that if you talk about hope and you say that Jesus is the light of the world and you say that the church is the answer, then I should not see in our communities, the dismay and disarray and the kind of dysfunction and devastation and the kind of absence of light that exists if we are, indeed, the church.  I find as someone who grew up in the church, who loves the church, very little that would draw me to the church on even a weekly basis.  There's nothing that makes me want to invest in it, that feeds my soul.  As I say, "The Twenty-First century, what ails the Twenty First Century? Black males' soul."  Now, I should say that this is not an indictment of all churches, what I say, but what I'm saying is what happens en mass, and that is we are building edifices and the church has become a church unto itself.  It is doing as a collective, too much in-reach and not enough outreach in a time when folks are losing their homes in record numbers to foreclosure, in a time when we are seeing more poor, an increasing amount of poor in this country, increasing amount of jobless that the church, if it is the vehicle that we say it is, it ought to be healing those and seeking to heal those that suffer from these kind of social afflictions.
Story_ID: 43611
Speaker 1: And so we live in a time where the church has become this kind of sacred cow, and we see, and we do without question watch multi-million dollar edifices go up in the midst of poverty stricken neighborhoods.  And we don't question why the church is not more involved in creating businesses or eliminating food deserts or building houses for the homeless.  And again, some of my best friends, some of the people I, I support and write about are involved in those kinds of things.  But they say to me that the church collectively has failed.  They are among the laborers in the vineyard, and we have taken on this kind of prosperity doctrine, this kind of materialism and, and in exchange for the kind of whole, holistic healing that the gospel offers for us all and that we are to be agents of this kind of change. Instead of being transformers, we have become complacent in the church.  And if I don't say anything about that as a social commentator, if I don't say anything about that, as someone who feels like I've been called to speak what I see, then I'm the one who's going to have to give an account for that.  And so we can reason together, and we may disagree, but the issues affecting our people, they are incredible.  It is critical at this time that we address them and that we move forward to healing our communities.  And I believe with my whole heart that the church is strategically in a position to do that, and yet, we're not doing it.  And I'm not gonna be mum about that.  I won't be.
Story_ID: 43612
Speaker 1: I know you must have some people in mind that are doing the right thing.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So who are some of the, your heroes in that regard of using the church as a vehicle for the social change?
Speaker 2: Some of my heroes are folks like Jacqueline Reed at the Westside Health Authority that has built a facility that serves as a community center and health clinic, but also has as her mantra this idea of empowering community, of creating, block-by-block, the empowerment zones, building houses and rehabbing houses for folks in the community, giving them space where they can meet and assemble, and, and continue to work out, work on their own problems to teach, to have classes, whether it's a home economics or having young brothers serve with local contractors, teaching them a skill that they can use.  People like Father [Michael Louis] Pfleger who is on the frontlines fighting for parents of murdered children, fighting for his community to be safe and functional and whole.  People like Arloa Sutter at 'Breakthrough Urban Ministries' on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] that is, has a great vision for building a great community center and who's already feeding the homeless, housing the homeless, providing after-school programs for the poor.  People like, at the Lawndale Christian Community Center [Lawndale Christian Health Center] on the West Side of Chicago who have built a health facility, who are doing the kind of holistic ministering to people, being the hands and feet of Jesus.  People like the, some folks I met in [New] Jersey who have gutted buses and created these mobile units to go out and minister to people on the street.  There are lots of people who are doing that.  But as a collective, if you talk to these people individually, they will say, we're not doing it.  We are failing as a body.  We must get back to what God has called us to do, which is be the hands and feet of Jesus.  It's not about going to church.  It's about being the church.
Story_ID: 43613
Speaker 1: Now, I'm thinking back to when you were giving us the origin of the Church of God in Christ and the Azusa ministry out in California is very similar to Pacific Gardens [Pacific Garden Mission] here in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --in terms of feeding the down and out and the people that don't have any means of support and that sort of thing, providing shelter for people and that sort of thing.  Is this something that the Church of God in Christ has gotten away from doing in Chicago and is it something that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, one of the things that I don't like to do and that I don't do in my writing is single out a specific denomination.  I don't single out denominations or specific churches or specific pastors in terms of what they're not doing.  That's for God to do.  I think in terms of, in terms of looking out at the social landscape, you know, I'm like the preacher who stands in the pulpit and says, "You keep looking forward, nobody will know it's you unless you raise your hand and say it" because it's more important for me than to single someone out, what's more important is to deal with the issue and to say, "We need healing and we need to be, we need to refocus."  And, you know, if we go back to Azusa Street [Revival] to look, as an example, of what we ought to be doing, we're not going back far enough.  We need to go back to the Book of Acts, that says that, the bible says that people gave, they sold what they have, what they had so that all men--they might have things in common.  They sold and they gave it to the poor, and I'm not suggesting that everybody sell their house.  That's not what I'm suggesting.  But we must become our brothers' keeper.  We must give.  We must lift up each other.  I've heard it said, "We speak in tongues but we won't speak to the homeless man on the street."  And we have to love.  If I were a pastor, I would never build a church, ever, never build a church building.  I would build housing for, transitional housing for families.  I would create, endeavor to create a community and love among believers and maybe we would some--I hear someone saying, well, where would you assemble?  There are lots of places and buildings you can rent to assemble, once a week if that's necessary.  But we have to come up with some way of seeing this in a different way so that we can utilize our resources for the betterment of us all.
Story_ID: 43614
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems that you have a, your definition of church has to do with more, less of a building and more of service, I mean the church itself is service rather than just a building.
Speaker 2: It is service, it is the body.  The bible says, "Know ye not that your bodies are the temple of God" [1 Corinthians 6:19] Your bodies are the temple.  Why would I spend $50 million on a building that no one can live in, a building that maybe we use at most three times a week, a building that then going to, with interest, cost me a lot more than that, with upkeep and pastoral salaries.  What a waste of money.  What a waste.  If those of us who are of faith, if we believe that God is, the Lord Jesus is coming back for a church, he is not coming back for a building.  He's coming back for his people.  And so we have to pour into the souls of men, pour into people.  That's what Christ cares about.  He didn't die for a building.  He died for people.  And that's where our emphasis has to be.  And some people say, well, John, you don't go to church anymore, and quite frankly, I am not attending a church so to speak now.  And I'm not saying that I never will.  But most ministers won't allow me to say what I say.  They would never give me the space to say that.  And many of them whose churches I might attend because I write my column, would try and check me or shut me up or shut me down.  And it is, it is about making a difference in the lives of men.
Story_ID: 43615
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 2010 [sic, 2011] you won the 'Peter Lisagor Award' [for Exemplary Jornalism] for commentary--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I guess for the columns that we're talking about [at the Chicago Sun-Times], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: These columns.  So, and, all right, now, we are, now, whoever put the outline, well, I know the brother who put the outline together.  He's got two pictures here we're looking at [of Trayvon Martin and George Zimmerman]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and I suppose they want us to comment on these, but this situation is something that has happened, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in other, I mean with other names, but are similar.  We're talking about the shooting of Trayvon Martin--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that's in the news today just like other shootings in the past have been in the news.  And--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the shooting of African American youth by other youth and by authority figures, you know, such as this person accused of--
Speaker 2: Zimmerman.
Speaker 1: --shooting him.  Do you have any comments about that?
Speaker 2: I've written about the Trayvon Martin case.  And one of the things that strikes me is that Trayvon Martin and certainly, you know, I commend his parents, and commending his parents doesn't even go far enough.  They, for me, are the symbol, are the greatest symbolism that I take from the Trayvon Martin case because people protested, yes.  And people have talked about the racial issue, yes.  But what stands out to me so clearly is that here was a boy who had two parents who loved him in life and love him in death.  And they were not about to accept what they deemed to be injustice for the death of their son.  And so that's really important.  The other thing that strikes me is that within the African American community, and certainly this case has galvanized support from across culture, background.  It has, it has gotten people involved with wanting to see justice for Trayvon Martin.  But there were so many kids that I could name right now, Charles Thompson, Rashonda Flowers, Tyesa Cherry, Robert "Yummy" Sandirfer, Robert Freeman, kids I've written about over the last two decades.  And there've been no mass marches.  And they were murdered just like Trayvon Martin, except in most of the cases that I've written about, these kids were killed by people who look like them.  And we must address that issue.
Story_ID: 43616
Speaker 1: Yeah, you said a moment ago that people don't respond to the black-on-black killings when youth shoot each other.  But they sort of do.  I mean pastors hold prayer meetings and marches in neighborhoods and the Million Man March Movement, it could even be argued grew out of that, those kinds of marches.  What is your answer to that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think there has been certain--and I don't mean to suggest it, no one has marched, no one has done anything.  But what we saw with the Trayvon Martin case is a kind of electricity that spread from Florida across the coast that spread internationally.  And what I'm saying is that for every child who's killed, that ought to be the same thing.  You know, from 1976 to 2010, there were nearly 250,000 black males, 14 and older, killed, murdered in the United States.  There were about 50,000 black females 14 and older killed, murdered in the United States.  Collectively, if you filled the United Center, Soldier Field, Wrigley Field and U.S. Cellular Field twice, that's the number of dead, black people who have been killed since 1976, at least, 14 and older.  It doesn't count kids under that.  That is a national tragedy.  Given those numbers, my question is why aren't we up in arms every day?  I think the element, for me, the element of race in the Trayvon Martin case is what got, what helped fuel some of the outrage.  And we have now, today in urban America, serial killers, young urban gang members who kill and kill and kill, and kill again.  And we're not outraged.  People see in the community who did the shooting.  And nobody says anything.  I have looked in the eyes of so many mothers and fathers and stood over the coffins of their children.  They hurt no less than Trayvon's parents, and until we get that, that this is a tragedy for every--93 percent of black homi--black murder victims are killed by blacks.  That means for every one Trayvon Martin, there are nine Trayvon Martins killed by black people.  And we're not marching.  The stories that I get the least amount of reaction for are when I write positive stories about black students, young black men doing the right thing are when I write about homicide victims.  And my endeavor in writing about homicide victims over the last, more than 20 years, has been to humanize them because I've been in newsrooms where people didn't care, long before writing about black people was the soup du jour, I was writing about them and advocating on the inside of newsrooms.  Now, as a commentator, I am saying to my people, "Stop killing."  I'm saying to my people, "We should be incensed.  We should be enraged about this.  We should impassioned about this."  I'm saying, "Fathers, let's father our children.  Let's not abandon them."  I'm saying, "Mothers, let's mother."  I'm saying, "Churches, do what you're supposed to be doing because our people perish."  And while we might be spotty in our marching, and even the Million Man March, we--marching is fine, but we gotta do more than marching.  We've got to solve these issues which are solvable.  They're solvable.  No child is born a killer, and we can blame other folks for, for the issues that happen from without our community.  But I have something to say about my son becoming a murderer.  If not, then what is the hope?
Story_ID: 43617
Speaker 1: What are some of your other hopes and concerns about the black community today?
Speaker 2: I have a hope, I have a concern about the public education system, a concern that after all these years the Negro still is not free and that the gap in wealth, the gap in education between whites and blacks is widening.  I have a concern that if our children don't have the skills, don't have--and I don't think you have to be college educated to have an education, so to speak, to be able to make a living for your family.  But you've gotta be able to do something to contribute, to make a living.  And so that is, that is, that is a grave concern.  A concern of mine is that, that the middle class has--and I'm part of the middle class, that we've accepted the status quo.  And we've become content to some degree with getting ours but not understanding that unless we all make it, we don't make it.  I'm concerned with us moving beyond this race question; that we begin to see each other collectively as Americans, as humans, as people, not white or black or brown.  You can't help what you see, what we look like, but seeing the humanity in us all and understanding that unless we treat each other right, and unless we understand that we are only as strong as the weakest link, as--that we're all in trouble, that the issues of urban America, will become the issues of suburban American.  We've gotta deal with it one way or another.  We all are citizens of this world, of this planet, and my hope is that we have been in troubled situations, we have--the world has faced common enemies.  It has faced horror and devastation, degradation and dehumanization.  And the good in man, the good in man eventually always seems to rise up to that occasion.  My hope is that the Church of God in Christ Jesus will occupy its rightful place and that it will restore hope in mankind, and that whether I'm Christian or whether someone's Jewish or whether someone is Buddhist or whether someone is Islamic, that we begin to see that our differences are not greater than the similarities than are, than who we are as human beings and that we can live in peace.
Story_ID: 43618
Speaker 1: Now, career wise, you're still fairly young, so do you see yourself living the balance of your life teaching journalism and, you know, pursuing your, your ministry or is there, are there--well, I'm sure that, I'm certain that that's probably gonna be part of it, but do you have any other big goals that you've set or any small goals that you've set that you wanna make sure you do before you, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, my goal for this summer is to learn how to ride a motorcycle (laughter) and to take a ride around, across the country with some friends.  But more serious goals, I am, I'm not sure about academe.  I, I like teaching, but I'm a storyteller, and I want to tell stories.  My wife [Monica Fountain] and I are launching the e-Book, the e-Publishing arm of our publishing company [WestSide Press] this summer.  And we have a number of titles that we're gonna publish before the end of the year.  So I wanted to do that.  But I also have aspirations of making a feature-length film, of doing documentaries and the only thing I know I will do until the day I die is tell stories.  I wanna tell stories.
Story_ID: 43619
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy of sorts?
Speaker 2: That's difficult to say what I would consider my legacy.  I want my legacy, even more important than my storytelling, to be that I love my children and I love my family.  And I feel like if I am blessed to die, to take my last breath in the presence of people who I know love me, I'm a blessed man.  As much as I write and as much as I am passionate about the things I write about, I really believe that if I've not poured into my children and poured into their lives and my family, that I missed the boat.
Story_ID: 43620
Speaker 1: Tell us about your children.
Speaker 2: I have, my wife [Monica Fountain] and I have a 16-year old and a 10-year old.  The 16-year old is a girl.  Her name's Imani, and our 10-year old is, his name is Malik.  And I have a 34-year old son.  His name is John Fountain [III], and a 32-year old son.  His is name is Demetrius and my 30-year old daughter.  Her name is Rasheena.  John is a graduate of Columbia University, Columbia College here in Chicago [Illinois], and is in grad school at DePaul [University].  And Rasheena is a graduate of the University of Illinois [in Champaign-Urbana] and is teaching writing at a small college in Decatur, Illinois.  And my son, [Demetrius] Rashad is still trying to find his way, and I'm hopeful and prayerful that he will do that.
Story_ID: 43621
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I didn't ask you this.  Now, you--I was, I should ask you, how did you, 'cause you said earlier when you were in church, you didn't feel the same way as some other people did.  Now, did you have a calling where you actually did experience something beyond just a--
Speaker 2: I did.  I was, my girlfriend at the time, my high school sweetheart [Robin], like many African American families, we have these big, huge bibles.  And I started reading the bible one day and was just fascinated by it.  I have read the bible all my life, but I was 19 years old and just began reading it.  And I don't know if it was because of everything that happened.  My father had died earlier that year.  I had a son [John Fountain III], I had dropped out of school and was going to [Wilbur] Wright College [Chicago, Illinois].  And maybe I was just, maybe I was just at a different place in my life.  But I began to read the bible and it began to make sense to me in a way that it hadn't before.  And I wasn't even going to church at the time, but I remember coming home to the apartment where I was staying with my mom and going to the bathroom and getting on my knees, over the bathtub, and saying the Sinner's Prayer and saying, "Lord, I'm committed to you, I wanna live for you, come into my heart; forgive me for my sins."  And, and I'd said the Sinner's Prayer as a young teenager, but the next day when I got up, I was like "Pssst, whatever.  I'm gonna do my thing."  But this time, I woke up the next morning.  And I know what I said the night before I meant it, I meant it.  And I was as passionate, as ferment, as committed to living for Christ when I said the prayer as the next morning.  I continued to read the bible, and I was, decided that, as is the custom in our church, we will fast.  Fasting is a way to draw closer to God, abstaining from eating.  And I didn't eat, and when you're asking God to do something for you, and all I wanted him to do, according to our faith, according to our denomination [Church of God in Christ], was to fill me with the Holy Spirit.  And I didn't know that I wanted to feel anything or jump around, and when I got up off my knees after saying that Sinner's Prayer, I didn't, you know, spin around and speak in tongues and run through the house or anything like that.  I didn't even tell anybody.  But a couple days later, as I'm fasting, still on my fast, I come from school, and I tell my girlfriend, I'm sitting in her living room, and I say, "I love God and believe He is the calling of my life and has called me to do something, and I want him to forever rule in my life."  And I was so filled with joy, and in that moment, my girlfriend and I are sitting on the couch, and I am filled with the Holy Spirit.  And for me what that means and what I say in my book 'True Vine' was I felt a physical sensation on the top of my head.  And words came out of my mouth that I've never uttered since and can't tell you where they come from except for my faith, my belief that it was God filling me with his Holy Spirit.  And I felt a sense of joy that I have never felt in my life.  I felt like I could run, I could stand in the middle of the street and nothing could do me any harm.  And it wasn't hysteria.  It was a deep dedication to wanting to walk according to God's word.  Of course, when I went to church a couple of days later and told my family that I was now saved and living according to the gospel, they said, "You, John, the sinner? (Laughter)  You're not saved, 'cause we know what you and your girlfriend have been doing."  I said, "No, but I've not been doing that, I'm not doing that anymore."  And so in time, they began to see by the life that I lived that there was something to it because I really did love the Lord and my life did change.
Story_ID: 43622
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy, and we'll probably come back 40 years from now to ask you some more.  But, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I'd like to be remembered as somebody who loved his family, someone who was not faultless or perfect, but who gave everything he had to his family.  And as someone who spoke the truth as he saw it, someone who spoke the truth as he saw it.  And someone who really did love God and did, by his faith, experience God.
Story_ID: 43623
Speaker 1: (PHOTOS) (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead and tell us about this next photograph, please.
Speaker 2: That's, from left to right, myself at age 18 and my father, John Fountain.  I don't know how old he is there; the only picture I have of him.
Speaker 1: That's the cover of my book, 'Dear Dad, Reflections of Fatherhood,' published in January, 2011.
Speaker 2: That's a paperback cover of my book 'True Vine, a Young Black Man's Journey of Faith, Hope and Clarity', published in 2005.
Speaker 1: The cover of my book, 'True Vine', the hardback cover, published by Public Affairs Books, New York in 2003.
Speaker 2: Myself in eighth grade.
Speaker 1: My wife Monica Fountain, my son, Malik, M-A-L-I-K, Fountain, myself, my daughter, Imani, I-M-A-N-I Fountain. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And approximate date?
Speaker 2: That is Christmas 2006.
Speaker 1: That's myself and my wife, Monica, M-O-N-I-C-A at home on her 40th birthday? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You can go ahead and speak up.  It's okay in this segment. (Monica Fountain):  That was 43rd birthday.
Speaker 2: Forty-third birthday.
Speaker 1: That's my wife, Monica and I, at our wedding, August 29, 1992.
Speaker 2: That's me on the far, at the front, far left at about four years old, three or four years old at a Tom Thumb wedding at All Nations Church of God in Christ on the West Side of Chicago.
Speaker 1: That's me in eighth grade--I'm sorry, as a senior in high school at 17 years old.
Speaker 2: I am front, left on the basketball team at Providence St. Mel High School.  That's the sophomore basketball team.
Speaker 1: My hands at a book reading for 'True Vine' in 2003.
Speaker 2: Signing books at a reading for 'True Vine' in 2003.
Speaker 1: Dancing with my mother, Gwendolyn Clincy, G-W-E-N-D-O-L-Y-N, Clincy, C-L-I-N-C-Y at my wedding in August 29, 1992.
Speaker 2: One of my essays was published in the book 'This I Believe' by National Public Radio in 2006.
Speaker 1: I am the, I don't know who the first two people are, but I am the young man with the vest on standing next to a girl in my class whose name is Ella Johnson.  That is upon receiving the 'Boy of the Year Award' in 1973, '74' [1974] for having the highest reading score in the district.
Speaker 2: I am the kid in the second row to the left, far left, seeming to have a jovial time, about {laughter) three years old or so.
Speaker 1: I am on the Presidential, Bill Clinton's [President Bill Clinton] first presidential campaign, on a plane flying somewhere that I can't remember.
Speaker 2: That's Bill Clinton, and I'm taking the picture, I guess, this time.
Speaker 1: A book reading for 'True Vine' in 2003.
Speaker 2: This is my grandmother, Florence Hagler on the front row, F-L-O-R-E-N-C-E, Hagler, H-A-G-L-E-R. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Is this at the True Vine Church [of God in Christ]?
Speaker 1: No, it's a different church.
Speaker 2: That's my mother, Gwendolyn Clincy, and her husband, my stepfather, Eddie Clincy, E-D-D-I-E.
Speaker 1: That is my grandfather's, the first--that is the storefront church where I grew up, 'True Vine Church of God in Christ.'
Speaker 2: That's my grandfather, George Hagler and my grandmother, his wife, Florence Hagler.
Speaker 1: Signing books in summer, 2011, for 'Dear Dad'.
Speaker 2: That's my mother, Gwendolyn Clincy, in August of '92' [1992].
Speaker 1: My mother, Gwendolyn Clincy, date unknown.
Speaker 2: I'm speaking at my alma mater, Wilbur Wright College on the Northwest Side during a book reading for 'True Vine'.
Speaker 1: That is probably 1976, 1977.  My cousins with my grandparents, Florence and George Hagler.  I am at the back row, far to the, farthest to the left. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm third from the left in the back row. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Myself, three students at Providence St. Mel and my mother at a Providence St. Mel gala in probably 1996.
Speaker 2: Myself, with my sister, Gloria [Fountain].  I'm probably about three years old, two or three years old.
Speaker 1: Me and the champ, Muhammad Ali who I met in Fairfax County, Virginia in 1996 or '97' [1997].
Speaker 2: Hagler versus Ali.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  That's me, 1978, May 1978 prom.  That's the only reason I'd wear something that God awful.
Speaker 2: That's me and my grandfather, George Hagler, at his 90th birthday celebration. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE):  In, what, January, 2011.
Speaker 1: January, 2011.
Speaker 2: That's my grandmother, Florence Hagler.  Date unknown.
Speaker 1: That's me in 2005.
Speaker 2: That's my father, the only portrait I have of him.
