Story_ID: 655819
Speaker 1: I'm Denise DeBurst Gines [Denise Gines], interviewer with The HistoryMakers and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Would you state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: My name is John H. Finney [HistoryMaker John Finney], J-O-H-N, H, F-I-N-N-E-Y.
Speaker 1: And what does the H stand for?
Speaker 2: It's Henry.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is October 31, 1938.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Chatham County, Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently I'm the executive director for Economic Opportunity, Savannah-Chatham County Incorporated [Economic Opportunity Authority for Savannah-Chatham County Area, Inc.], the local anti-poverty agency.
Speaker 1: All right.  And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: The interview location is 1120 May Street, Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 11, the year 2017.
Story_ID: 655820
Speaker 1: All right, so let's start with some fun questions about you.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Believe it or not, my favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me what is it that you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Since I'm here in the low country in Savannah, Georgia, my favorite meal is really shrimp creole and rice.
Speaker 1: All right.  And when you go on vacation, what's your favorite destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite destination is Washington, D.C.  The family and I enjoy going to Washington, D.C. because of all of the historical monuments, and it's like walking through history every time we go to Washington.  We also cut a little bit of time out to go over to Virginia to look at some of the historical monuments over in the State of Virginia, because it's so closely linked to, to Washington.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is really the fall.  It's a beautiful time of year when leaves are changing, and it's almost like changing life.  It's movement from one season to another.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite saying or quote?
Speaker 2: My favorite saying is: If you don't do it, it won't get done.  There are so many times in life when we depend on other individuals to come forward, and we really need to look at whatever contribution we can make.  In the final analysis, we have a lot within us that we can make a difference.  And the main thing about life is that we don't have to be the star in order to steal the show.  We don't have to be the president, we don't have to be leaders, but we all can make some kind of appreciable contribution to the quality of life, and especially making a difference in the world that we live in.
Story_ID: 655821
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family history.  Would you tell me your mother's name, when and where she was born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Margaret Maynor [Margaret Maynor Finney].
Speaker 1: Can you spell Maynor, please?
Speaker 2: M-A-Y-N-O-R.  And she was born in South Carolina, in a place called Estill, South Carolina.  It's really in Hampton County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she share any, any stories about her growing up?  How did she grow up?
Speaker 2: Well, really my mother only went as far as eighth grade.  There was a real tight system of segregation, and she lived on a farm with other relatives.  A little later in her life, she managed to move from Hampton County, South Carolina to Savannah, Georgia, where she was married to Ellis Finney.  But she grew up on a farm and picked cotton, and made a lot of relationships with other people there in Hampton County, South Carolina.  There were other individuals in the community who owned a funeral home, Garvin Funeral Home [Garvin and Garvin Funeral Home, Estill, South Carolina], to be exact.  And there was another family that lived in her community who came to Savannah, Georgia and developed a great business that was called Sidney Jones Funeral Home [Sidney A. Jones Funeral Home; Sidney A. Jones-Campbell Funeral Service].  So, Mr. Sidney Jones [Sidney A. Jones, Sr.] and his wife Carolyn Jones made a tremendous contribution to Savannah as well.  So, Garvin Funeral Home was owned by minorities, and Mr. Sidney Jones had a funeral home as well.  But most of her life was on the farm.
Speaker 1: All right.  And did your mother, did she have siblings?  Do you know how many siblings she had?
Speaker 2: She had five siblings, and they, for the most part, grew up in Savannah, Georgia after she came to Savannah and met Ellis Finney.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what about your grandparents--your mother's--
Speaker 2: My grandparent- my grandmother was Miss Rose Ann Reed [ph.], Miss Rose Ann Reed.  And she was a very spry lady who never owned a car, and she did a lot of domestic work when she came to Savannah.  And she walked everywhere she went, and she encouraged all of the children in the family to join the church.  As a matter of fact, a portion of our family is African Methodist Episcopal and another portion of our family is Baptist.  But our grandmother always insisted that every Sunday morning we had to be in Sunday school.  We had to remain over for church at eleven a.m., and Sunday was just full of church services.  We had to go back at seven in the evening to church service as well.  And in those days, there was a part of the Baptist church that was called BTU, Baptist Training Union.  It was another form of Sunday school, but it was sort of like bible study, late in the afternoon.  So, the whole day on Sunday was just full with worship service and church related activities.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the church that they attended?
Speaker 2: The church was called Union Baptist Church [First Union Baptist Church, Savannah, Georgia].  However, many of us attended Sunday school at the A.M.E. church, which was St. Philip African American Methodist Episcopal Church [St. Philip A.M.E. Church, Savannah, Georgia].  So, we attended Sunday school at St. Philip, and we attended regular church service at First Union Missionary Baptist Church, as it's called today.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather had a small business in Savannah.  He was very independent.  He had did a lot of work for various families, sort of handy work around the community.  And he did own a truck where he did work for people occasionally.  And eventually, he was able to get a job with what was called the Southern railroad company [Southern Railway] in Savannah. And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was your grandfather's name, sorry?
Speaker 2: His name was Ephram Stanford [ph.], S-T-A-N-F-O-R-D.
Story_ID: 655822
Speaker 1: And do you know about the education of your [maternal] grandparents?
Speaker 2: Well, very limited.  Most of our parents were limited because of the rigid system of segregation.  The grandfather [Ephram Stanford (ph.)] went a little bit higher, around eleventh grade, but I'm not sure whether he really finished high school.  And of course education became the theme and the hallmark for all of the children in the family.  Because of limited opportunities on the farm, our grandparents and parents [Margaret Maynor Finney and Ellis Finney] as well really looked forward to the day when their grandchildren would be able to receive at least a high school diploma, and go beyond.
Speaker 1: Do you know whether your grandparents owned the property on which they lived on?
Speaker 2: No, they did not.
Story_ID: 655823
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about your dad's side of the family.  Tell me your father's name, and when and where he was born?
Speaker 2: Father's--was Ellis Finney.  Ellis Finney grew up between Baldwin [Baldwin County] and Bibb County in middle Georgia, and his family owned a farm.  And they tilled the farm, sold produce, and became fairly prominent.  They never became extremely rich, but they made enough from the production on the farm to really support the family and to make sure that everyone had at least a decent high school education.
Speaker 1: Do you know what type of crops they had?
Speaker 2: Sweet potatoes, okra, greens, and some other products that were quite popular around middle Georgia.
Speaker 1: And how much education did your father have?
Speaker 2: My father never finished high school.  He, too, was somewhat relegated to a limited amount of education, but they always exposed themselves to individuals who could read and write.  And they had limited education, so when we got to a certain point in our education where they could not help us, they were able to get other children who had basic skills in education, and they came in to tutor us to make up for, you know, that limited education that they had.  So, they were very, very, sensitive about education, because they thought that in days or times to come, it would make the difference in our lives.
Speaker 1: And was your father always a farmer, or did he have another occupation?
Speaker 2: He was always a farmer.  And when he came to Savannah, he was able to get a job as a laborer with a group called the Southern Cotton Oil Company.  They pressed cottonseeds to produce oil, and the Southern Cotton Oil Company in Savannah, Georgia was one of the largest employers when he came to Savannah.  And he worked his way up to a supervisor's position, and he was over at least about fifty men at the Southern Cotton Oil Company.  And ironically, he was so intense about work that he asked his boss to let him work during the summer months, because the Southern Cotton Oil Company was a company that produced cottonseed oil primarily during the winter months.  So, when June, July, and August came around and the company was, was down, he went back to his boss and asked to do additional work.  And of course, the boss found something for him to do there at the oil company.
Story_ID: 655824
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Margaret Maynor Finney] and father [Ellis Finney] met?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure how, how they met.  But it was a time when black men and black women really found each other in the church.  She did not meet him in the church [in Savannah, Georgia].  She met him at some social occasion or social activity that she attended.  But he eventually joined the church after she did.  For some reason or another, there were more black females who were closely associated with the church than there were black men.  And I'm not sure about that number today; the ratio may be maybe three or four to one.  For every woman who is a member of the church, there may be one man--one male.
Story_ID: 655825
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is attending Maple Street School [Savannah, Georgia].  That was an elementary school, and the principal was a man by the name of Mr. Dixon [ph.].  Mr. Dixon, I believe, came to Savannah, Georgia to work in the public school system from a community called Sparta, Georgia.  He was a strict disciplinarian.  And of course in those days, if you were late for school or if anyone was involved in disciplinary matters, you had to go to the principal's office, and the principal would dole out some kind of duty for you to do.  You'd also have to stay after school.  But he was a strict disciplinarian, and he was insistent that all of the students become scholars.  In those days the principals believed that the hallmark to good citizenship was a good education, and that in the lower grades, if you were able to master the basic fundamentals of education--which was reading, writing, and arithmetic, as they call it--that you were going to be destined for a better life a little bit later on in middle school and high school.  And they definitely pushed for the fact that you should go on to college as well.
Speaker 1: So, your earliest memory is of him?
Speaker 2: Yes, Mr. Dixon at Maple Street School.  And the interesting thing about Maple Street School was that it was not a paved street.  It was a dirt street, and most of the teachers who taught at Maple Street School, believe it or not, had two pairs of shoes; one pair of shoes to walk in the sand.  The sand was very deep, and once they got to school they would take those shoes off and empty the sand and have another pair of shoes, you know, to wear while they were teaching, you know, in the classroom.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, tell me--
Speaker 2: And of course, one thing to mention about the school, the school was not a school that was built for education.  It was actually a church that was left by white missionaries.
Story_ID: 655826
Speaker 1: Describe the school [Maple Street School, Savannah, Georgia] for me.  And what grade did it go to?  And how were the classrooms formed?
Speaker 2: Well, the school went up to sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It went up to sixth grade, and it was a two story church building that was converted into a school.  And some additional work was done on the church for lavatories for males and females.  We did not have a cafeteria in the school, but we ate in what was called a lunchroom.  And the lunchroom was two houses that were purchased by the board of public education, and the houses were converted into what was called a lunchroom rather a cafeteria, and that's where the meals were served.  We had to come out of the school and walk maybe five or six feet across the street, and that's where the lunches were served.  They were nutritious lunches, but we were not fortunate enough to have a cafeteria inside the school, as some of the other schools in Savannah-Chatham County [Savannah-Chatham County Public School System].
Speaker 1: So, someone prepared hot lunches or sandwiches?
Speaker 2: They were hot lunches that were prepared by the staff of the board of public education.  But they were prepared in a house that was purchased by the board of education, and the house was large enough to serve kids during the lunch period.  There were at least two or three lunch periods, to make sure that they accommodated all of the kids who were enrolled at the school.
Story_ID: 655827
Speaker 1: Tell me more about activities at the school that you were involved in.  What, what type of child were you?
Speaker 2: Well, I believed in a lot of art, a lot of artwork.  And of course in elementary school [Maple Street School, Savannah, Georgia] at that time, they did not have athletic activities, so I was involved and interested in artwork and was able to pursue that a little bit later when I went to middle school.  And I went to middle school at a place called Cuyler Junior High School [Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia]; that's C-U-Y-L-E-R, Cuyler Junior High School.  And it was there that I met a very inspirational teacher, a lady by the name of Virginia Kiah [Virginia Jackson Kiah].  Virginia Kiah was an art teacher who was actually educated at Pratt Institute, one of the best art schools in America.  Pratt Institute was located in Brooklyn, New York.  And Miss Kiah was able to teach in the public school system in Savannah [Savannah-Chatham County Public School System], and she promoted art education.  And a museum was named after Mrs. Kiah in Savannah, Chatham County [Kiah House Museum, Savannah, Georgia].  And there was another teacher in middle school by the name of Addie Byrd Byers, and that's when I became interested in humanities; in Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], William Blake, Edgar Allen Poe, and many of the novels written by the Victorian poets, Keats [John Keats] and Shelley [Percy Bysshe Shelley], and Shakespeare and all those people.  But Addie Byrd Byers was a teacher of humanities in middle school, and she was quite an outstanding lady because she was--she came close to being sanctioned by the public school system because she had an open membership with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And at that time, teachers were intimidated by the public school system and were not encouraged to be part of groups, or have memberships in groups like the NAACP.  But Mrs. Byers was a woman who was unbought and un-bossed, and she defied many of the rules and regulations, not just in the public school system, but was quite defiant, and was insistent on the fact that children should inquire of their parents if they were registered voters in Savannah, Chatham County [Georgia].  So, I became interested in the humanities under Mrs., Mrs. Byers, and of course, art education under Mrs. Virginia Kiah.
Story_ID: 655828
Speaker 1: But we're, we're going to step back a little bit, because we're still in elementary school, okay (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: But I'm glad you, you know, gave us that information.  But in elementary school, tell me about the activities that you were also involved in--extracurricular activities--if there were any.
Speaker 2: Well, that's the point; there were limitations.  Even spelling bees were not citywide for kids in the Negro public schools at that particular time.  Spelling bees were limited to the schools, and of course, if you wanted to participate you could.  But whatever awards were given, they were given there at the school, and they were not publicized citywide.  In some of the Anglo-Saxon schools in the community, if you participated in the spelling bee and if you were able to advance, you'd advance citywide and then to the state level.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we had limited activities in elementary school.
Speaker 1: All right.  So there were no activities as far as the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]?  No Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, unless you joined those activities outside of the school.  They were not functional in the school, but there was a YMCA, which was called the West Broad Street YMCA [Savannah, Georgia], which provided activities.  And once school was over, if you were interested, you could always join the Y.  And there were other people in the community who had activities going on that you could become involved with.
Speaker 1: Well, that's what I'm asking.  Were you involved in any other activities?
Speaker 2: I never became a part of the scouts, but I participated in many activities at the YMCA, because at that time the Y was centrally located.  It was located on what was called West Broad Street at that time, and kids would go to the Y to study after school.  And of course, there was only one library that was available to Negro students at that time.  It was called the Carnegie Library [Savannah, Georgia].  So, we didn't have a library there at the elementary school, at Maple Street School [Savannah, Georgia], so we had to walk from the Westside to the Eastside to the Carnegie Library to, to utilize the books there.  And of course one thing they taught us at the elementary school was the Dewey Decimal System [Dewey Decimal Classification], and once we got to the library then we had knowledge of how to look up information.  Everything was classified into numbers.  Language I think was 500s, and science was the 400s, or something like that.  Religion was 200s, and that Dewey Decimal System was almost like a guide.  But, we utilized that.  And we had to walk from the Westside to the Eastside to the only library that was available.
Speaker 1: All right.  And at the Y, were there any things that developed there?  Was there a swimming pool?
Speaker 2: There was no swimming pool.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was--unfortunately there was no swimming pool at the Y, and Negro students were not allowed to utilize the swimming pool that was available at what was called Daffin Park [Savannah, Georgia], and which later became a site for demonstrations and, and, and swim-ins, as we called it in the 1960s.
Story_ID: 655829
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about home life.  If you could, describe the neighborhood in which you lived while you were in elementary school [Maple Street School, Savannah, Georgia].  So, tell me about your house.  Describe your house, give me a description of your house.  And within about a square block, who lived around you?  Who were your neighbors and friends, and do you know what their parents did for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, it was quite an interesting neighborhood, quite diverse.  There was one individual who lived across the street from my family who was a baker.  He did a lot of baking for different businesses in Savannah, in Chatham County [Georgia].  My next door neighbor was a family by the name of the Mazos, M-A-Z-O, the Mazos.  And Mr. Edward Mazo was a truck driver; he stayed on the road quite a bit.  And we had housewives in the neighborhood, and we didn't have any professional people in the neighborhood; they were simply laborers.  It was a dirt street.  The street was not paved until about the 1960s, but it was a close knit neighborhood.  Some people would call it a poor neighborhood, but we had what was known as a social network.  It was a network of people who helped each other, a network in which if one family was short on flour or sugar, you know, the family helped out in that regard; people would loan money.  And in those days, it was an honor system.  There was an Oriental [Asian] grocery store in the neighborhood that was controlled by people, immigrants, who came over from China.  And there were no computers back in those days, and so if you needed food, you would simply go to the grocery store.  And your account was kept with a pen or a pencil on a card, and once your family was paid on Friday afternoon--and Friday afternoon was payday for most laborers--you would simply go the grocery store and pay your bill.  And during the week if you ran short on food, or any kind of other commodities that's sold by the grocery store, you could go there and get the food or the commodities on credit.  The neighborhood was, ironically, was quite diverse.  There was Fisher's Drugstore [ph.] owned by a Jewish family and a soda shop that was owned by a Jewish family.  There was a restaurant known--owned by an African American family, a barbershop owned by African Americans, and a tailor shop called Paderewski, owned by German im- immigrants who came over at the turn of, of the 19th century.
Story_ID: 655830
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were telling me about the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yes, the neighborhood was quite diverse; Italians, Jewish people, Germans.  It was just quite diverse.  And it was quite ironical that this diverse group of immigrants who came over to America at the turn of the 19th century was living harmoniously in the same neighborhood.  And many of the property and business owners lived upstairs, and their businesses were downstairs.  And there were two movie theaters in the neighborhood, the Star Theatre and the Dunbar Theatre [Savannah, Georgia], and they were owned by people in the Jewish community.  And it was just a closely knit society.  There were people who actually loaned money to families so that their children could attend college.  And Savannah State College [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] at that time was the closest institution for higher learning for kids in the black neighborhood, and Savannah State was, was quite inspirational as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Many of the instruct- instructors at Savannah State came in to--into our neighborhood just to do some recruitment.
Story_ID: 655831
Speaker 1: So, back to your home [in Savannah, Georgia].  Describe your, your house for me where you lived, and the inside of your house.
Speaker 2: I lived in a two story house.  The--it was a, a family that lived next to us, but it was a two story house, a wooden porch.  I did not have a bathroom on the inside; our bathroom was outside.  And we did have adequate bathroom facilities, you know, for grooming on the inside, but the actual bathroom was on the outside of the dwelling, and that's how things were structured back in the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s].  We had to scrub the porch, it was a wooden porch.  And so we had to scrub the porch, and we put newspaper on the porch after it was scrubbed.  Part of the sidewalk was brick, but there were no brick homes in the neighborhood.  All of the homes in the neighborhood--there were about maybe ten houses in our neighborhood, and of course when one family cooked meals, they would often invite other families to come in and have dinner.  So, no one was really hunger.  And it was a camaraderie system that was just out of this world.  Once a week, people would come over, as the Jewish families did, and have dinner.  No one in the family went hungry; no one in the neighborhood went hungry.  We had an honor system in which there was one person in the neighborhood by the name of Mr. Coleman [ph.].  Mr. Coleman would often provide an opportunity for kids to make ice cream.  In those days we did not have an electric ice cream maker, so you had to churn it manually.  And so if you wanted some of the ice cream, each kid would have to take his or her turn churning.  And of course with ten or twelve kids in the neighborhood churning the ice cream, you know, it was a lot of fun, and then of course, you could have some.  And then that was an honor system; if you didn't churn, you couldn't eat any of the ice cream.  And, and that was a system where people actually came together and, and worked on, on a common goal together.
Story_ID: 655832
Speaker 1: Did you have siblings, brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had one sister, unfortunately, who passed at age twenty-one.
Speaker 1: Okay, what--
Speaker 2: She--we had relatives up in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and she went up to Pennsylvania one year and developed tuberculosis and came back.  And of course the doctors made home visits during those days, but we did not have the adequate facilities to treat her.  At one point, we thought she would have gone to Warm Springs, Georgia to recuperate, but she passed away from pneumonia at age twenty-one.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Eula Mae [Eula Mae Finney (ph.)].  And she had a great desire to actually become a member of the [U.S.] Army.  Even though there was segregation in those days and black females were not encouraged to, to join the [U.S.] military, she had a desire to join the military after, after graduation from high school.  But, unfortunately died at twenty-one.
Story_ID: 655833
Speaker 1: So, you talked a little bit about the junior high school [Cuyler Junior High School; Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia] and two of the teachers [Virginia Jackson Kiah and Addie Byrd Byers] that were very inspirational to you.  What else, is there anything else in high school at that time?  What were your aspirations about what you would do when you grew up?  Now this is middle school.
Speaker 2: Well, in middle school, my interests began to change somewhat.  I still had a great appreciation for the arts and humanities, but something came along called basketball.  And we had a YMCA in the neighborhood [West Broad Street YMCA, Savannah, Georgia], which had limited facilities for basketball.  The basketball gymnasium was on the third floor of the YMCA, and we were limited in how high we could shoot the basketball, because the ceilings were not as high as the gymnasium.  So, we had to be very innovative, and that's where I learned how to master the fundamentals of basketball.  And when the middle school formed a basketball team, that's when I became interested in basketball, and it took up a great deal of my time at that point.  And I also played baseball a great deal, but basketball lingered with me because most of the kids in the neighborhood were playing basketball.  And we had limited facilities; other than the Y, there were no gymnasiums around.  So, we also had the opportunity to travel, would you believe it?  To travel.  We went to a couple of rural counties, and the rural counties close by, like Guyton, Georgia did not have gymnasiums either.  The Anglo-Saxon schools had gymnasiums, but the black schools in rural areas did not.  So, we played on what was known as a clay court; they would prepare the clay and smooth the clay for games.  And we did have the school bus to take us out of town when we played games out of town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was a very interesting ex- experience.  Playing--learning how to play basketball, most of the games were on a clay court.
Story_ID: 655834
Speaker 1: And as far as travel, did your family go on any vacations during that time? Did you--
Speaker 2: We never went on summer vacations, summer vacations, but during the wintertime we would always take a trip.  Before Christmas, we would take a trip to middle Georgia to my dad's hometown near Milledgeville [Georgia], between Macon [Georgia] and Milledgeville, in Baldwin County, and there we would spend about three days.  And people in rural areas would kill hogs and they would also prepare deer meat for families who came to visit.  So, we visited our relatives in the rural areas about a few days before Christmas, and we picked up a lot of meat and other vegetables that we brought back to Savannah [Georgia].  It was also a time when we had a small reunion and a little fellowship with our relatives who lived in the rural areas, but other than that, we did not take a yearly vacation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  With your junior high school [Cuyler Junior High School; Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia], besides basketball, were there any fieldtrips that your school went on?
Speaker 2: Yes, we had several fieldtrips that took us to different historical points around Savannah.  We were taken to Savannah State College [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] at that time before it became a university, as an inspiration for kids who may want to go on to a school of higher learning, you know, after coming out of--after graduation.  But our fieldtrips were limited.  We rarely took a fieldtrip outside of Chatham County [Georgia], but there were other historical sites within Savannah, in Chatham County, that were quite interesting.  They would take us to the sugar refinery where sugar was made, and to, believe it or not, where my dad [Ellis Finney] worked, at the Southern Cotton Oil Company, to give the kids some, some idea of about how cottonseed oil, you know, was prepared, and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 655835
Speaker 1: And what was your desire at that time?  What did you think you would want to become once you either went to college or after high school [Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well, black families were not really encouraged a great deal to think beyond certain types of careers.  When you graduated from school, you would go into the [U.S.] military, you would find a job locally, or you would perhaps go to college.  And so, careers were extremely limited to African Americans at that time.  But I was always interested in service; what could I do to help someone.  And so, most of the professional people in the black neighborhood were postmen, they delivered the mail.  And that's how I came in contact with Mr. W.W. Law, a civil rights leader in Savannah [Georgia].  But there were a few dentists in the neighborhood, only a few, but we had more professional black people in the '50s [1950s] than we did in the '60s [1960s].  And that is because of the development, you know, of black culture.  But I was never interested in those kinds of professions.  I was always interested in, in helping, and it might have had something to do with our teaching at the church, of trying to help people and trying to make the world a better place to live.  So, I had some desire to do something in social work, and that was my aim.  And eventually ended up, as a--believe it or not, as a social worker for over--for many, many, years.
Story_ID: 655836
Speaker 1: Let's move on to high school.  So, and your school--were in walking distance, is that correct, from your house?
Speaker 2: Not in walking distance.  We had to take--we walked to school a great deal, but there was a local public transportation that provided transportation for kids to go to Beach High School.  We would catch the bus on a main thoroughfare called West Broad Street, which is now Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard, and the bus would take us directly to the school.  After certain hours during the morning, the bus would stop at a certain point and you would have to walk down to the school.  But during school hours, the bus would take you directly to the school and drop you off.  But I attended Alfred E. Beach High School, and it was one of two high schools at that particular time for Negro students in Savannah [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know who Alfred E. Beach was?
Speaker 2: Alfred E. Beach was an engineer, and he was quite popular in the New York area.  It's my understanding that Colonel Beach, as some people refer to him, was responsible for developing the design for what we call the--we used to call it the Hudson tombs [Holland Tunnel], but it was really the underground facility that took you from New Jersey to New York [New York].  So, whenever you hit New Jersey and you go under the tunnel into Manhattan New York, Colonel Beach and a couple of other engineers were quite instrumental in developing that design, which is still one of the great miracles in America today.
Story_ID: 655837
Speaker 1: Now you have developed this desire to, to help in you know social work.  Art is one of your, your favorite subjects, and the humanities, and you're playing basketball.  So, what happens now in, in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, in high school, we became more civic minded.  At that particular time we became more closely associated with the Youth Council of the Savannah Branch of the NAACP [NAACP Savannah Branch, Savannah, Georgia].
Speaker 1: So, what year did you enter Beach High School [Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, okay, tell me what it is that you began to learn, or the people who you're exposed to in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: Well, the NAACP Youth Council was teaching kids more about civic matters and about becoming more involved as public servants.  They suggested that we work along with other NAACP Youth Councils.  And there was one person in particular from Savannah State College [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] at that time, an African professor by the name of Dr. Peacock [ph.].  Dr. Peacock would travel into Savannah [Georgia] from the campus and would talk to kids about civic responsibility.  And in addition to that, he recommended that once we graduate from high school, then we attend college.  And he was actually indirectly recruiting for Savannah State College at that time.  We didn't know it, but he would come to the Hi Y classes at Beach High School and talk to us about civic duty.  And he said one thing, "Once you enter college, you definitely had to join one fraternity." And that was Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, because he was an Alpha.  And over a given period of years, I eventually became a member of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity.  And so we were young kids, but we were exposed to so many adult ideas and activities, probably before our time.  Most kids would be interested in just high school activities, and student council, and Future Farmers of America [sic. New Farmers of America] and that kind of thing.  But Dr. Peacock wanted to make sure that once we graduated from high school and we headed on to college, that the males would join the Alphas.  And he also indicated that it would be a good idea for all young men to also join another organization called the Prince Hall Masons.  And ironically, I eventually became a member of Mount Moriah Lodge No. Fifteen, Prince Hall Masons [Savannah, Georgia].  So, his recruitment paid off for me.  I don't know about the other kids who were in high school at that time, but it was very, very, very interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were some of the things that you did with the Youth Council and the NAACP at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, we assisted individuals in registering to vote.  We attended seminars, and we recruited other kids to become involved in NAACP work.  And at that time there was not just a Youth Council in Savannah, but a statewide Youth Council, where kids would, would get together from the NAACP branches around the State of Georgia and share ideas about what they could do in their local communities.
Story_ID: 655838
Speaker 1: So, now, now that you're in high school and you're thinking about college, are there any teachers that are encouraging you to go to college, or to do anything, you know, other than what you, you know, anticipate you would do after high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say a multiplicity of teachers.  I will add that, number one, teachers were more than teachers.  They were counselors, they were confidantes, they were helpers.  Teachers, to a large extent, at Beach High School [Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia] in the 1950s were simply an extension of one's family, and I think that that's what made learning at Beach High School a little different from contemporary education in public schools today.  Today, it's very difficult for counselors to be too close to students, because there're so many legal impediments; things that you can or cannot do because of, you know, the legal laws and that kind of thing.  But in high school, we had teachers who would actually make home visits.  We had teachers who would call students in for personal counseling after school, and make sure that students stayed on the right track.  We had tutorial sessions during lunch hour.  We had tutorial sessions after school, and we had meetings after school.  And I began to play basketball, and of course our basketball coach was like another dad away from home.  He was quite concerned about all of his players.  You had to have haircuts.  You had to be uniformed.  You could not use profanity, because you were representing the school, and it was just not the kind of value system that he wanted to see develop, you know, in his players.  And of course, in athletics, as he taught it, it's also a medium or a mechanism where you could work with other people for a common goal, and the fact that it's not just about a singular individual and his or her talents; and that on his team he was always concerned about what can we do for the team.  And that brought in the concept of losing and winning.  No one likes to lose, but you have to be pragmatic.  Sometimes in life you don't always win, and you also have to learn how to congratulate other people when they do a job.
Story_ID: 655839
Speaker 1: Now in your, in high school, do you attend your senior prom?
Speaker 2: Definitely, the junior, junior year and senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And for some reason or another--well, the mascot was the Beach High School Bulldogs.  But when we arrived at Beach [Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia] as, as freshmen, we thought we were full Bulldogs.  We never considered ourselves to be pups; we felt that we were full Bulldogs.  And there was a certain maturity in our freshman class, and it held on, you know, for the next three years when we graduated in May of 1957.  But we participated in the dramatics club under an instructor by the name of Ella P. Law.  Mrs. Law was a great motivator in terms of dramatics, and she made a tremendous contribution to Beach High School and eventually left Beach High School and went to Hawaii where she passed.
Speaker 1: Was she any relation to W.W. Law?
Speaker 2: No relation to W.W. Law.  There were several Laws in the Savannah [Georgia] community.  W.W. Law was one family.  Ella P. Law was another family.  And Mr. John P. Law [ph.], who was in charge of the Delta Hi Y [ph.] and who taught a civics class, was another Law family.  So, there were several Law families in Savannah in the 1950s.
Speaker 1: So tell me about the dramatics club, you participated--did you do any Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] since that was one of your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We never had, we never had a chance to do Shakespeare in high school, only comedies.  I remember one play entitled, 'Wildcat Willie Carves a Turkey' [sic. 'Wildcat Willie Carves the Turkey,' Anne Coulter Martens]. And it was a real big comedy, you know, on the campus.  And I also learned--we had one great experience from producing that play under Mrs. Law.  About four weeks before production time, we were negligent on our lines.  And I remember the instructor walking out of a practice session and said that she no longer wanted to be associated with us because we were going to be embarrassing, and that she did not want to be a part of us because we didn't have any high school pride.  And she walked out of a practice session and did not come back until we had a meeting of ourselves.  And of course everyone in the production, all of the cast members, came together and we talked about the spirit of the school and what it meant to be a Beach High School Bulldog, and what it would mean to be deficient in what we were trying to produce.  And we worked extremely hard, and was able to come back and put on a magnificent production.  And after we mastered our lines we called her back in, and she asked us why was she summoned to the meeting?  And we told her we thought that we were ready.  And she said, "Well, I'll think about it."  She wanted us back, but she wanted to make us sweat, and she said, "I'll think about it."  And then the next day, she said, "Well, okay, I guess I'll work with you again if you think you're ready."  And it was one of the best productions, but it was a matter of, of pride.
Story_ID: 655840
Speaker 1: And you said definitely you went to the prom.  Who did you take to your junior prom and your senior prom [at Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well, to, to the, the junior prom, a young lady by the name of Shirley Parrish [ph.].  And the senior prom, Joanne Mitchell [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember the theme of the senior prom?
Speaker 2: I am not sure, but I, I think it was: achievement is our aim, and success is our goal.
Story_ID: 655841
Speaker 1: What sights, sounds, or smells would you would, would take you back?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure whether other kids were as sensitive as I was, but for me there was just something about the smell of a classroom in school.  There was a particular sound that resonated with me at the beginning of school.  It was almost like winter was gone and the ice had melted, and the water began to flow again and spring was sprung.  And when you walked into school, it was just something about school that you didn't want to miss.  It was the excitement of people walking through the halls and exchanging greetings and not having seen each other for three and a half to four months--well, four months at that time, because school was over at the end of May and did not open until after Labor Day.  And so, vacations were over and it was time for us to rekindle those relationships, not that they had been diminished or anything like that, but you know, it was time to just get going with academics again.  It was something about classrooms.  It was something about the smell in the gymnasium and the noise, and the overall excitement of school.  I could smell it, and it resonated with me.  I was ready to get back and get going.  And it's the kind of thing that is different from anything else.  Being at home, or maybe working on a summer job is nice, but now it's time to really get back to the routine; you know, going from one class to another after forty-five to fifty minutes.  You know, it's a matter of lunchtime and having something to eat, and to talk about old times and that kind of thing.  But the sight and the sound of school was something special and unique, and it was just a lot of excitement to me.  And I think that once you do this for thirty-six months, or four years, it's the reason why you cry when you receive the diploma and walk across the stage, because it means something indefinite is coming up; it means you may never see these guys again.  And that's why school to me was just something special.  And it was something at Beach [Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia], because you had instructors who would always call, "How are you doing?  What are you doing now?  What can I do to help?"  And so, school was something extra special, especially at Beach.
Story_ID: 655842
Speaker 1: Speaking of summer jobs, when was the first time you had a job?
Speaker 2: Well, I never had a summer job during my high school career [at Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia].  But I had a good friend and a cousin, and we would often carry newspapers, and so we thought we were businesspeople.  And we didn't make a lot of money, but the local newspaper had two editions; the Morning News [Savannah Morning News] and the Evening Press [Savannah Evening Press].  So in the school year while school was going on, if we had the time we would carry papers and deliver papers after school.  But during the summer months, you had a chance to do that full time.  And so, but summer jobs were not available, at least to black students during that time, so you would always look to your family to find something for you to do.  A lot of kids left Savannah [Georgia] and they went out of town, specifically up to New York to work on summer jobs.  But--
Speaker 1: You never--
Speaker 2: --there were no summer jobs unless you delivered newspapers and did, you know, whatever work came up.
Speaker 1: Well, then how did you spend your summers?
Speaker 2: Summers were spent doing work.
Speaker 1: For you?
Speaker 2: Yes, and for the family.  And participating--now in all of the churches, there was an activity that was called Vacation Bible School.  And so it was one of the reasons why at least the Missionary Baptist Church [First Union Baptist Church; First Union Missionary Baptist Church, Savannah, Georgia] developed the Vacation Bible School because they felt that not later than maybe three to four weeks after school is over, that local churches should have what is known as the Vacation Bible School that would last anywhere from two to four weeks.  And of course, these were arts and craft and bible study.  And by the time you got out of this, you know, it was almost time for school again.  Of course a lot of kids went from one Vacation Bible School to another, and there were not what you might call any planned activities outside of family chores, you know, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But there was no real planned summer work for kids, as we have today.  Currently, the mayor of Savannah [Eddie DeLoach] has invoked a citywide summer jobs program so that kids will not be idle, and that they would work with different companies as an apprentice to maybe learn a couple of trades or, you know, skills and that kind of thing.  But we didn't have that in the 1950s.
Story_ID: 655843
Speaker 1: So you graduate from high school in 1957?
Speaker 2: May of 1957 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seven. Okay.  So what, what happens next?
Speaker 2: What happens next is that I worked for a while and I went to Savannah State College [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said you worked.  Where did you work?
Speaker 2: I worked for a place called the Mary Catherine Clinic [ph.] in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And how did you get that job?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a friend who was a labor union person up in New York, and the place was called the Hospital for Special Surgery [New York, New York], but it was really a hospital for the ruptured and crippled children and adults.  They called it the Hospital for Special Surgery because they specialized in spine surgery, broken bones, and recuperation for athletes and that kind of thing.  It was connected with New York Hospital, and part of the Cornell University medical center [New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center; NewYork-Presbyterian / Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, New York].  The Hospital for Special Surgery was on East 70th Street, and the New York Hospital was on East 69th [Street], and they were connected and had an interchangeable medical staff.  But I worked there for a while and then I went to Savannah State as a freshman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But of course when I graduated from Beach High School [Alfred E. Beach High School, Savannah, Georgia], I had the pleasure of attending what was known as Fieldston School [Ethical Culture Fieldston School] in Riverdale, New York [Riverdale, Bronx, New York] on an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] scholarship; it was called the Encampment for Citizenship.  It was almost like a prep kind of school activity for kids who were going on to college.  And it was held in a little small community called Riverdale, and it was there for the summer.  And after that was over, I worked for a while in New York and went on to Savannah State as a freshman.
Speaker 1: All right, and okay.  And what type of work did you do at the facility where you worked?
Speaker 2: I, I assisted the doctors and nurses with patients as they came back from surgery with their recuperation.
Story_ID: 655844
Speaker 1: Now you go to Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia]. And tell me about your experience there.
Speaker 2: Well, we're talking about the beginning of a new movement.  We're talking about a time when civil rights is in the air.  We had a dynamic leader on the Savannah State campus at that time by the name of Bobby L. Hill, a young man who came to Savannah State out of high school in Athens, Georgia.  And our president at that time was Dr. W.K. Payne [William K. Payne], and Dr. Payne unfortunately suffered a heart attack because there were student demonstrations on the Savannah State College campus at that time.  And this was something totally new for Savannah, Georgia and totally new for the South.  We were going into the 1960s, where civil rights movements and protests are taking place all around the country, and Savannah State's campus was no different.
Speaker 1: All right.  So what were some of the demonstrations?  Were you a part of any of the demonstrations?  Was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] very--
Speaker 2: Well, the NAACP was, the NAACP was not, did not instigate the demonstrations.  But this was social unrest like, as I said, like any other college or university, you know, at that time.  And of course, as I said before, the president was, had some difficulty adjusting to that kind of behavior.  And it was, you know, something that was quite extraordinary and, and unusual, you know, for a, you know, a state school at that time.
Story_ID: 655845
Speaker 1: So you go from '57 [1957], 1957 until--what year do you graduate?
Speaker 2: Well, I graduated in 1967 from Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], but in between there was something that came up called the Vietnam War, and which interrupted part of my academic pursuits.  And ironically I ended up in a basin, or a place called Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], which, believe it or not, was the processing station for many people going to Vietnam.  Vietnam, Thailand, Cambodia, several islands out in the Pacific [Pacific Ocean], our company had individuals who would go on what was known as temporary duty to Vietnam.  And it was quite challenging for me, because my neighbor, Sergeant John Hicks [ph.], who was in the [U.S.] Air Force, was killed on the Da Nang Air Base [Da Nang, Vietnam].  And with my induction into the [U.S.] Army, my grandmother and entire family, they were on edge.  I did not tell--when I received my assignment and orders to leave South Carolina and go to California--and from California to what we called the south--because anyone stationed south, like Thailand, Cambodia, Okinawa, or Vietnam, we called it the south.  And anyone who received orders from the south, you know, they knew that they were going to be challenged in some way or another; it was going to be quite engaging.  So, I didn't tell my family where I was going because I didn't want them to know that there was any kind of remote possibility that I might end up in the same area where our neighbor had been killed.  And his death, you know, was quite traumatic in the neighborhood, because I happened to be home the day when the two people from the Air Force came to visit his wife to give her the news that he did in fact pass from, you know, a mortar attack, you know, at the air base in Da Nang, Vietnam.  So, my parents [Margaret Maynor Finney and Ellis Finney], they just knew that ironically through some twist or another that I would probably end up in the same area, and almost did.
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: I spent two years in the Army, one year overseas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What year was it that you went in?  What year was it?  Was it--how long were you at Savannah State before you--
Speaker 2: I was at Savannah State for about a year and a half.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I spent '62 [1962], 1962 and part of '63 [1963] in the south.  And I was back home by 1964 and went right back into demonstrations.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, where did you go to boot camp?
Speaker 2: Fort Jackson, South Carolina [Fort Jackson, Columbia, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: All right.  And so what was your job in the service, while you were in the [U.S.] military?
Speaker 2: While I was in the military I had to--I was at a--where we had the service missile sites.  We were not allowed to say where the sites were located, but the base had special forces: Army, Marine [U.S. Marine Corps], [U.S.] Navy, and Air Force bases where I was stationed.  The planes were in the air twenty-four hours a day.  The base was called the Keystone to the Pacific [sic. Keystone of the Pacific], key base with missile sites, and those missile sites had to be operational twenty-four hours a day.  So, my job was to make sure that the missile sites had their parts, and they had to be operational.  And of course, this was a little bit, this was separate from the air bases.  There were two air bases, Kadena [Kadena Air Base] and Naha [Naha Air Base] air bases, which had their separate operations in addition to our Army base, which really kept those missile sites going twenty-four hours a day.
Story_ID: 655846
Speaker 1: Can you share some other experiences of being in, in the [U.S.] Army, in the [U.S.] military; your interaction with other, other soldiers there, and, and with the command as well?
Speaker 2: Well, I received one promotion and one honor.  I received a promotion while I was overseas, and for a promotion I came out number two out of almost a hundred individuals who went up for a promotion.  And I received an honor by Colonel Walter Baer [ph.] at Fort Stewart [Georgia] when I returned, as the second African American to be chosen as outstanding soldier.  And that was awarded in a parade ceremony at Fort Stewart by Colonel Walter Baer.
Speaker 1: And what did you personally feel about the Vietnam War?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a little bit different.  I felt as if there were two things that were going on at the same time.  Number one, I had no qualms about military duty, because I had an older brother who served in the [U.S.] Navy in World War II [WWII].  I had one brother who served in the Korean War, in the Army, and one brother who was in the Navy during the Korean War.  So, I ended up in the service during the Vietnam conflict.  And so four boys, and all four boys had seen military service.  And so I thought that, you know, my brothers paid their dues, and I needed to pay mine too.  I didn't have any qualms about serving.  The only difference is that everyone was heralded when they came out of the service during World War II.  And then of course, it was the same thing with the Korean conflict.  But Vietnam soldiers apparently did not receive some kind of respect that other military personnel had enjoyed.  It could be that maybe many Americans protested the war, and the war almost divided the country at one time.  And it could have been the main reason why President Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] did not, chose not to run again for another term, because the expenditures and the lives lost during the Vietnam War was something that a lot of people questioned, and so Johnson decided not to run again.  But that war just took a heavy toll, and then it just appeared as if the soldiers who came out--that people look at them with an indifferent attitude.  So, it was just something, you know, that I was caught up in.  And it was something that you never asked for, but something that you have to, have to endure.  You'd like to be held in high esteem, but it's very difficult to explain.  You know, when you have these demonstrations and you're in, you know, not the most comfortable zone in the world, and then you come out and then you got to start all over again, you, you know it's, you'd like to think that, you know, you, you did your part too, you know.  But it was almost like a thankless kind of situation to be in.
Speaker 1: What I hear you saying is, you know, you were fighting in a war, but yet when you came home, you had to fight, you know, just for voting rights, or, you know, just--
Speaker 2: Well, all African American soldiers had to do the same thing, but there was a lot of excruciating pain with Vietnam vets.  Because, as a matter of fact, a good friend of mine did two tours, two or three tours in Vietnam, a young man by the name of Sage Brown.  He was along with me in the civil rights demonstrations of the '60s [1960s], and he did a couple of tours and came back home.  And he became an attorney and I became a social worker.  But he, too, felt, felt the same thing, that--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) it was a little bit different, you know, the attitude appeared by, by Americans appeared to be a little bit different.
Story_ID: 655847
Speaker 1: So you return to the states in 1964, and truly a lot of things have, have gone on.  So you were away when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how did you hear of the news?  And, and what was the, the landscape in your--where you were at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, it was shocking, because we heard that all of us may be pressed into duty in Vietnam, and that every--we were on alert indefinitely.  And I remember that every morning we had records check.  Your last will and testament, and all of your deductions and your pay, you know, and your insurances were checked, and your shots and everything like that.  And we were on alert.  At one point I think we were on a lockdown.  Unfortunately, we had a typhoon come through and hit the island, and in addition it was just a lot of excitement.  So everybody was just, you know, sort of tense, you know, for a while.  And as I indicated before, I think the [U.S.] Air Force had the Thunderbirds [U.S. Air Force Air Demonstration Squadron] or the Thunderchief [Republic F-105 Thunderchief] airplanes in the air twenty-four hours a day.  So, it was a pretty challenging time.  And then to come out and go right back in--I went right back into civil rights activities again, to test the public accommodations law.  [U.S.] Congress passed the public accommodations law of 1964 [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title II], outlawing all segregation in places of public accommodations.  So what happened was that on the front end I was in demonstrations, civil rights demonstrations, as a member of the NAACP Youth Council.  And after the war, coming back and I had to go downtown--the law was passed I think on a Wednesday.  And on a Thursday, another member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I, we tested the public accommodations law in Savannah [Georgia] downtown.
Speaker 1: And so, how did you do that?
Speaker 2: We went down--we didn't demonstrate.  We went down to eat in a restaurant that had never served a black person before.
Speaker 1: Do you remember--
Speaker 2: But we had to test it.  His name is Lewis Stell [ph.].
Speaker 1: And what restaurant did you go to?
Speaker 2: Anton's Restaurant.  It was on the corner of Bull [Street] and Broughton.
Speaker 1: So, explain to me what happened when you went.
Speaker 2: Well, the NAACP said, "Well, we got to test the law."  So, Stell and I went down and we, very simply, we just ordered a hamburger and a Coke [Coca-Cola].  And there were some stares and maybe one or two jeers, but no violent activity that took place, certainly not like what we had in the 1960s, you know.  Because, you know, during that time, you know, it was a lot of, you know, a lot of turmoil.  But we didn't experience any hostility or violence or anything like that.  But, we just had lunch there.  And we didn't have cars, so we had to walk down to Broughton Street and then walk back home, and then we went back to the NAACP office.  And that night at seven o'clock--there were, there were meetings that were held nightly quite a bit during those days.  So, our report was made at seven o'clock that night.
Story_ID: 655848
Speaker 1: Talk to me about what you know about the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and W.W. Law, and Hosea Williams and the two groups, and what the differences were, as you understood them.
Speaker 2: Okay. Same goal, but different approaches.  Hosea Williams was more inclined to be a little bit more engaging in protests.  Mr. Law believed in protest, but it had to be organized.  Mr. Law did not believe in nighttime demonstrations.  As a matter of fact, Mr. Law believed that not all of the elements in the black community were in tune with NAACP training.  See, when we demonstrated in the '60s [1960s], and then tested the law [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title II] again, you know, in '64 [1964], we knew what was at stake.  If someone engaged in activity against you, you had to cover up and not really fight back.  That was the philosophy of Mahatma Gandhi, which had been adopted by Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and Mr. Law was of the same opinion.  And I'm not saying that Hosea was part of violent elements, but there were some people who were just a little bit more engaging, and they had differences of opinion about how demonstrations should be done and conducted.  And Mr. Law believed that there were times--that there was a time for everything: there was a time to negotiate, and there also a time to demonstrate. So, eventually Hosea Williams became affiliated with the Chatham County Crusade for Voters and eventually SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] in Atlanta [Georgia], and Mr. Law continued on with his tenure as president of the NAACP.  And W.W. Law was not just a, a civil rights crusader, but also a historian.  And to a large extent, he was what you might call multifaceted.
Story_ID: 655849
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, understanding the difference between W.W. Law and Hosea Williams, but explain what is--what were the differences were between the night and the day demonstrations?
Speaker 2: Mr. Law believed that nighttime demonstrations would draw in elements that were not in tune with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] philosophy and training.  There are so many times today that you have demonstrations in cities, but not all of the demonstrators are individuals who are there for the cause.  They are simply rioters and people who look for opportunities to disrupt and to destroy, and that nullifies all of the good work that's done by pure demonstrators.  Individuals can carry a sign or a card or something like that, indicating certain types of slogans, but people who come in and break windows and destroy property, that's another element.  That's an extremist element, and you can control elements better in the daytime when you can actually see who is involved.  People who engage in arrogant behavior, destroying property, are not the individuals who come to meetings.  They are not the people who are trained.  They are not people who are spokespersons who knows about the mission and what the organization is all about.  These are just simply people who are looking for an opportunity to disrupt.  And you have them in, in, in all groups, not just in civil rights demonstrations.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any of the, the wade-ins at Tybee beach [Tybee Island, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Not--no, I was not; just, simply, occasionally some sit-in demonstrations downtown [Savannah, Georgia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 655850
Speaker 1: All right, so what happens after 1964 and you're back from the [U.S.] military?
Speaker 2: Back at Savannah State College [Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].
Speaker 1: All right.  And tell me about your experience there, and what happens after that when you graduate in '67 [1967]?  So, between '64 [1964] and '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: Well, I maintained my relationship with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I worked my way, literally, through college from there.  My dad [Ellis Finney] passed away while I was in the military.  And what I was hoping would not happen, happened.  I didn't tell the family where I was going, because I knew what his cardiac condition was.  And, you know, people through some way or another they find out.  So, his condition became worse and he passed away.  And so I went to work after the military.  I just took a job, and I ran into a couple of stumbling blocks.  I applied for a job at a place called Tetley Tea Company, and I was told they had a job opening.  I applied for the job and I felt that I met all of the qualifications, but they had three jobs rather than two jobs--I mean, one job.  So I filed a complaint with the civil rights commission, and they found that the tea company, in fact, had discriminated.  But by that time, you know, I just had to move on to something else.  I could not get a job at the tea company, and so I worked at Memorial Medical Center [Memorial Health University Medical Center, Savannah, Georgia] for a while after school.  And at the medical center, they had a rigid form of segregation.  At the medical center, a black patient could not be housed in the same room with a white patient.  But I worked with patients in the emergency room, and also on the fifth floor when extra help was needed.  But I had to leave the medical center under some unusual conditions there.  All of us worked under the condition where, you know, believe it or not, if you had any kind of disease or sickness, you know, you just could not be in the room with an, with an Anglo-Saxon patient.
Story_ID: 655851
Speaker 1: But I worked in the emergency room [at Memorial Medical Center; Memorial Health University Medical Center, Savannah, Georgia], and on this particular day there were two incidents of patients that came in; a black female who was stabbed, and a black male who had a gunshot wound.  And they called the doctor to come over and treat them, and when the doctor arrived, he said, "Mr. Finney [HistoryMaker John Finney], where are the patients?"  And I showed him the patients and indicated to him that I had cleaned the wounds, and we were ready for him to begin treatment.  And he said that they were not emergencies.  He said, "These kind of things happen every weekend.  These people do this all the time."  And I indicated to him, I said, "Well, you have to treat everybody regardless of race, creed or color."  Because that's what Hippocrates--that was the spirit of Hippocrates, that all doctors must take the Hippocratic Oath to treat people.  And he said, "I know, but they just do this all the time."  So, this was on the weekend, and that Monday when I arrived at work I had a note to come in for a conference.  I was not terminated, but I was, you know, they asked me about the incident and said that the doctor had lodged a complaint and said that he was insulted.  And I indicated that I was insulted, because there were other black employees who were there in the lobby when he said it.  And it was just a matter, you know, that these people needed help regardless of what the situation was.  So, the tension grew up on me, and then a letter was distributed to all medical center employees that any medical institution using Hill-Burton funds [Hospital Construction and Survey Act of 1946], that is governmental funds, had to integrate with all deliberate speed; that is, all vestiges of segregation or separation had to come down.  That meant that black patients could be in the room with white patients.  It meant that at lunchtime there were not two cash registers, but one cash register in the cafeteria.  There was a partition that separated, you know, black employees from white employees, so they had to be removed.  But my situation got worse, because I think they must have remembered the comment that I had made with the doctor. I was a good employee, but I guess that one incident just sent them over (laughter) the edge.  And so I resigned, because I needed a course, I remember very distinctly, called criminology, in order to graduate [from Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].  And if I didn't get that course it would have been twelve months before I could graduate, so I just, I had to resign, because they would not allow me to be five minutes late.  I had to be there at 3:30 rather than 3:35, so I eventually resigned and I went to work at a place called Holsum bakery [Derst Baking Company, Savannah, Georgia].  And there at the bakery the hours were longer, but you know, there was nobody to support me in my family, so I had to take a job there at the bakery.  And my hours were from four in the afternoon until 1:30 in the morning, and my first class was at 8:20.  So, I had an hour to, hour to study and maybe a couple of hours to sleep, but I graduated.
Story_ID: 655852
Speaker 1: What year did you work at the bakery [Derst Baking Company, Savannah, Georgia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixt--
Speaker 1: Sixty [1960]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the '60s [1960s].  I graduated from Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] in 1967.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The gratifying thing about the graduation is that there were black and white--a black and white delegation of nurses and other hospital people were there to support me on graduation day.  So, people--it was what it was.  It was the system, and people work in a system sometimes that they don't always agree with.  But they supported me as an individual, because I tried to help everyone I could when I was working there.  Sometimes I would do two shifts.  If they needed somebody I would do the extra time, not just because of the money, but because they needed the help.  And so my supervisor, the lady who had to question me, you know, who called me into the office, she was there to support me on graduation day.  When I got that diploma and walked outside, there was a whole delegation of people from the hospital [Memorial Medical Center; Memorial Health University Medical Center, Savannah, Georgia], black and white.  And that's the interesting thing about civil rights and about human relations and everything else--is that people are just people, you understand.  We all live and work under conditions that we disagree with, you know, but in the final analysis, people are just people.  And people, by working together and living together, they finally realize, you know, that people are just human beings, you know.  So that was a high mark for me at that particular time, to see that delegation outside.  Now, part of my family was there, you know, but they were there as cheerleaders.
Speaker 1: So at this point when you talk about your family, was there anybody special in your life?  Were you thinking about getting married or anything at that time?
Speaker 2: No, I--no, not at all.  I was--as a matter of fact I met one young lady, but she knew that my goal was a college diploma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in college--you talked about the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity].  Did you pledge?
Speaker 2: I pledged Alpha and did not make it, and became an Alpha after that.  Because working those kind of hours and pledging, it just, it was just a toll.  And anybody will tell you that when you're pledging for a college fraternity, you don't need to be working.  (Laughter) You really, you're going to have to put in some time after time.  And at that time they required, you know, activities, you know, beyond normal school and working hours, and other kinds of, certain types of activities, but.
Speaker 1: Who was the president when--of Savannah State?
Speaker 2: Dr. Howard Jordan [Howard Jordan, Jr.] was the president when, when I was there.  Ironically, he happened to be an Alpha too.
Story_ID: 655853
Speaker 1: All right.  So you get--so you graduate, and what happens next in your life?
Speaker 2: Well, after grad- graduation--well, when I was--the funny thing about it is that I received a high school--no, not a high school--a college diploma at eleven a.m. on a Friday, and I was mopping floors at four o'clock in the afternoon.  Because when I graduated--I was working on a laborer's job when I graduated from college.  And I applied for a job with the local anti-poverty agency and was able to get a position working with high school dropouts.  And I worked with high school dropouts at EOA Savannah [Economic Opportunity Authority for Savannah-Chatham County Area, Inc.] for two years, '67 [1967] through '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what was your job there at EOA?
Speaker 2: I worked with high school dropouts.  I was a counselor.
Speaker 1: A counselor, okay.
Speaker 2: I was a counselor.  I was counseling about a hundred and twenty-five kids who had dropped out of school and they were, they had to attend school at night and work on their GED [General Educational Development], but they had jobs in the day.  So I worked with high school dropouts for two years, and then an opportunity became available for work study at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and I went to Atlanta University partly on a scholarship.  The scholarship was offered by the Office of Economic Opportunity, and that was coupled with a couple of dollars from the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] which had been reinstated for veterans.  And I went to Atlanta University and worked on a master's degree.
Speaker 1: And your B.A. was in--
Speaker 2: B.S. Both degrees were in sociology--the B.S. degree at Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] and the master's of art degree at Atlanta University.
Speaker 1: And you said that was 1969?
Speaker 2: I went to Atlanta University in 1969 and worked there; I was in school there.  I completed all the coursework, and I came back to Savannah [Georgia] and began working with EOA Savannah again and finished up the work for the master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And graduated from Atlanta University in 1971.
Story_ID: 655854
Speaker 1: So you--when you come back to the EOA [Economic Opportunity Authority for Savannah-Chatham County Area, Inc.] to work, are you still in the counseling position or a--
Speaker 2: No, I'm outreach.
Speaker 1: Outreach now? Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it--yeah.  My job was to work in neighborhoods and community organization.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: There were many low to moderate income neighborhoods in Savannah [Georgia] and Chatham County, and my job was to coordinate the effort, making sure that people were organized.  And that was not a good omen with local government at that time, city or county government.  They were somewhat suspect of the local anti-poverty agency.  But the job was not to cause dissension.  What we wanted to do was to organize communities for action.  So, it was a very simple proposition.  We went into different neighborhoods and we asked a question: "Are you organized?  Do you have a president, a vice president, secretary, and treasurer?  Are you chartered?  Do you know what services are available to you as a legitimate neighborhood group? And if not, then you should petition your city or your county government for whatever services are available." Then we worked with the neighborhoods to let them know that if you need help with tax preparation or if you need any kind of legal assistance, or if you--you know, if you need to know how to read or deal with your electric bill or your gas bill.  It was providing information so that communities could become self-sufficient.  And that's what the anti-poverty movement was all about.  It was not to cause trouble, but there were some people who thought that once neighborhood or community people knew what their rights and privileges were, they would become a problem.  But that was not the case.  The case was just simply to make sure that people were organized.  And to a large extent to date, no one who has run for public office in the past fifty years has not at least sought the endorsement of a neighborhood group, because even the city government at that time had no idea how important organized communities were.  So in order to apply for federal money, cities and counties learned that they needed to seek the input of low to moderate income people; poor people needed to have some kind of say so in terms of what they needed in their communities.  And so our agency at that particular time was the first agency in Savannah that would allow people from the neighborhood to actually sit on the executive board of directors, to give some input into how the anti-poverty movement would be conducted or would be organized in the local community.
Story_ID: 655855
Speaker 1: What were some of the, the projects that the communities, once they were organized, were able to, you know, get done for their community? Like I know that there are certain communities that might not have had sidewalks or lights?  Was that part of what you did?
Speaker 2: Well, there were two that come to mind, and they were very big projects.  Crime was increasing in a neighborhood called Woodville [Savannah, Georgia], and the president at that time was a man by the name of Charlie Bryan [ph.], B-R-Y-A-N, and he was quite enthusiastic.  He had done some work, a lot of work out in the Woodville area, and became their president.
Speaker 1: Where is Woodville located?  Can you tell me, give me an idea of where it is in the city?
Speaker 2: Woodville is located near, it's near Garden City [Georgia].  It's, it's, it's adjacent to Garden City, but it's on Alfred [Street] and Fair Street.  Woodville was a combination of city and rural; rural and city.  But many streets were not paved in Woodville, and they did not have proper lighting.  And that was the first big project that the community took on, was to increase the lighting.  And they even invested some of their personal funds in buying lights for the community, to make sure that it was a deterrent to crime. But one of the biggest projects that EOA [Economic Opportunity Authority for Savannah-Chatham County Area, Inc.] developed with the help of the community is now called the Curtis V. Cooper Primary Health Care center [Curtis V. Cooper Primary Health Care, Inc., Savannah, Georgia].  And a lot of people are not aware of how the center was organized, or its inception.  At one point, there were no medical facilities west of West Broad Street which is now ML King [Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard]; no medical facilities from that point to the Effingham [Effingham County, Georgia]--to the Chatham [Chatham County, Georgia] or Effingham county line.  So, people were thinking that a healthcare facility was needed on the Westside of Savannah [Georgia] going toward the Chatham county line.  And we worked very, very closely with people in the west Savannah community.  And a Catholic nun by the name of Sister Mary Julian Griffin, who was with the Catholic Diocese of Savannah [Roman Catholic Diocese of Savannah], had a lot of conversations with the EOA, and the EOA applied for a federal grant, and we received a grant of $619,000.  That was a planning grant to begin what was called the Westside health center [Westside Comprehensive Health Center].  The Westside health center was located on Bay--it was located on Bay Street.  And the land was donated by a black family in Chicago [Illinois] called the Sengstacke family, and that was the first neighborhood center.  And from that particular operation planned by EOA with the $619,000 grant, it evolved into the Westside Urban Health Center, which was located on York [Street] and Drayton [Street].  And from York and Drayton, the center decided to expand, and a new facility was constructed on the corner of East Broad and President Street, which is now the Curtis V. Cooper Primary Health Care center.  That center serves about close to twenty thousand clients per year.  But what started off as an idea in the community, the EOA picked it up, assisted the residents of Westside Savannah, received the federal grant, did the planning, and it started off as the Westside health center on Bay Street.  And from there it became the Westside Urban, and from Westside Urban, it's now today the Curtis V. Cooper Primary Health Care center.  That is the complete history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's the biggest healthcare project done by any kind of community organization.  It employs a few hundred employees and serves roughly eighteen to twenty thousand people per year.
Story_ID: 655856
Speaker 1: That's a, a great accomplishment for EOA [Economic Opportunity Authority for Savannah-Chatham County Area, Inc.] and the community involvement.  So, now you were at EOA for--well--
Speaker 2: I was not--
Speaker 1: EOA is fifty years old.
Speaker 2: Fifty-two years.
Speaker 1: Fifty-two years.  And you have been there almost fifty years.
Speaker 2: Forty-eight.
Speaker 1: Forty-eight, almost fifty years.  So, what was your next position?  Because you had--how many positions did you have in that forty-eight years?
Speaker 2: I've had three positions.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I started off as a counselor with high school dropouts.  After graduate school at Atlanta [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], I came back as supervisor of outreach services.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And from there as acting executive director, and then executive director.  So, three positions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what other initiatives--that was one major one, and a very--
Speaker 2: Well, for the agency, for EOA as an agency, a lot of people are not aware of this.  Prior to 1972, there were no continuous activities recognizing the contributions of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. There were scattered church programs here and there.  You know, a church would have a program once in a while, here and there.  So in 1972, with four ministers, two black and two white ministers, on January 15, 1972 I asked everybody to take their lunch hour at twelve, from twelve to one [o'clock].  And I had some friends who were pretty close by in the neighborhood.  One was Reverend James Hooten, a white minister from the Church of the Covenant [Covenant Christian Church, Savannah, Georgia]; Reverend Harold Baker from Second Ebenezer Baptist Church [Savannah, Georgia]; Reverend Edward Ducree who was with an African Methodist Episcopal Church [sic.] called Asbury United, Asbury Methodist Church [Asbury United Methodist Church, Savannah, Georgia]; and a white minister by the name of Noel Cooper, who was the pastor of Bull Street Baptist Church [Savannah, Georgia].  And Bull Street Baptist church was significant, because we could not attend Bull Street Baptist Church in the 1960s; we were turned away at the door.  But, it was Noel Cooper from Bull Street, Reverend James Hooten from the Church of the Covenant, the two white ministers, Reverend Baker and Reverend Edward Ducree.
Story_ID: 655857
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you have these, these ministers, two, two black and two white.  And you did mention about Bull Street [Bull Street Baptist Church, Savannah, Georgia].  What made you call that particular pastor [Noel Cooper]?  Because--and this was '72 [1972], but in the '60s [1960s], blacks couldn't attend--were blacks attending that church?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: In '72 [1972]?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, made you want to call him (simultaneous))--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, for two reasons.  Number one, some time had elapsed, and we wanted to make sure that we--you know, that the speakers were fully--you know, that they were from both parts of the racial spectrum.  And it was just a chance.  I called the church and I indicated to the pastor who I was, and indicated to him what I would like for him to do.  And you have to keep in mind, now, that this was the first program of its type in Savannah [Georgia], and nobody knew that it was happening, except a couple of people in the community and our staff.  There were about forty-five people at the first program, and we held it in a conference room at 1112 Whitaker Street.  And they came over and we had a couple of songs, and it was such great spirit with the small group, that the next year we decided to go to a larger venue which was the Golden Age Center on May Street, right down the street.  And we had close to a hundred people, at least a hundred and twenty-five people.  So, it began and grow and grow and grow.  And about six years after we began that community program, another group decided that they wanted to have a parade, and that's how the parade and the observance association, as it is called, was organized.  But the impetus, or the idea, actually came from EOA [Economic Opportunity Authority for Savannah-Chatham County Area, Inc.].  Now, we still continue to have a program today, but our program is the same today as it was forty-five years ago.  We start at twelve and we end at one [o'clock], because we honor Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and have a commemorative program and then we go back to work.  And that's where the twelve noon idea came in.  And so, we've been doing this for forty-five years.  But the point I'm trying to make is what we did in 1972 gave the inspiration for the development of the group today that has the parade, called the Observance Association [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Observance Day Association].  But a lot of people have no idea of what the real true history is about the ML King celebration in Savannah.
Speaker 1: Well, this was started way before the King Holiday [Martin Luther King Jr. Day] became a national holiday?
Speaker 2: That's right, and another thing is that we dropped Columbus Day.  I was able to get our executive board to drop Columbus Day and to take January 15th as a holiday.  So, we were years ahead of Washington, D.C. and, and the local government.
Speaker 1: And even Atlanta [Georgia] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we, we, we were able to get the--our board of directors to make that switch.
Story_ID: 655858
Speaker 1: So, what were some of the other highlights of the EOA [Economic Opportunity Authority for Savannah-Chatham County Area, Inc.] during your tenure?
Speaker 2: In the 1990s, as you know, utility companies--everything was beginning to escalate.  Technology was moving forward, and then natural gas development was taking place, especially in the State of Georgia.  The State of Georgia went into what was known as natural gas deregulation.  That is, no more monopolies, you know, to have companies go out and provide services and to make it competitive.  So, with that particular change, we knew that the people we served were going to be effected.  And so, we held the first community conference, a workshop, on natural deregulation.  We had two community workshops, one in the day at twelve and another at six [o'clock] in the afternoon.  And the purpose of the workshops was to bring in all of the marketers.  We were able to bring in about nineteen different companies that were offering natural gas services, and we brought in clients to ask questions of the natural gas marketers.  There were a lot of people who had no idea what a therm [thermostat] was.  A lot of poor people we worked with had no idea of how to read their gas meters; some of them probably don't today.  But the marketers came in and we packed the house.  We had a packed house at twelve and a packed house at six in the afternoon.  The one that was held at twelve in the early 1990s was held at St. Philip A.M.E. Church on West Broad Street at that time; it's ML King [Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard, Savannah, Georgia] today.  And the other one was held at St. James A.M.E. Church [Savannah, Georgia] in the afternoon.  But people came in and they were able to ask questions of Georgia Power [Georgia Power Company], Georgia Natural Gas [South Georgia National Gas Company], SCANA [SCANA Corporation].  One group was called Columbia [Columbia Energy Services Corporation], and there were some gas companies that just developed companies out of nowhere.  But we wanted to make sure that the poor people we served would not be shortchanged, and that they would know everything there was to know about natural gas deregulations.  And it was very, very, important, because there were some companies that decided to slam clients.  And the term slamming clients meant that while natural gas was wide open, you didn't have to stick with Georgia Power or Georgia Natural Gas; you could go to another marketer.  Some companies actually took over accounts from people, and they had no idea that their account had been taken over.  We worked with one client for about four hours one day, only to find out that a company in Canada or someplace had taken over, you know, their account, and we had to work with the client to make sure that they knew what was going on.  But it, it was, you know, we, we called it community education more than anything else.
Story_ID: 655859
Speaker 1: What about housing as far as home buying? Was the EOA [Economic Opportunity Authority for Savannah-Chatham County Area, Inc.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well housing--
Speaker 1: --involved in that at all?
Speaker 2: Housing is our second largest entity at EOA.  We spend more money in housing, other than child care.  Head Start, with a budget of about 6 to $7 million, is the largest component in the agency, but housing is next.  We have three homeless shelters, more shelters than any other agency in Savannah [Georgia].  The first shelter is the Tom Austin House [Tom D. Austin House] at 14 ML King Boulevard [Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard, Savannah, Georgia].  We have about twelve apartment units with the Tom Austin House open to men, women, and families.  The second unit is the Duffy Street SRO [Duffy Street SRO Homeless Shelter, Savannah, Georgia], single room occupancy, for men only.  There are forty apartment units for men only.  And then there's the Peeler home [Peeler House, Savannah, Georgia] with four apartment units over on Abercorn [Street] and 54th [Street], off 54th.  And so, those are the three homeless shelters that we operate.  But our brightest spot has been the home buyer education class.  And in home buyer education, in the past five years we've had two families who came into one of our homeless shelters and were able to purchase their own homes in less than two years.  We consider that to be one of our biggest poverty reduction projects--a homeless family with nothing at all--no house, no apartment--can come in, stay in our shelter, and go through our home buyer education class and purchase their own homes in less than twenty-four months.  We thought that that was a poverty reduction success story.  And then of course, we've graduated over three thousand clients in the past eighteen--the past nineteen years.  And we have had, oh, about, well over $32 million in mortgage money by the clients who were able to purchase their homes.  But the fact that homeless people were able to come in and go through the class, we, we think that that was a great feat.
Speaker 1: Yes, it absolutely is a great feat.
Story_ID: 655860
Speaker 1: So, what other things the E- are the--are available through the EOA [Economic Opportunity Authority for Savannah-Chatham County Area, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, right now we have a partnership.  Back in the '70s [1970s], I was asked to come into the United Way office for a conference, and the United Way indicated that there was no community effort to deal with the problem of sickle cell anemia.  And I indicated to United Way that EOA was an agency that serves everybody, regardless of race, creed or color.  And the United Way administration said, "Could you do this, since you know some people in the black community and you work in the black community in your church and everything.  Could you take the effort on?"  We were able to make sickle cell anemia part of the partnership with the EOA.  And in the early 1970s, if you had a sickle cell anemia problem and had to be treated, you had to travel to Augusta [Georgia], to the Augusta comprehensive sickle cell anemia clinic [Comprehensive Sickle Cell Center; Augusta University Sickle Cell Center].  And through the efforts of the community and our organizing parents, and the health department and the EOA, we were able to form a partnership with EOA, Grady Memorial Hospital [Atlanta, Georgia], the Chatham County Health Department, and the Memorial Medical Center [Memorial Health University Medical Center, Savannah, Georgia].  The Memorial Medical Center opened up what was called the genetics hematology clinic.  They didn't call it sickle cell, but they did call it genetics hematology, which dealt with blood problems anyway.  And so through that particular effort, we were able to get client services here in Savannah [Georgia], rather than have people travel to Augusta.  And today we do have a clinic here in Savannah, the Backus Children's clinic [Backus Children's Hospital Outpatient Center], which is over at Memorial Medical Center.  And we have young people in the sickle cell anemia program at Memorial Medical Center, and we do assist sickle cell anemia kids with going to summer camp every year.  But now we have that partnership going on, where we have parents and we have other organizations that are involved; you know, Grady Memorial, EOA, Chatham County Health Department, and Memorial Medical Center.  And one of the bright spots is really an unfortunate spot for us.  We had one student who had a B average, and who had to drop out of school with a couple of months left.  And unfortunately she had to be hospitalized at Grady, and she passed away.
Speaker 1: Sorry.
Speaker 2: And we were able to get her diploma awarded posthumously.  But we do assist families on a limited basis with medication.  I've served as the chairperson for sickle cell anemia since 1973, and have missed maybe about four years since 1973--four years as being chairperson.  And we are now expanding to include other parent groups to make sure that everybody is aware of, of sickle cell anemia.  But we do assist families on a limited basis.  And we have an endowment at Savannah State University [Savannah, Georgia].  So, if a sickle cell anemia child would like to go to Savannah State and do not have the funds, we can assist that student.
Story_ID: 655861
Speaker 1: There was another board that you worked with during these years as well, and the Youth Futures Authority.
Speaker 2: The Youth Futures Authority.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It--a group that's been an advocate for youth services and youth wellbeing in Savannah [Georgia] and Chatham County [Georgia].  And Youth Futures was organized by the late city manager, Don Mendonsa [A.A. "Don" Mendonsa], and former mayor [HistoryMaker] Otis Johnson was also actively involved with the Youth Futures Authority.  They have done a lot of planning, and they produce a lot of statistics on youth services every year.  I've also had a chance to service on the board of the Curtis V. Cooper Primary Health Care center [Curtis V. Cooper Primary Health Care, Inc., Savannah, Georgia], which provides healthcare services, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, would you talk about some of the other boards that you--?  You work with so many of them, but some of the ones that--
Speaker 2: Well, one--you know, I never noticed it myself, but I've been involved with a lot of healthcare initiatives.  One is no longer in business, but again, in the early '70s [1970s] it was said that the best place to die from a stroke, it was Chatham County.  So, Dr. James Metts [James C. Metts, Jr.] and Dr. John Elliott, who were affiliated with Candler, asked me to come and join with them in working with the new group that would eventually become the Chatham County cardiovascular council [Community Cardiovascular Council Of Chatham County, Inc.].  And the primary theme was Strike out Stroke, that is, to work with people to reduce the number of strokes that were occurring in Savannah and Chatham County.  Because Chatham County had one of the worse stroke rates in the country, not just in Georgia, but in the country.  And so Dr. Metts and Dr. Elliott formed that council, and we were able to secure a director.  And the Chatham County stroke council operated for many years with its headquarters over at Candler Hospital [Savannah, Georgia], and we were able to dramatically reduce the number of strokes.  As a matter of fact, there's a group that eventually organized a stroke rehabilitation unit at a place called the Georgia Infirmary.  And the Georgia Infirmary hospital--not hospital, but center, is located on 35th [Street] and Abercorn [Street].  And the stroke council was in business for many, many years and eventually ran into funding problems with the State of Georgia.  But due to the efforts of the, we call it the CSC, Cardiovascular Stroke Council [ph.], it operated for many years in reducing the number of strokes in Savannah and Chatham County.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I've also had a chance to work with a group called the Rape Crisis Center [Rape Crisis Center of the Coastal Empire, Savannah, Georgia].  The Rape Crisis Center deals with women being vulnerable--vulnerable to, you know, to rape problems in, in the community.  And also, the Voluntary Action Center [Chatham-Savannah Voluntary Action Center, Inc.], which was organized by a social worker some, some years ago.
Story_ID: 655862
Speaker 1: And tell me, what was the, the Armstrong-Savannah State College social work consortium, what did it do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, at one time there was no social work program in Savannah.  If you wanted to go to a graduate school of social work, you had to go to the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia].  And of course at one time you could go to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] or some other school that had a social work program that offered a master's degree in social work.  And so over thirty or forty years ago, a group of us used to meet at different locations, and we talked about the idea or the possibility of developing a social work program in Savannah, Georgia.  Well, Dr. Otis Johnson [HistoryMaker Otis Johnson] was a part of that particular effort along with a lady named Mary Roston [ph.], and a couple of people from the Chatham County Department of Family and Children Services [Chatham County Division of Family and Children Services].  And so, eventually the social work program became a reality at Savannah State University [Savannah, Georgia].  It started under Dr. Carlton Brown and is now flourishing under Dr. Cheryl D. Dozier [Cheryl Davenport Dozier].  And that's how the social work department at Savannah State was initiated, through the efforts of a group of social workers.  And I think another lady was involved with that group, called Gertrude Greene, and another Gertrude who was called Gertrude Locke [ph.].  So, the idea was to have something here in Savannah rather than have people travel to the University of Georgia or travel outside of Savannah, Chatham County [Georgia].
Speaker 1: And also you were a member of the outreach committee at Morehouse College School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I'm no longer a part of that group, but I think Dr. Sullivan [HistoryMaker Dr. Louis Sullivan] was at Morehouse medical school at that time, and it was just simply a matter of serving as a contact person here in Savannah for people who wanted to become involved with, with Morehouse, you know, going on to their medical school to become doctors.
Story_ID: 655863
Speaker 1: The Georgia Community Action Association.
Speaker 2: I'm still a member of the Georgia Community Action Association, and will be until the end of this month.  But because of the nature of the work of the Georgia Community Action, you don't have to be an executive director of a community action program in order to have membership in the association.  So after my retirement, I still plan to have a membership with the Georgia Community Action Association.  But that association is made up of all of the anti-poverty programs in the State of Georgia.  It's about twenty-one agencies altogether, and they do strategic planning and they serve as an advocate, and they operate a multiplicity of programs dealing with low to moderate income people, from energy assistance to economic development, emergency services, child care, foster grandparents, and senior volunteers.  Most of the agencies are almost like a one stop shop providing, you know, various types of services like home improvement, energy assistance, and weatherization; that is, working on homes to make sure that homes become more energy efficient.  So, the Georgia Community Action Association has been around for almost fifty years, and is still doing an excellent job.
Speaker 1: And I also see that presently you're still on the board of directors for the hospice of Savannah [Hospice Savannah, Inc., Savannah, Georgia] and a board member of the Savannah Speech and Hearing [Savannah Speech and Hearing Center, Savannah, Georgia].
Speaker 2: No, I've had to resign from those two organizations.  But I did spend a considerable amount of time with hospice and also, you know, the, the other group.
Speaker 1: Speech and hearing?
Speaker 2: Speech and hearing.
Story_ID: 655864
Speaker 1: What are your plans now?  Are you saying that you're finally going to retire after forty-eight years with this organization, with so much that you have accomplished.  So, so, what's next for you?
Speaker 2: Other than maybe a few weeks or a month of relaxation, I'm concerned about a contemporary problem. Let me just say this.  There was one component of EOA [Economic Opportunity Authority for Savannah-Chatham County Area, Inc.] that's been developing, and we never got to a point where it materialized exactly the way we wanted it to.  One of the keys to racial harmony today is a coalition of individuals from different backgrounds.  In the year 2000, EOA formed a group called the multicultural coalition.  The multicultural coalition was a group that we brought together of Native Americans, Anglo-Saxons, blacks, Jews, Hispanics, Indians, Africans, and everyone.  And it came off extremely well, because one of the keys in the multicultural coalition was a Native American by the name of Red Sparrow Signs [ph.].  Red Sparrow was, is a Cherokee Indian who had done a lot of work.  She's a member of the Catholic church, and had done a lot of work in terms of working with groups on racial harmony and that kind of thing.  And we were able to pull her in along with some of our other Jewish friends, and Dr. Zhang [Weihua Zhang] from China, who is employed with Savannah College of Art and Design [Savannah, Georgia].  We had a young lady who was from India who taught at Armstrong [Armstrong State University, Savannah, Georgia], and we have a very good multicultural coalition group: Dr. Lester Johnson, who is affiliated with the Muslim church in Savannah [Georgia], and a young man who passed away last year by the name of Faheem Ali [Maajid Faheem Ali], who is the pastor of a mosque here in Savannah.  I'm going to be doing some work in terms of putting together and keeping together a multicultural coalition to make sure that we have racial harmony.  Because what--especially after the election of 2016, there seems to be some factions in the country that are bleeding through some of the harmony, racial harmony, that we established in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], all the way up to past the millennium.  But we don't want relationships among ethnic groups to erode, and the only way to make sure that everybody appreciates what is known as cultural diversity, is that we keep people coming together.  So, one of my goals is to make sure that one day we will have a people's day in Savannah and Chatham County [Georgia].  Now we're being separated and segregated by politicians on Christians, Muslims, Catholics, Baptists, ethnic Jews, blacks.  We cannot afford to just sit back and not do anything to counteract these negative acts and attitudes that are going on in this country.  And we don't need money to do that.  We don't need to vote on it, we don't need to get any bills passed or anything.  We just need to come together as ethnic people.  I know that the Dr. Zhang--Chinese are with us, the Asians.  The Jewish Educational Alliance has allowed us to meet there, and I have Anglo-Saxon friends and I have friends in the Muslim community.  As a matter of fact, someone destroyed a Muslim church here in Savannah, and people of goodwill came together and put money into the pot to rebuild.  And so it has once been said that, I think it was Edmund Burke who said that, bad people prevail because good people remain silent.  So, that's one of the things that I would like to accomplish after retire--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is to make sure that, that the community understands that all of us should appreciate each other's cultural diversity.
Story_ID: 655865
Speaker 1: Now throughout the--all these years, we, we've--when I asked you earlier about family, you hadn't gotten married yet.  So, well, we never got back to that.  So, tell me about your family.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, I'm a widower.  I was--
Speaker 1: But you had to get married first, though (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was married in a popular month of the year, on June 15, 1975.  And it was a beautiful relationship and marriage, and I just remember so many beautiful days of work, hardship, sacrifices, travel, family life, picnics.  And that went on for forty years, and--
Speaker 1: Who did you marry?
Speaker 2: I married Gwendolyn Young [Gwendolyn Young Finney] from a place called Screven County in Sylvania, Georgia, not very far from here.  And we are the parents of Jondrea [Jondrea Finney] and Sharyn [Sharyn Finney], and I developed a little nickname for the family.  Jondrea is called the Johnny Cake, and Sharyn is called the Jelly Cake.  And my wife at one point put on a couple of pounds, and I wanted to call her the Patty Cake, (laughter) but I was told that ladies don't like for you to talk about their weight.  And so I said, "Well, that's okay.  She's just my wife, my sweetheart."  So, but anyway, we had an enjoyable marriage together, and unfortunately she passed away at Candler Hospital [Savannah, Georgia] on July 1, 2015.  And our family has always been a spiritual family.  I'm Baptist, and she and the girls are members of the African Methodist Episcopal church, and we shared a lot of religious experiences together.
Story_ID: 655866
Speaker 1: And we, we did something a little bit unusual. We, we went down to Disney World [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida] in, in 2015, and my wife [Gwendolyn Young Finney] had never been on a roller coaster.  So, when we went into Disney World [sic. Universal's Islands of Adventure], she indicated that she would not mind riding on a ride that's called Spider-Man [The Amazing Adventures of Spider-Man].  And we didn't understand how that could happen, because she often stayed away from roller coasters, no exciting rides at all.  But this particular day, she said, "Well, John [HistoryMaker John Finney], let's go on the Spider-Man."  And the kids were overjoyed; they didn't know what was going on.  But it was something unusual.  It was an unusual experience for us at Disney World, because we spent the day before at the Holy Land [Holy Land Experience, Orlando, Florida], and we went into a church service and just stayed in this service all day and had a wonderful time.  And on a Friday evening, we went to our favorite restaurant called The Cheesecake Factory, and everybody had their favorite dish at The Cheesecake Factory.  We got up, we went over to Disney World.  She went on to the Spider-Man ride, and it was something just out of the ordinary; she had never done that before.  A lot of things she did was just out of the ordinary.  And then we returned home and the girls and I gave her a fortieth wedding anniversary cake.  And fortunately, we were able to record the smile on her face and the surprise when she walked into the kitchen.  And we have pictures, we have videos from the fortieth anniversary.  As a matter of fact, we were video freaks early in our marriage.  We have our oldest daughter [Jondrea Finney] throwing oatmeal in the ceiling of the kitchen, on the floor, and we have kids crawling on the floor.  We had the two girls pushing each other in the snow when it snowed in 1989 in Savannah [Georgia].  So, we were able to go back and really have a good time before she passed away.  But we just had no idea why these things were happening, and you know, why they just materialized and unfolded in that particular manner.  But fortunately for us, our oldest daughter has a master's degree from Georgia Southern University [Statesboro, Georgia], and the younger daughter, Sharyn Finney is an honor student who came out of Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia].  So, but we have a spiritual communication.  We talk to each other every day and, and we pray with each other every day, not just to remember mom, but to keep our spirits going.
Story_ID: 655867
Speaker 1: Tell me what is it--what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, I've always been a team player.  And a lot of people really don't realize this, but I have never been a leader.  I came along at a time when people like Mr. W.W. Law and a number of other people in the community believed that everybody has a contribution to make.  And it's often said, "You don't have to be the star in order to steal the show."  You can do what you do, and do it in a very humble fashion, and you can be quiet about what you do.  But eventually, what you do will surface.  You don't need Republicans, you don't need Democrats.  You don't need the Green Party, you don't need the Tea Party.  You don't need Independents or anybody else to legitimize your character.  Your character and value system is developed by your family, and you can just do some plain and simple things in life.  But every little bit helps, and nobody can be left untouched.  And so my legacy is that, you know, "John [HistoryMaker John Finney] came along and John was able to help us."  And so, in return what we have to do is help somebody else.  And then that way, the good deeds and help will be perpetuated over a long period of time, if just everybody would just look at some small thing that they can do in terms of helping someone else.  On my church ward, I have fifty people, and many of those people are elderly.  And just visiting people in the nursing home, or maybe doing a small chore for them, is really a good deed.  You would be surprised at the number of people who just need some simple things to occur in their lives.  And I went and visited one couple at home, and intended to stay five minutes and ended up spending one hour.  Because the female, who is on the verge of Alzheimer's, came into the room and joined our conversation, the conversation that I had with her husband.  And it just went on and on and on, and they were just glad to see someone, especially someone from the church [St. Philip Monumental A.M.E. Church, Savannah, Georgia].  But my legacy is that, "Well, Finney just tried to help out."  I've never been a leader, but I find myself in a leadership position.  And all of the things that I experienced, I tried to project myself into people that I was dealing with.  I had to discipline a parent in a conference one day, because the parent was using profanity.  And I asked the parent to engage in volunteer work, to just come in and do some volunteer work.  And the lady said, "Well, Mr. Finney, I'll try.  But I have a dad who has diabetes.  He also has to go on dialysis three times a week.  I have a granddaughter that I'm bringing to the center every day.  I have two jobs that I'm working on, and I also have medication I have to take."  And I said to myself, you know, if we could only project ourselves into the people we work with, or the people we profess to serve, and try to understand what other people feel--that everyone who comes to work every day brings a different story, a different scenario.  But we are all here together for at least eight hours a day, some of us more, to try to get a job done.  But between the time we come and the time we leave, we are still human beings, and that's one thing that I've always tried to project, that I never forget that people are human beings.  We may be directors, we may be mayors, we may be chairpersons and servants and people with big positions, but my legacy is that we used to be human beings, but I don't know what we are now.  We are so wrapped up in titles.  We're so wrapped up in money, the economy.  We're wrapped up in race, and problems, and family, and drugs.  There are so many scenarios and problems that confront us and, and challenge us every day, until we have forgotten about the fact that we are just human beings.
Story_ID: 655868
Speaker 1: Well and I guess another way to, to say that, or to ask the question as far as legacy--how do you want to be remembered, is, is another way of saying it.  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I just tried to work hard.  I've never been intelligent, I've never been smart, I've never been articu- articulate, but I've always tried to, to empathize and, and, and to just try to make a difference.
Story_ID: 655869
Speaker 1: Now, just one last thought.  Because you have lived a, a long life in public service and have lived through the Civil Rights Movement, movement of getting people together and working in the community--and was here to see the first African American president of the United States [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], can you give reflections about your thoughts about that day that he was elected president?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a dream come true, and I thought that at time that everything that the country stood for really came to light.  There was an African guru, I can't remember what country it was.  But there was an African guru who said that, "It's a great day in America, and not just in America, but a great day in the world."  But the jury is still out.  We'll have to see what happens.  But I will tell you this: at age seventy-nine, I thank God for every experience that I have had.  Because I think that the experiences that I have had has eventually molded me into the person that I am.  And I've been through it all, and when I say that I've been through it all, let me share with you a couple of personal experiences that I've had in life at one interval or another.  When I was coming up as a kid, we had a rigid form of segregation in Savannah [Georgia].  We had an insurance man by the name of Mr. Carter [ph.].  He was with the interstate insurance company, and he would come around on Friday.  And believe it or not, he would actually sit down and have lunch at our table, and my mom [Margaret Maynor Finney] would prepare a snack for him when he came by to collect for the insurance policy.  My dad [Ellis Finney] was at work.  As a little kid, I could not understand this rigid form of segregation, as to how someone from the Anglo-Saxon community would actually be in our house in that intimate setting.  So, I guess I was around maybe six, maybe seven years old.  I kept walking in and out the house, in and out, in and out, to observe his movements.  He looked like he was totally comfortable in the home of an African American family.  So, one day I think I walked in a little bit too much, and so after he left, my mom called me in.  And in those days, families were not democratic as they are today.  Kids didn't vote on things; you did what your parents told you to do.  And my mom called me in and she said, "Look, son, come here.  Let me talk with you."  She said, "Now, why do you keep coming in every time he comes here?"  And I couldn't answer the question.  Do you know what she told me that made all of a big difference in my life?  She said, "Look, I know how we live in Savannah.  But, John [HistoryMaker John Finney], you have to love everybody," and I didn't understand what she meant by that.  But we went to church every Sunday and stayed in church all day. She said, "But what that preacher is preaching about is you have to love everybody."  When I went to church, the preacher talked about loving people.  When I went to school, the black teachers talked about loving everybody.  Wherever I went it was almost like a script of love, "You got to love people."  Whether you like it or not, you got to love people.  You're not going anywhere after--well, it's a matter of whether you believe that there is a life after this life, and I do.  Because I, I definitely believe that one day, that whatever I do on this earth, I'm going to have to answer for it.  But, but I will never get there unless I learn how to love everybody.  And it stuck with me.
Story_ID: 655870
Speaker 1: And Mr. Law [W.W. Law] would always say, "John [HistoryMaker John Finney], not all black people are good, and not all white people are bad."  When I got this job, it was a Jewish, my Jewish attorney and a couple of white guys who called me.  And you know what they asked me?  "John, congratulations.  What do you need?  How can I, how can I help?"  Do you understand what I'm saying?  And the black people supported me when I got the job, but I'm just saying, they said, "John, what can we do to help you?"  And some of my biggest supporters have been members from the Anglo-Saxon and the Jewish community.  So, and then I was a civil rights worker, I went through that.  And like I told you before, when I graduated, even though I had problems of discrimination on the job, when I graduated there was a delegation of black and white people on my job who was there to say, "Look, I know how hard you had to work and struggle, but we're just here to say that we support you and we believe in you."  But God has allowed me to have all of these experiences.  When I--during the Vietnam crisis [Vietnam War] and we were on, you know, the schedule to go to Vietnam, a Jewish kid from Brooklyn, New York, sat on the side of my bed.  And he said, "John, God has sent me to you."  (Laughter) Now, I didn't know what he was talking about.  You know, when you're in the [U.S.] Army and all these things--you know, all of this gun stuff around you, you don't know what to say.  But he said, "God has sent me to you."  And he said, "You and I are different.  We're not any better, but we are different."  So, you know, I've just had a lot of people in my life, black people and white people, that God has put these people in my life to say that, "Look, now I know you've had some problems, but I just want you to know that I'm still with you.  I got your back, no matter what happens.  You can rest assured that whatever you do, and wherever you go, John, I'll be there with you."  And I have learned how to be militant in the demonstrations.  I had to challenge the segregated laws, but at the same time--and what I'm working with now--you know, it was white people, Jewish people, the Muslims, Asians, the Chinese and everybody else, to try to get this group together.  Because I don't think Savannah [Georgia] and I don't think this country is going to survive unless, you know, people come together and try.  And it can be done, it can be done.  So, I thank God for the opportunity just to be, you know, on planet Earth, just, you know, just another day.  And most of all, as I said, to try to make a difference.
Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I thank you for taking the time, is there anything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I hope I haven't bored you.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely not (laughter). Absolutely not.  Is there anything else that we haven't talked about that you would like to talk about?
Speaker 1: No, I can't think of anything.  I just need to make sure that I remember my daughters [Jondrea Finney and Sharyn Finney] on Valentine's Day.  I need to--(laughter).  Those girls, yeah, we're going to just--you know, since my wife [Gwendolyn Young Finney] is, is not here, you know, we may do something in her honor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we really miss her.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right.  Well, thank you so much for taking the time to tell us your story.  And I'm--I just know that this is going to be such an inspiration for the future generations.
Speaker 1: Well, I hope it will be.
Story_ID: 655871
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Go ahead and tell us about these photographs.
Speaker 2: We're going to start from, from here and then go this way, okay.
Speaker 1: Ok- this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just tell us who's in the pictures.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In the upper left hand corner is Sharyn Finney, my youngest daughter.  Sharyn is a graduate of Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], and she is inspired now to do some additional graduate work at Georgia Tech.
Speaker 2: In the next family photo is yours truly, [HistoryMaker] John Finney.  There's Sharyn Finney next to me.  She was a debutante young lady for Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.].  And next to her is Jondrea Finney, a graduate of Georgia Southern [Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, Georgia].  She is a graduate counselor now in Charlotte, North Carolina.  And next to Jondrea is my brother Charlie [Charles Finney (ph.)].  He is retired, a former employee with the Metropolitan Museum of Modern Art in New York City [New York, New York] for over thirty-five years.  And at the bottom is my late wife, Gwendolyn Young Finney.
Speaker 1: And in the lower left hand column is my sister Eula Mae [Eula Mae Finney (ph.)], who passed away in 1951 at the age of twenty-one.
Speaker 2: And in the lower right hand corner is Jondrea Yvette Finney, who is currently employed in Charlotte, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: I've worked with sickle cell anemia since 1973.  This is a picture that was taken in McIntosh County [Georgia].  I'm in the beige suit on the front row, and that's at a place called the Dorchester Academy [Midway, Georgia] with a group of people who made a donation to sickle cell anemia.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a graduate photo.  I received a master's degree in sociology from Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  My master's thesis was on residential segregation in Savannah, Georgia, 1940 through 1960.  This was taken on the campus of Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] after graduation.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: I'm a member of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity.  This is one of the most recent photos of our graduate chapter, the Beta Phi Lambda Chapter of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: This is an early family photo.  Jondrea is on the left.  I'm in the upper portion of the photo.  That's my wife Gwen.  And of course Sharyn is a much larger girl now, but she was a munchkin at the time of this photo.  This is a family photo.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: This is a graduation photo of Sharyn.  Sharyn is graduating as an honor student from Georgia Tech, and she is receiving her degree from the president.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and my late wife, Gwendolyn, a family photo.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: This is another family photo, an upgrade from the other photo.  John, Gwendolyn, Sharyn; and Jondrea is at the bottom.
Speaker 1: This is--this is the other daughter graduating?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's Jondrea receiving a master's degree from Georgia Southern University, in counseling.
