Story_ID: 30934
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archives.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Lloyd Noel Ferguson.  What else?
Speaker 1: And could you spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Oh, L-L-O-Y-D, N-O-E-L, Ferguson, F-E-R-G-U-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Two, nine, eighteen.  2-9-18 [February 9, 1918].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  What did --
Speaker 2: Two, nine, eighteen.
Speaker 1: Two, nine, eighteen.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired chemistry teacher.
Speaker 1: And I'm sorry.  I stepped on, you were getting ready to tell us you born in Oakland, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oakland, California.
Speaker 2: California.
Speaker 1: All right, I'm sorry.  I stepped on it.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?  Oh, gee, I don't know.  Oh, the day after Easter, I'll say that.  April 28th--25th?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The year?
Speaker 1: Oh, see, that's right, 2011.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: The apartment where we live.
Speaker 2: Okay, we're in--
Speaker 1: Our apartment.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what is this?  This is--
Speaker 1: Sunrise Assisted Living.
Speaker 2: In Los Angeles, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 30935
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five light-weight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up.  And the first one--they all just require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, not, not really favorite, a variety of foods that I like.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, sir, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really a favorite.  Heck--it depends on what's being colored.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No, I enjoy the whole year.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really cause we didn't do much of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 30936
Speaker 1: Well, okay, all right.  Well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I only know Gwendolyn Louise Johnson Ferguson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Gwendolyn Louise Johnson--
Speaker 2: Johnson Ferguson.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have no memory at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, would you think about 1900, you think, or 1890s?  Well, what do you think?
Speaker 2: I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: Was she very old when she had you?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Was she in her twenties?
Speaker 2: I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just thought you might have a sense of how old she was--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --when you were coming up?  Okay, all right.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: I think Oakland [California].  I just don't follow those facts.  I would guess Oakland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was her family from Oakland basically?  Were they--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Does it go back--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I read that your family goes back three generations in California.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: I guess so, yeah, mother, grandmother and [grand]father.  I guess so, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, do you know--is there a tradition of where the family came from before they came to California?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't know what state they came from?
Speaker 2: I know my father [Noel Swithin Ferguson] came from out of California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was born in--he was, boy (laughter), see--well, he was born in one of the Islands.
Speaker 1: Okay, in the Caribbean, is that what you mean?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, down that way.  Gee, I just don't remember now which Island it was.
Speaker 1: Jamaica.
Speaker 2: Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was born in Jamaica.
Story_ID: 30937
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, okay.  Well, I wanna ask you what can you tell us about your mother's [Gwendolyn Louise Johnson Ferguson] side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Only to my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: William Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Actually, all this is written up in different places, but it was something in the bank.  It wasn't a bank teller.  I just don't remember.  It was associated with the bank.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was this, was that unusual for those days for a black man to have a job at a bank?
Speaker 2: I guess so, yes, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is not a black bank or is it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a black man.  He didn't look black, but he was a black man, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was the bank he worked at, was that a black bank or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he worked for a--
Speaker 2: Big bank, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he didn't look like he was black, but he was--
Speaker 2: No, un-un.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did the people know he was black that he--
Speaker 2: I'm sure they must have.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: They had to.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And, now, your mother grew up in Oakland [California] or did she grow up in Oakland?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she have any stories about growing up in Oakland?
Speaker 2: Not that I remember.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about how it was when she was a little girl?
Speaker 2: No, not that I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she talk about what race relations were like in Oakland in those days?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, problem.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother finish high school?
Speaker 2: I'm sure she did.  Let's see.  I think she did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, she was a elevator operator--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in a clothing store.
Story_ID: 30938
Speaker 1: All right, well, let me go over to your father's side.  And then we'll try to get them together.
Speaker 2: I don't know much there.
Speaker 1: Oh, you don't know that much on that side?  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Noel Swithin Ferguson.
Speaker 1: Noel?
Speaker 2: N-O-E-L.  Swithin, S-W-I-T-H-I-N, Ferguson.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know his date of birth?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And he was born in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there a story about how he came to the U.S. [United States]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have any idea why he came over?
Speaker 2: No.  I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, did he come by himself?
Speaker 2: Yes, as far as I know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so his parents didn't bring him or--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he came by himself.  All right, okay.  Did he come right to Oakland [California]?
Speaker 2: I really don't remember.  I mean, just hear about it.  I just don't remember whether he did or not.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was wondering if he was on a boat or something that docked in Oakland--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: --or something that, you know, or came off at some other port and made his way to Oakland.
Speaker 2: I just don't remember those facts.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your father finish school, high school?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Do you think he finished in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, so he more than likely had a pretty good education if he finished in Jamaica, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, no, no, just high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Well, what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a, he worked for a bank or something, wasn't a teller, a runner.  I just don't remember now how he described it.
Story_ID: 30939
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Noel Swithin Ferguson and Gwendolyn Louise Johnson Ferguson] met?
Speaker 2: Not that I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your father [Noel Swithin Ferguson] talk about growing up in Jamaica at all to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, rarely, rarely.  We were a long time, my wife [Charlotte Welch] and I finally visited Jamaica and just passed through the neighborhood.  But my father didn't say much about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you very close to your father?  Were you all very close?
Speaker 2: Reasonably close.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, all right.
Speaker 2: No factor that I remember separated us.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: None.  So you were the only child?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, so you don't know how your parents met, but they--
Speaker 2: No, I don't know how they met.
Speaker 1: But they did meet in Oakland [California], you guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: Or San Francisco [California].  Had to, I guess Oakland.
Speaker 1: Oakland.  And they got married in the 1920s, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see I was born 1918--
Speaker 1: No, no, right, yeah, it had to be before then.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Maybe a year before that or something.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, about 1916 or seventeen [1917].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's during the, World War I [1914-1918], I guess.  World War I was going on I guess when they, around the time they met or just--
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Story_ID: 30940
Speaker 1: What are some of your childhood memories?
Speaker 2: My childhood memories?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Nothing special.  I, my parents [Noel Swithin Ferguson and Gwendolyn Louise Johnson Ferguson] worked so that my grandparents--and they left me with my grandparents [maternal grandparents] which were, they lived a block or two apart.  And that's what I remember.
Speaker 1: Now, is this in East Oakland [California]?
Speaker 2: Oakland.
Speaker 1: In East Oakland?
Speaker 2: No, in Oakland.
Speaker 1: What part of Oakland?
Speaker 2: North Oakland.
Speaker 1: North Oakland, okay, all right.  Was there a particular name for the neighborhood you lived in?
Speaker 2: No, not to associate with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of neighborhood was it in terms of--
Speaker 2: Mixed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who lived there other than black people?
Speaker 2: Asians, particularly, as I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay, did white people live there too?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: So, what, can you describe your household for us and can you give us an idea of what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, the household, you say?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, just a typical hou- two, three-story house that we lived in.  Wait a minute now.  As I say, most of the time, most of the years I was growing up with my grandparents [grandfather: William Johnson], but my parents lived just a block, block and a half away.  So I spent a lot of time in both places.  And in my grandparents' place it was a typical, two-story house with a big basement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they live there by themselves in that house?
Speaker 2: Well, for a while one of their daughters lived there and one of their sons lived there while I was living--I mean I'd go over there and spend most of the day with living there while my parents were at work.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your parents lived in a three-story house?
Speaker 2: Well, mostly it appeared that I recall when they lived in an apartment building which my father [Noel Swithin Ferguson] owned.  And that was the way it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were doing fairly well then.
Speaker 2: Financially, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now--
Speaker 2: Until he lost his job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The, what do you call it?
Speaker 1: The Depression [1930s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Depression came along.
Story_ID: 30941
Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Where I lived?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Oh, just the ordinary cooking smells and I don't know by sights, you mean inside the house, normal--
Speaker 1: Well, things are different now than what they were then.  I think we could agree with that, right?
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Speaker 1: So there are things that you saw growing up that we can't see anymore.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: And there are things that are going on now that we see that didn't happen then.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: So I'm asking, you know, what were the sights and sounds and smells of growing up from 1918 to, I guess, 1930 or so?
Speaker 2: Well, I lived there until I graduated from college, twenty years or something.  It was, and we had chickens out in the backyard.  And my paren- my grandparents cooked.  So you had food odors.  It was no problem.  I don't--nothing stands out, unusual.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, yeah, I was just trying to figure out a way to get you to explain what life was like in 1918, I mean or in the 1920s as opposed to today, you know, in terms of the way things looks and were like that you remember?
Speaker 2: Not many people had cars.  And we didn't do much going to eat in restaurants.  I just don't picture my grandparents going to a restaurant to eat.  They did the cooking, particularly, my grandfather [William Johnson].  Everybody spoke well of his cooking.  He cooked rather than my grandmother.  And an uncle or an aunt would come and spend a while, I mean different uncles or different aunts, come live a while.  And all that was, say a block and a half from where my parents [Noel Swithin Ferguson and Gwendolyn Louise Johnson Ferguson] lived, running an apartment building that my father owned.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have a radio?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah, as far back as I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, did you have a favorite radio program?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't pay much attention to radio, rarely sat down and listened to it.
Story_ID: 30942
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did you spend your time doing then when you were growing up as a little kid?
Speaker 2: Oh, playing ball with the neighborhood kids or running around playing games in their yards or our yards [interruption with someone calling interviewee and him responding].
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Well, you see, it wasn't anything unusual.  My friends did the same thing in their homes.  We visited each other, parents, their parents and my parents, grandparents were very friendly and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I just wanna let you know, I'm not asking for the unusual, you know.  I'm asking for the usual.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The usual is history now.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What happened then is unusual now cause it happened then (laughter).  So don't worry about it being unusual or not.  I don't think you should worry about trying to tell an unusual story cause it's--I'm just asking you what it was like growing up.  Okay.
Speaker 2: [Interruption] Come in. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: So at any rate, just, now you said you played a lot of ball?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we played ball in the yard and the corner lot and so forth.
Speaker 1: Baseball, primarily?
Speaker 2: Yeah, baseball mostly, catch.
Speaker 1: Now, how old were you when you got a chemistry set?
Speaker 2: How old was I?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Oh, gee, I don't remember.  Let's see, chemistry set.  It was before high school.  I don't remember, young.
Speaker 1: So you were, well, you think you were like about ten, eleven?
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Story_ID: 30943
Speaker 1: Okay.  And from what I've read, you did something kind of unusual with the chemistry set.  You made products and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, had a lot of fun making a couple of, two or three products, selling them to people.  I think people bought them just for encouragement.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, they were interesting, now, one was called "Clean-O"--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: And did you have labels for these products and jars?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I don't remember.  "Clean-O", "Moth-O" and so forth.  I just don't remember now.
Speaker 1: And something called "Prest-O", I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the name.  I just don't remember what it was.
Speaker 1: It was silverware cleaner, Prest-O was.
Speaker 2: Oh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was reading about it.
Speaker 2: Clean silverware.
Speaker 1: So how did you figure out how to make these products?
Speaker 2: I don't know, something I learned in the lab and followed it up.  That's all.
Speaker 1: So you learned at school?
Speaker 2: Learned it at school, and I had, I built a one-room building in the backyard for a laboratory, and worked out there myself.
Speaker 1: Now, you built the building yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, no, I didn't, you see, I didn't build it myself.  It might have been there already, and I just converted it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you had your own laboratory?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at age ten or eleven, you had your own laboratory?
Speaker 2: I was young.  I don't remember the age.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wanna make sure that anybody listening to this knows that at ten or eleven, you had your own laboratory and were producing products--
Speaker 2: Chemicals, right.
Speaker 1: --for sale?
Speaker 2: Right, yep.
Speaker 1: Now, that is unusual.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, Clean-O, Prest-O, and you said--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what was the other one?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: You just said it, Malto, you something that started with an "m".  I can't think of what--
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Well, okay, all right.  So did you, how would you sell the products?  Would you sell them door-to-door or?
Speaker 2: Oh, let people know that they're available in the neighborhood.  And I think people bought it just for encouragement.
Speaker 1: But they actually worked--
Speaker 2: But they worked, but I think that's why they bought them.
Speaker 1: What size quantities would you make of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, they were small, Vaseline jar size.
Speaker 1: Did you collect, did you buy the jars or did you collect old jars and use them?
Speaker 2: Oh, I guess I collected old jars and cleaned them up and used them, yes.
Story_ID: 30944
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, now, what was your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Elementary?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Elementary.  I think it was Longfellow or something.
Speaker 1: Longfellow?
Speaker 2: I think.  Longfellow and then Hoover Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Hoover Junior High School.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oakland Technical High School.
Speaker 1: Oakland Technical High School.  See, it's curious that the junior high school is named Hoover, you know  In those days, it must have been really, well, it's remarkable that a school would be named after Hoover [President Herbert Hoover, 1929-1933] during the Depression era [The Great Depression, 1930s].  So it was probably named before the Depression, right?
Speaker 2: I don't know, didn't follow that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't pay any attention to it.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did you ever hear any talk about Hoover in terms of the Depression and what he was--
Speaker 2: Not, I was aware of him and so forth; just let it slide.
Speaker 1: Yeah, him being the president during the Depression, you know, when the Depression hit, I know people had a lot of--
Speaker 2: Against him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, against him, right.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't follow that.  I just accepted the name.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what--now, you started grade school at Longfellow, you say, you guess that's the name.  But what, did you like school when you started?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked school.  I liked the teachers.  I liked working with them.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure I had some then, but I don't remember them.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, do you remember a teacher named Ms. Forsyth (ph.)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a, Forsyth, she was a chemistry teacher, either science or chemistry that I worked with, helped cleaning up glassware and stuff.
Speaker 1: Now, was that in middle school or high school?
Speaker 2: I'm inclined to think it was high school, junior high?  No, high school.
Story_ID: 30945
Speaker 1: Well tell us what happened, I guess, cause your family experienced an economic hit during the Depression [The Great Depression, 1930s], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, I was little, didn't pay much attention, but my father [Noel Swithin Ferguson] lost his job, yes.  And he couldn't afford, he couldn't afford keeping up the apartment building.  The rent that came in, I mean a lot of the, a lot of people lost their jobs and they couldn't pay their rent and so forth, and he couldn't maintain the apartment building.  And so he wanted to get rid of it and he tried to burn it.  And that wasn't successful, so he had to go to jail for that, for arson, for a year or something.
Speaker 1: He was desperate trying to collect the insurance money?
Speaker 2: Yes, and get rid of it.  I don't remember how many units it had.  It was a big building there.  But that's the only thing I remember at that time.
Speaker 1: That must have been devastating for your family, for your father to go to jail?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.  I guess that's where he was when I graduated from college, I believe, yeah.  He was still there when I graduated from college [1940].  So he spent some time.
Speaker 1: That's a long time to spend, it seems to me, a long time to spend for the crime.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, okay.  So was your mother [Gwendolyn Louise Johnson Ferguson] still working?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was working.  As I say, she was an elevator operator, and sometimes she'd go out and serve meals for people who wanted a waitress, and you know, served meals.
Speaker 1: Okay, almost like a catering business or like a--
Speaker 2: Well, she didn't provide the food.  She'd just come in and cook or not so much cooking even, just preparing it and serving it, making extra.
Speaker 1: Okay, she was part of the wait staff of catering?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you participate in that too?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So you had to live with your grandparents [maternal grandparents] after that?
Speaker 2: I spent, yeah, I lived with my grandparents.  I'd sleep over their house too.  We, they wasn't very far apart so I'm running back and forth and so forth, but most of the time I was spending with my grandparents.  And then my cousins would come in and visit and other grandchildren would come in and visit and we'd play and so forth.
Story_ID: 30946
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a lot of friends when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, were they--you had friends from different races I read?
Speaker 2: Yes, blacks, whites, Asians.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And everybody seemed to get along okay?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no problem.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, now, well, tell me about high school, I guess, Oakland Technical High School?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have to qualify to get to technical.
Speaker 2: Oh, no (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: It was just regular.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Just register and go.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, why did they call it Oakland Technical High School?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I have no idea.  That's what it was called.
Speaker 1: So they didn't emphasize technology or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think it was any different than the other couple of high schools around.
Speaker 1: Okay, was this your neighborhood school?
Speaker 2: Yes, although it was, let's see, eight or ten blocks away (chuckle).
Speaker 1: All right, now, I heard that, now, you had been sick, right, when you were little?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one period there, diphtheria or something like that.  So I was in the hospital, and my mother [Gwendolyn Louise Johnson Ferguson] at that period happened to be working for a doctor.  I don't know, see, I don't remember what she did, maybe house cleaning or something like that, doctor, and so he oversaw my health problems and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you were sick about a year, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about a year.
Speaker 1: And then, but even with that, you were able to skip two grades in school?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, yeah, from what we have here, you graduated from high school at age sixteen, two years early--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --from most people.
Speaker 2: I see.  And do you remember being skipped in school?
Speaker 1: I remember, I remember that it happened, nothing associated with it.
Speaker 2: Well, usually what's associated with it is a child that's so bright that they're smarter than the kids in their peer group.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, yes.
Speaker 2: So, is that--
Speaker 1: I skipped several grades.
Speaker 2: So did they make much about your intelligence and your capacity to--
Speaker 1: Not particularly, just did it and kept on going.
Speaker 2: Did you know any other children that were skipped like that?
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sure I must have.  I just don't remember.
Story_ID: 30947
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, did the teachers ever talk to you about being skipped a grade?  Did they say, Lloyd, you're a pretty smart--
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I just took what came along.
Speaker 1: Well, did anybody tell you, you were a pretty bright young man?
Speaker 2: Not really, that I recall.
Speaker 1: Well, you're being moved ahead now.  I mean they didn't give you any--
Speaker 2: Skipped grades.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they didn't give you any explanation for it or they didn't talk about it?
Speaker 2: No, just did it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As far as I remember.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you're an only child at home so I guess none of the other kids could be jealous?
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: But did your grandparents [maternal grandparents] tell you, you were special?
Speaker 2: No, no, didn't have any such ideas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So in high school [Oakland Technical High School], did they have, were there various tracks for students to take?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Like business course?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I didn't face that issue.  They must have.  I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in the college preparatory course.  I imagine--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that you were taking chemistry and--
Speaker 2: Always had an idea I was going to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So would you have been the first person in your family to go to college?
Speaker 2: More or less.  I think so, but I can't think of anybody who was older than me that went to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now in high school were you in--
Speaker 2: [Coughing] Excuse me, yes.
Speaker 1: Do you need some water or something?
Speaker 2: No, I'm all, fine.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So in high school, were you involved in anything other than science?  Were you in clubs and, or did you--
Speaker 2: Yes, let's see, in high school, I wasn't on athletic teams.  I played, but I wasn't on the athletic team.  So, I don't remember, nothing stands out.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you run for class office or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  I don't remember, I recall being an officer?
Speaker 1: Did you have a girlfriend in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I guess I did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about those days, you know, that would be of interest to us today, you think? (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  Whispering
Speaker 2: Now, you said do I remember anything about what?
Speaker 1: Well, I was just asking you about your high school experience, what it was like in high school in those as a--did you have to work when you were in school?
Speaker 2: As I recall, I did work.  I suppose I must have had to work to help the family financially.
Speaker 1: Now, I read you had a paper route.
Speaker 2: Yeah, for--
Speaker 1: Was that through high school?
Speaker 2: --a good time, good time period, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were you still selling your products in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, it wasn't a lot of selling, just family or friends or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: People would buy it for encouragement.
Story_ID: 30948
Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: I went to Sunday school.  I remember that, but after that I didn't, passed off.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the family didn't do a lot of praying and going to church?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We said our prayers at night, but nothing religious about the family.
Story_ID: 30949
Speaker 1: Now, when did you, I guess, first start thinking that you wanted to be a scientist?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I guess, let's see, well, somewhere along there after junior high when I had this lab, somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Did you have a role model for doing that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, must have, but I--no person sticks out, just plain liked it.  I remember the high school teacher [Ms. Forsyth (ph.)], I was attracted to her work.  So I'd help the high school teacher, I even think I made a little money, a small amount of money.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you know of any other black scientists in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, Percy Julian.  I knew that name.  I don't know if I knew of any before him.  And I don't remember what period that came up.  At least in high school, but I don't remember junior high.  I didn't know of any at junior high level.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't do much reading.
Speaker 1: So you didn't read that much?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right.  Let's see, did anybody try to discourage you from being a scientist?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I mean in those days.  Did people say--
Speaker 2: Mostly encouragement.
Speaker 1: Okay, so nobody said a Negro can't be a scientist?  Don't worry about.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were encouraged for the most part by everybody. Okay.  And you said your high school teacher, Ms. Forsyth (ph.), was the one that--
Speaker 2: Encouragement.
Speaker 1: Yeah, encouraged you the most.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 30950
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, did you have a plan for how to go to college or where you were gonna go?
Speaker 2: No, didn't plan anything, take it as it would come along.
Speaker 1: Was, did your family really have hard times during the Depression [The Great Depression, 1930s]?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm asking (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I wasn't aware of the facts, just what I heard cause I was too young.
Speaker 1: But in relationship to other people that you knew, were they doing pretty good or just--
Speaker 2: Well, I would only know so through that the kids I played with and their parents were hanging on, nothing--none real poorly.  But that's all I recall.  I didn't seem to pay much attention to what was happening.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just went on about my, fun-filled days.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, so other than playing ball and doing chemistry, what other fun did you have?  Those were the two major things that you--
Speaker 2: Well, playing, things like playing chess and games like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you learned how to play chess when you were a teenager?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's unusual today for a teenager to play chess.
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I think my uncle taught me.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you like the movies?
Speaker 2: Okay, yes.  I didn't make an objective to go to certain movies or anything.  And also, I didn't have the money (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Okay, what about music?
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't a music.  I wasn't interested in following music.  There'd be some songs that I would like to hear or sing or something like that.  But it didn't entrap me as a profession or objective.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you just--in those what kind of music was popular?  Can you tell us?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  Whatever was popular, I'd go along with it.
Speaker 1: Big band music, pretty much or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, big band era.
Story_ID: 30951
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, you graduated from Oakland Technical High School in what year was it?
Speaker 2: Gee, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we got it here somewhere.  Yeah, 1934.
Speaker 2: Thirty four [1934], huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, age sixteen.  This was in the middle of the Depression [The Great Depression, 1930s].  And so, now, you went to work for the WPA [Works Progress Administration], right, I believe.  That's what it says here.
Speaker 2: I guess so.  I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we've got it here from somebody that you worked for the WPA right out of high school for a minute--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --and you did your paper route until you got a job with the--
Speaker 2: I had the paper route for a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, but you quit the WPA to work for the Southern Pacific Railroad.
Speaker 2: Oh, redcapping.  That was a good-paying job.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was supposed to be a good job in those days being a red cap, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So, now how did you get this job?
Speaker 2: I don't remember how I got it.  Let's see, now, there was a captain or the head of the red caps would try to provide such jobs for other blacks.  He was a black fellow, and realizing it was a good paying source of funds for blacks, he would try to be sure to have the staff filled and gave us a break.  Like, for example, I was still going to school, gave me a break in being able to get off to go to school and so forth.
Speaker 1: This is after you started U-C, Berkley [University of California, Berkeley], right?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's even before I started Berkley, I think.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the captain you're talking about is Myron King, is that who it is?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, well, tell us about him.  Now, he was the captain of the red caps?
Speaker 2: Well, he was the boss.
Speaker 1: The boss, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And basically, he made sure that you had the time off to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yes, or provide an assignment for me to be able to take off to go to school without penalty.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was in charge of your schedule?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, but, so he--was he consciously trying to help with the--
Speaker 2: Blacks?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was a black fellow himself.  Yes.
Story_ID: 30952
Speaker 1: So after you got that job [red cap with the Southern Pacific Railroad], you were able to then go to Berkley [University of California, Berkeley]?
Speaker 2: Berkley?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you, I mean did you apply to Berkley when you were in high school [Oakland Technical High School] or did--
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  Gee, just follow, after I graduate, apply and go.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So Berkley was not too far from where you grew up, right?
Speaker 2: No, that's right.  It's close.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there--
Speaker 2: Relatively close.  So I would ride a bicycle to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were there very many other black students going to school?
Speaker 2: Not really, not many blacks, relatively, some, of course.
Speaker 1: How did you, I mean what was your thought when you were seventeen going to school at Berkley about the black community?  Did you have any idea of what our position was in America--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or what condition we were in?
Speaker 2: Just took life as it came.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you weren't really thinking about it politically or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, but did you, were you surprised that there weren't many black people--I mean did the number of black students at the school kind of mirror the black population of Oakland [California]?
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't surprised.  I just, you'd hear it all along that that was the case.  So that was it.  In those days, I just took life as it came, didn't worry about the politics and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you, now, what was your major at Berkley?
Speaker 2: Chemistry.
Speaker 1: Now, did you consider any other field?
Speaker 2: I guess not.  I liked it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, did you have any trouble with chemistry courses?
Speaker 2: Not really, did fine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Good grades.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't have to, you know--
Speaker 2: Okay.  You came in all ready, ready to participate.
Speaker 1: (Chuckle).
Speaker 2: All right, okay.  All right, who were, describe us like, I guess, some of the personalities in the chemistry department, teachers and students that you worked with at UC-Berkley when you were--
Speaker 1: At Berkley?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, I just don't recall those.  It's so long ago.  They were all friendly and all interested that a black fellow was coming along and capable.
Speaker 2: So they were all encouraging about that?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Very much.
Speaker 2: So nobody was against you being there?
Speaker 1: Not that I recall.
Speaker 2: They didn't make themselves known if they were?
Speaker 1: No. Okay.
Story_ID: 30953
Speaker 1: Now, what was, so you were working as a red cap [Southern Pacific Railroad] and going to school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, were you able to study on your trips?
Speaker 2: When you say "trip", you mean?
Speaker 1: Well, no, did you take trips or were you just at the station as a red cap?  How did you do it?
Speaker 2: Well, as I recall, I carried, yes, that's right.  In my uniform, red cap, uniform, I had big pockets built on the inside, and I carried books in, a book in there.  And every moment that I wasn't doing anything, I'd run into the corner and study and read.  So I did that all the way through.
Speaker 1: Yeah, red cap, you basically were carrying bags, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, for passengers?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have to make any trips or anything?
Speaker 2: No, stayed right in town.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So were the, so the captain of the red caps [Myron King] was supportive of what you were doing, and he'd make sure you--
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: So he could actually make sure that you had some time to study if he wanted to?
Speaker 2: That or not penalize me for not being able, not being available for certain assignments.  He was very encouraging.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, so can you describe a typical day for us when you were in school?
Speaker 2: No, no, not at all?
Speaker 1: I mean just in terms of what your day would be like.  Would you go to school first and then be a red cap at night?
Speaker 2: No, I'd red cap in the morning, and go to school; then red cap in the evening.
Speaker 1: Okay, so school was sandwiched between--
Speaker 2: Yes, assignments, right.
Speaker 1: Work, okay, all right.  So did you get paid for working when you were actually in school some times?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.
Story_ID: 30954
Speaker 1: So in the chemistry--did you have to take other courses other than chemistry that you--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, full schedule.
Speaker 1: What else did you like--
Speaker 2: Like?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that you took.
Speaker 2: Well, I liked the science, whatever science I was taking, biology and physics and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you get involved in fraternities or any of that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: I joined a couple of, I remember being in fraternities, but it didn't occupy too much of my time.
Speaker 1: When did you join?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember.  You say what?
Speaker 1: What fraternity did you join?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: And I, we have that--I don't know if you joined.  Did you join Alpha Phi Alpha?
Speaker 2: Yes, seemed like that was a fraternity on campus [University of California, Berkeley], for chemistry majors or something.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: No Alpha Pi Alpha is a black fraternity.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I don't remember.  It sounds familiar.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And I think Alpha Chi Sigma was the--
Speaker 2: The science one.
Speaker 1: Science, yeah, science fraternity, right.  Yeah, okay, it says here there's a story about this, about the science fraternity.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what the story is, that they invited you to a rush?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Well, it says here they invited you to a rush for Alpha Chi Sigma and you showed up, and they said, oh, they looked at you.  They didn't know you were gonna be black.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.
Speaker 1: And they didn't invite you back again, you know.
Speaker 2: I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: You don't remember that.  Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well, who were some of your professors?
Speaker 2: Professors?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Gee, I can't name them now.
Speaker 1: Well, did you have a favorite one?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember [Melvin] Calvin, of course, since he was also in charge of my research, the research program that I worked on.  And I just don't remember those names now.  Calvin and--
Speaker 1: That's Melvin Calvin.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and what about, now, we have a list of some of them.  Ermon Eastman--
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of those was a good chemistry staff I got along with well.
Speaker 1: And a Willard Libby, was he on staff?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: William F. Jack?
Speaker 2: Jappie?
Speaker 1: Jackie (ph.), yeah, Jackie or Jappie [William F. Giaque].  G-I-A-Q-U-E, A-Q-U-E.
Speaker 2: I don't remember now.
Speaker 1: Okay, Glenn Seaborg.
Speaker 2: Can't remember them.
Speaker 1: Ian McMillan?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All of these are professors who won Nobel Prizes down the line.
Speaker 2: Yes, they were pretty active.
Speaker 1: So you were in--
Speaker 2: Good company.
Speaker 1: Yeah, good company, and all your, you know, six or seven professors, Nobel Prize winners.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, now, did you have a sense of that in those days?  Did you know that you were with some of the best?
Speaker 2: No, just happened to, they happened to get those awards.  I went to work with them, with whatever they were doing that I happened to like, and so good, they got an award.
Story_ID: 30955
Speaker 1: So did you just continue at U-C Berkley [University of California, Berkeley] as a grad student onto, you know, all the through to your Ph.D. or did you stop at some point?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  I guess I worked continuously until I got the Ph.D. as far as I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There was no really stopping for any reason?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you weren't drafted or anything for the army?
Speaker 2: No, I got on a science project that protected my, so I wasn't drafted.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the project I read about, and I don't know if this is the one, but I read that you were involved in a project to create a material that would release oxygen into submarines?
Speaker 2: Guess so [knocking sound]  Hi. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  (unclear)
Speaker 1: How's Shawn? (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  She's okay.  All right, so I'll have her out here.
Speaker 2: Let's see.  What did you ask?
Speaker 1: I was asking you about the materials you were working on that would release oxygen in a submarine?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, gee, I don't remember anything about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but the situation was that they wanted to have some sort of way that oxygen could be manufactured inside the sub?
Speaker 2: Provide oxygen for these, under those conditions.  But I don't remember the issue, I mean what we did about it.
Speaker 1: There was a--
Speaker 2: We worked with compounds--tried to find a compound that would release oxygen or absorb oxygen from the air and then when it's down below, could be heated and give off the oxygen without being decomposed.  But I don't remember any details.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you work on that for a long period of time?
Speaker 2: Well, two or three years, mostly with Calvin.
Speaker 1: Okay, with Dr. Melvin Calvin?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, anything else about U-C Berkley that happened, anything else about college that you wanna tell us about?
Speaker 2: No, I felt that a lot of my classmates turned out to be leaders in their field and so forth and so I was happy to have been associated with them.  But that's about all, and I had good teachers at Berkley, all of them sort of leaders in their field.  That's it.
Story_ID: 30956
Speaker 1: And I was asking you about, you know, U-C Berkley [University of California, Berkeley] in those days.  Now, you were able to get through the University of California at Berkley with no, you were the only black person in the chemistry department.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Was there anyone else in the science department at all, I mean in the sciences in (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, it must have been somebody (coughing).  I just don't recall.
Speaker 1: Well, that's kind of dramatic there.  If there was another one, it seems like you would know it.
Speaker 2: (Coughing) None comes to mind.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So chances are there probably weren't any.  And were there any other minority groups in the science department?
Speaker 2: There must have been a couple of Asians. (coughing)
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, did any of your classmates at Oakland Technical High School go to U-C Berkley?
Speaker 2: I'm sure, none that I recall.  But I'm sure one or two did.
Speaker 1: Were any of the chemistry--
Speaker 2: In chemistry, working on the same project and so forth.
Speaker 1: Yeah, do you think there were some in chemistry?  Were there any?
Speaker 2: I'm sure one or two, did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And you don't have to give their names.  I just wanted to know if--
Speaker 2: I wouldn't remember it now.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you think there were some?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 30957
Speaker 1: All right, you're still a grad--now, you started working in 1940 in the radiation laboratory [University of California, Berkeley].
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That's at U-C Berkley [University of California, Berkeley]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --1940 and did the radiation laboratory have something to do with the development of the Atomic Bomb?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, they were leaders in that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, that's something about it that's important.  I'm trying to see where--now, do you remember Gus Dorall (ph.)?
Speaker 2: Dorall?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, let's see, not much; just another student.
Speaker 1: Or Walter Rhodes?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And there was, now, there's a story about some yellow stuff that you had created in the laboratory.  Do you remember that story?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: A bucket of yellow stuff that you had, that you poured down the--
Speaker 2: Don't recall that at all.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  What about Pat Fuller?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Pat Fuller.
Speaker 2: Oh, Pat Fuller.  Yeah, see he, for, over a good period, we were good friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, when you worked in the laboratory, did you primarily work alone or did you work as part of a team?
Speaker 2: Oh, part of a team, yes.
Speaker 1: So you got your bachelor's of science in 1940, and then you started working the radiation laboratory.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Well, can you remember of the details of your work in the radiation lab?
Speaker 2: No, not really, nothing stands out.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a sense of accomplishment being, you know, working in the radiation lab at UC-Berkley during those days when they were trying to develop--
Speaker 2: I was aware that it was an outstanding school and had a good reputation.  Faculty members were leaders in their specific field, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you know Martin Kamen?
Speaker 2: Cayman?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess I started working with him for a short while.  Then somebody else took me over.
Speaker 1: Okay, now he was one of the co-discoverer of the isotope carbon fourteen.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: I think, yeah, that's what he's famous for.  And he was one of the Manhattan Project [atomic bomb project] people--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --along with Sam Ruben and did you work with him when he discovered the isotope?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  What was the mood like in the laboratory?
Speaker 2: Friendly and aware that we were working on, leaders in our field.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have--were you concerned about your health on the job at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You were dealing with a lot of chemicals and radioactive things.  Did you--
Speaker 2: Well, there wasn't any fear.  You use common sense with handling them and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And do you remember, I think carbon tetrachloride was particularly dangerous.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't recall now it being a problem.
Story_ID: 30958
Speaker 1: So you worked with Dr. [Melvin] Calvin at the radiation laboratory too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, okay.  Now, he was directing a national defense research project?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And can you remember anything about that in terms of what it actually was about?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was pleasant working with him, and he was an active fellow, but, and it was a pleasure being on his staff, happy to be on his staff.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have to work with classified information?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there some kind of special screening they gave you or testing to--
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't recall, just we used common sense when and when not to say anything.
Speaker 1: So they didn't give you any--
Speaker 2: Screening.
Speaker 1: --or did they tell you, you know, this is what you can say and what you can't say or?
Speaker 2: No, it just--you became aware of what you can say and not say.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is, okay--so, now it says here that you worked with Dr. Calvin in developing a material that Monsanto [Company] took up--
Speaker 2: Took over?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't remember specifically about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the material that would release the oxygen, I guess, for the submarines.  This is--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, we discovered it and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, do you remember how it worked?
Speaker 2: No (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Did you have to heat it up or something?
Speaker 2: Heat it, give off oxygen, cool it down, it would re-absorb oxygen and not decompose or burn up.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the stuff?
Speaker 2: Oh, gee, I don't remember at all--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --if it had a name.
Speaker 1: All right, and eventually, I mean the government didn't use, from what I read, finally, they didn't use it because they developed a--
Speaker 2: Oh, won the War [WWII].
Speaker 1: No, they developed--
Speaker 2: Atomic Bomb?
Speaker 1: No, a way to send a tube up to get air from the surface, I think, instead of--
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  At any rate, now you and Dr. Calvin published several articles together--
Speaker 2: I guess.
Speaker 1: In the 'Journal of the American Chemical Society' between 1946 and 1950--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --it says here.  Now, about the oxygen project and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --primarily.  Okay.  Is there a, do you have any stories about working with Dr.--
Speaker 2: Calvin?
Speaker 1: Calvin, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, a pleasant fellow to work with, and he was all work and no play.
Story_ID: 30959
Speaker 1: Was he [Melvin Calvin] basically your advisor for your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Well, he was my advisor through much of the training I received, but my thesis was under a different professor.
Speaker 1: Okay, so who was that?
Speaker 2: Let's see.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Was it Dr. Kirkwood?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: [Pause] [thinking]. Gee I just don't...
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, what about, oh, Dr. Branch?
Speaker 2: Branch, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Branch.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I'm sorry.  I misread this.  It's Gerald Ere (ph.) Kirkwood Branch
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: G.E.K. Branch, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so that was the person you--and, what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: Oh, gee, I don't recall (chuckle), don't remember.
Speaker 1: Now, okay, now, this, okay, does this ring a bell?  Something about the absorption spectra of linearly conjugated compounds--
Speaker 2: I guess.  It sounds familiar.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Now, was there a difference in working with Dr. Branch than working with Dr. [Melvin] Calvin?
Speaker 2: A little.  Branch would lay back and you sort of go at your own pace, but, and Calvin was right there on top of you, seeing that you move along.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Oh, tell us about Terrell Hill, Terrell Hill.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was just a classmate, good friend.
Speaker 1: Okay, was he another black teacher, I mean a black student?
Speaker 2: No, he was a white fellow.
Speaker 1: White fellow, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, white student, I mean he was a white student.  So we both worked for [G.E.K.] Branch or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a chance to mentor any of the black students at University of Berkley [University of California, Berkeley] or did any come through?
Speaker 2: No, not really, not really.  Most of my time was spent working on a research project.
Story_ID: 30960
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did you, after you earned your Ph.D., what were your prospects?  What did you think you would do?
Speaker 2: I don't recall now, probably teach, but I don't recall.  I think teach at a college.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did you want to go to any particular place?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't even remember, seemed like it was a year before I started teaching at a college, North Carolina or some place.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Greensboro [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a college that, where they had the sit-in's in 1960, I think.  But that's, so you started teaching there in 1944?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I see.
Speaker 1: In '44 [1944].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Right.  So this is an historically black college, and now had you ever been out of the Bay Area [California] before?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  Now, I had to think about it when I asked the question because I hadn't heard about you going anywhere else really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you'd been in the Bay Area your whole life at this point.
Speaker 2: Right, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was it like traveling to North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing I was with my wife [Charlotte Welch].
Speaker 1: Oh, now, how did--
Speaker 2: And she's from the--she grew up in Arkansas and went to college in Texas, black school.  And so she coached me on what to do and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, could you tell us how you met your wife?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's right she wanted to move from Arkansas to California to live with her brother in Berkeley.  And my brother's wife wanted my wife, Charlotte [Welch], to meet some people of her age range cause they were older.  And she invited her coworker over, and that coworker asked me to give her a lift cause her brother lived just a block away.  So I drove her over and stayed for the party, and that's when I met her.  And I think the next day I was going back for a date, and we started dating for about a year and then got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, now, was she going to school in Oakland [California] at the time?
Speaker 2: No, she had graduated from college and she took a job at the Library of Congress and then took a job teaching.  So she taught two or three years before we moved out of town, moved back to the South.  I taught at Greensboro and then Howard University [Washington D.C.].
Speaker 1: So your wife kind of gave you some coaching about what--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --it was gonna be like?
Speaker 2: --in black situations.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this is about, you're saying the black situation in the South.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did she tell you to do?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember specifically, just don't berate the people and so forth.  They're different, a lot them.  That was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she tell you the black folks were different?
Speaker 2: Well, their situations would be different, yes.
Speaker 1: Did she say it would be dangerous?
Speaker 2: Yes, use common sense when and when not.
Speaker 1: Now, was this all new to you at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes, cause I'd lived in California all, up to that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you never had any racial problems in California?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But, so did you have any problems in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: No, no, I knew how to adjust and act under conditions.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was never any--
Speaker 2: No problems.
Speaker 1: --any bumps in the road and nothing--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was okay.  All right, so you were in Greensboro, North Carolina--
Speaker 2: For a short time, a year or something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we moved to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: So you taught chemistry at--
Speaker 2: Always organic chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, well, how did you like North Carolina A and T?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was interesting.  It was okay.
Speaker 1: Is there a reason why you didn't stay there instead of going--
Speaker 2: Well, I think Howard offered more opportunity, graduate school and so forth, to teach.
Story_ID: 30961
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, in 1945, you go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Is that it?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  You accepted a position at Howard University in Washington, D.C. in the Department of Chemistry, and now who was in the chemistry department when you got there?
Speaker 2: Oh, gee, I wouldn't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know, now, Dr. Just had left, right?  I mean he had been--
Speaker 2: What, Jeff?
Speaker 1: Just, Ernest Everett Just, yeah, he had been--
Speaker 2: Oh, could have.
Speaker 1: But, now, you--okay, now this is, let me just raise this and see, just to get your reaction to it.  But George Washington Carver, who was at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] were you aware of him when you were teaching?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was he one of your heroes?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Let's see now.  For some reason, I was interested in joining his group and learning from the group, and I wrote and asked him could I join his group.  And he told me to stay where I was and learn more in chemistry and get the exposure there, which I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you wrote him earlier--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --before you got your PhD from U-C Berkley [University of California, Berkeley]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, why were you impressed with George Washington Carver?
Speaker 2: Well, he was discovering a lot of different things.  And I just didn't know how he discovered them, the procedure, and I wanted to work with him, admired his work.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, he passed away in 1943.  So, okay, were you aware of him passing away in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, at Howard University in 1945, who were some of the--do you remember--I know the president there was Mordecai Johnson?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Dr. Mordecai Johnson.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What are your memories of him?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was the boss.  Everybody knew he was the boss (laughter).  And he acted that way, but he was good for the university.  I didn't have much contact with him other than a meeting or something like that.
Speaker 1: Is he the one that hired you directly or were you hired by someone in the Department of Chemistry?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember.  I, it must have been somebody in the Department of Chemistry recommended me to him, but he did the hiring and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he did the hiring.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he took charge.
Speaker 1: Okay
Story_ID: 30962
Speaker 1: Now, what about the chemistry department there [Howard University, Washington D.C.]?  Can you tell us something about it?  How big was it and--
Speaker 2: Well, it was very active, research wise, had a mixture of black and white faculty members; did a lot of interesting research--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and is supported by the administration.
Speaker 1: Now, was the chemistry department closely associated with the medical school at all?
Speaker 2: Well, they were aware of each other, had a lot of association between them, different programs.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, well, Howard in these days, we have a note that there were about ten thousand students at Howard in those days.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: And there was, you were asked to set up a graduate program?
Speaker 2: Could be.  I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: All right, now, this is one of your biggest accomplishments.  So help me out here (laughter).
Speaker 2: About establishing--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Establishing a graduate program.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a graduate program at Howard.  I think it was the first black school to have a graduate program in chemistry.
Speaker 2: Oh, Ph.D., right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, just normal getting in there and doing your job.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they asked you to set up a graduate program--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: They asked you to set up the graduate program?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, maybe I was department chairman at the time, as I think about it.
Story_ID: 30963
Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the other people in the department [chemistry department, Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Gee, I just don't remember at all?
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, none of the other teachers, professors--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in chemistry--
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: --and colleagues and staff?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's see.  What about some of the other people on campus?
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of black leaders in their field were on campus, but I don't, I can't list their names.
Speaker 1: I'll call some names and see what you, you know, and you can give me a response, all right.  And tell me what you remember about them?  Ralph Bunche.
Speaker 2: I didn't know him personally, just through what he was doing in his field, leading the way in activities in his field.
Speaker 1: Okay, Charles Hamilton Houston.
Speaker 2: Again, he was down there in med [medical] school or something like that.
Speaker 1: He's a law school.
Speaker 2: Law school?  Just by name, wasn't even friends to visit each other.
Speaker 1: Thurgood Marshall.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the name stood out, and I was well aware of what he was doing in law.
Speaker 1: Okay, William Hastie.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't recall.
Speaker 1: All right, Ernest Just.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, active in their field, and that's it.
Speaker 1: Percy Julian.
Speaker 2: Same thing, high respect for him, what he was accomplishing, had accomplished.
Speaker 1: Now, these two gentlemen were scientists, Ernest Just and Percy Julian.
Speaker 2: Julian is, let's see, Just, I thought he was law or something.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, well.
Speaker 1: E. Franklin Frasier.
Speaker 2: Frasier was in history or something like that.
Speaker 1: Sociology.
Speaker 2: Okay, just they were outstanding in their field, leaders in their field.
Speaker 1: John Hope Franklin, he's a historian--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and Elaine Locke.
Speaker 2: I don't remember her.
Speaker 1: Let's see, what about W. Montague Cobb.  He was in medical school, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, respected his work and so forth, but I wasn't active with him or anything.  He was just in another field.  I'd read about him.  [cough]
Speaker 1: Okay, can you remember who you were most associated with and who you worked with--
Speaker 2: At Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, Barnes.  He was another organic chemist (coughing).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember some of those names now.
Story_ID: 30964
Speaker 1: All right, well, what was it like?  Now, what were you, was it difficult to adjust from being a research scientist on these deep research projects at U-C Berkley [University of California, Berkeley] to going to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and being a teacher?
Speaker 2: No, I knew what to expect and enjoyed it, and working with black students to do what I could for them.  So it was no problem.
Speaker 1: All right--go ahead.
Speaker 2: No, I was, felt comfortable working with blacks as well as with whites (coughing).
Speaker 1: Now, did you miss doing research or did you, were you able to continue--
Speaker 2: No, I enjoyed it, the teaching, wrote a couple of books and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now, you wrote some textbooks, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean textbooks.
Speaker 1: Now, we have, our notes say that you wrote seven textbooks.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Is that true?
Speaker 2: Well, all through the career.
Speaker 1: Are these different editions of the same book or--
Speaker 2: No, a couple of them in the same field, organic chemistry, overlap and so forth, but they weren't like revisions of an earlier edition.
Story_ID: 30965
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember Dr. Herman Branson?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Physics.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  Well, maybe I'm asking the question too soon here.  I'm looking ahead.  Now, you were at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] until 1968, right?
Speaker 2: Is that it?  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh, before we had the break, I was asking you about the textbooks, and you were telling me that the textbooks were on different aspects of organic chemistry.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you remember anything about what aspects you focused on?
Speaker 2: No, just organic reactions and mechanisms, uses of the organic compounds.
Speaker 1: Now, what differentiates organic chemistry from physical chemistry or?
Speaker 2: Well, organic is the chemistry of carbon-containing compounds and (unclear).  And physical chemistry, is that what you asked?
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know the other kinds.  What are the other kinds of chemistry?
Speaker 2: Well, there's organic, inorganic.  Inorganic would be chemistry of all the other compounds (laughter), not containing carbon.  And there's physical chemistry which is the behavior of, the physical behavior of substances under different physical conditions.
Speaker 1: Okay, like if you heated something up or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or you chilled it down or--
Speaker 2: Affected by heat, light and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, I understand.
Speaker 2: But mine were organic chemistry, sometimes physical organic chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like the effect of light on different compounds and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now, were you still conducting any research at Howard when you were there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you--
Speaker 2: Research to support the articles.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were writing articles too for publication?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Right, and from what I, the notes we have you have been prolific in terms of writing articles and producing (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well, I had a good supply of 'em, just sort of reporting of what we were doing.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: I'd get support from government agencies.  That was it.
Speaker 1: I think I asked you before.  Did you know Dr. Percy Julian?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You see, I'm not sure.  I didn't know him--I wasn't very close to him personally, but I knew about his work very much, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was there a society of black chemists in those days?
Speaker 2: No, there weren't enough of us.  We were well aware of our limitations and so forth, and associated with the other group.  But there weren't many black chemists.
Speaker 1: Well, did the departments in the D.C. area get together, like Morgan State's [University, Baltimore, Maryland] department and Coppin State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and, you know, and some of the other black schools in the D.C. area?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we--there was an organization that the black chemists would attend meetings and so forth.
Speaker 1: That's what I'm asking in the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --during your time period at Howard, was that going on?
Speaker 2: Yes. Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 30966
Speaker 1: When you look back on your Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] days, what do you consider to be your greatest accomplishment or your most important accomplishment?
Speaker 2: Oh, writing textbooks--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which you distribute, in which your ideas go out to different schools, the country, all countries.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the distribution of your textbooks, now, who was the publisher of your textbooks?
Speaker 2: Well, there were two or three publishers.  I don't recall the names of the publishers now.
Speaker 1: Well, what was the nature, I mean what was the, were these publishing companies associated with the black colleges and universities or were they--
Speaker 2: No, these were standard publishers, textbook publishers, and they were happy to have a book published by Ferguson because it was gonna be sold, chosen and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, so at that time, then you had a reputation as a--
Speaker 2: Yes, a reputation--
Speaker 1: Okay, as a book--
Speaker 2: --as a publisher, um-hum.  And the books were fairly successful.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know if most people who read your publications were aware of your race?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't think that, I'm sure the students didn't.  The faculty members may inform special groups that the author is a black fellow, but that wasn't the big issue.  If the material is there, they were glad to have it no matter who wrote it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so does that pay fairly well, writing textbooks?
Speaker 2: Oh, you didn't write them for pay.  You wrote them for enjoyment, but you, we received a nice, yes, get some money back from it.
Speaker 1: Okay. I'm sure there's more to it than just the pay, but I'm just, I'm asking if there's any financial gain early from writing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, so it helps out.  Is there any feedback that you got that you remember that particularly stands out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Only that when you went around, people said, here's the name Ferguson, they mean associated with that textbook which was fairly successful and widely adopted.
Story_ID: 30967
Speaker 1: Okay, now.  I'm gonna ask you this again.  I don't know whether you'll remember or not, but what studies were you focused on at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in terms of research when you were at Howard University?
Speaker 2: Well, organic chemistry, seemed like I was concerned with the taste of organic compounds, which structures led to certain taste or the color of compounds, what structures led to certain colors.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you discover anything that would be--well, tell us about something that you discovered during that research, about taste of various kinds of--
Speaker 2: Oh, nothing that made me a rich man, but there were some discoveries and relationships other teachers would pick up and refer to.
Story_ID: 30968
Speaker 1: Now some of the other black folks around--I asked you about Herman Branson.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] during the time?
Speaker 2: Physics, yeah, he was at Howard.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: His field was Physics.
Speaker 1: What about, well, what about him?  I know he later became a president of Central State [University] in [Wilberforce] Ohio.
Speaker 2: I guess so.  I guess he did.  I was away from it then, and I--
Speaker 1: Well, what about David Blackwell?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a very smart mathematician.  I had high respect for him.
Speaker 1: Okay, would he be like one of your closest friends at Howard?
Speaker 2: Oh, not closest, but good friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about Lawrence Robinson?
Speaker 2: Yeah, same thing, except--well, Lawrence wasn't a leader in his field like some of the others, but we were good friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Blackwell has a, later he goes to University of California, Berkley, I believe.  He goes there too--
Speaker 2: Guess so.
Speaker 1: There's a common kind of tie there.
Story_ID: 30969
Speaker 1: Okay, it says here your first textbook was 'Electron Structures of Organic Molecules.'
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Do you remember that one?
Speaker 2: Hardly.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  So you published that in '52 [1952], and Prentiss Hall published that.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: And Prentiss Hall is a very well-known textbook publisher.
Speaker 2: Publisher, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, and, so did Prentiss Hall do most of your textbooks or--
Speaker 2: I don't recall.  I (unclear), now, I don't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, in, we'll switch gears here.  Now, in '53 [1953], you take a sabbatical to Copenhagen [Denmark]--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --after earning a Guggenheim Fellowship.  Well, tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see Copenhagen, that was for research.  Once in a while I'd give a talk in the class or something like that, but it was mostly research rather than teaching (coughing), excuse me.  My wife [Charlotte Welch] and I enjoyed it more than our children I think.  But the whole family went over for the year.
Speaker 1: Okay, you all were studying biological processes in the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, right?  Does that sound right?
Speaker 2: (No audible response.)
Speaker 1: No, okay.  All right, so you were at the Carlsberg Laboratorium in Copenhagen?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: To do research.
Speaker 1: Were you doing the same kind of research you were doing over here [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I probably changed to a different problem.
Speaker 1: Okay, now it says that Dr. [Melvin] Calvin came, visited you in Copenhagen?
Speaker 2: Probably because I had worked with him there at Berkley [University of California, Berkeley].
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was Denmark like in relationship to the United States and what you experienced here?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, it was different, all whites and a small percentage spoke English, but they were very friendly.  I guess that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you like Denmark?
Speaker 2: Yes, we enjoyed it.  At least, as I said, my wife and I.  And I'm not sure how much the children enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Now, by that time, you had how many children?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see (unclear).  I think only two of the children went with us.  I have three.  One was going to Berkley or college so he stayed, he stayed here in the states and continued in college.
Speaker 1: Oh, when you were in Copenhagen in '53 [1953], there was one that old to go to college?  I don't think there's one that old to go to college.  Well, I don't--
Speaker 2: I think Lloyd, as I say he's sixty-six now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, well maybe--but '53 [1953] though, yeah.  Fifty three [1953] is kind of, if he was born in '40 [1940], in '53 [1953], he would be, yeah, he wouldn't be old enough to go to college.  But at any rate, so the children didn't enjoy it very much you said?
Speaker 2: Well, I think not as much as my wife and I did because of the language problem and so forth.
Story_ID: 30970
Speaker 1: So when you came back from Copenhagen [Denmark], well--while you were there, I guess, you know, is when the Montgomery bus boycott [Alabama] took place in '56 [1956]--
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, with Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and there were some other, you know, major Civil Rights Movement, you know, the--
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember now.
Speaker 1: --the Little Rock [Arkansas] case was heating up.  So when you come back in 1958, you become head of the chemistry department at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], right?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Now, who was the head before you?
Speaker 2: Gee, I don't remember.  It could have been Towns.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Now, was there a difference between what, was a big difference or any difference between what you learned at U-C Berkley [University of California, Berkeley] in terms of chemistry and what was being taught at Howard when you got there?  Were they up to date?
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay (cough).
Speaker 1: All right, so you didn't--and what about the equipment?
Speaker 2: Same level.
Speaker 1: What about the equipment and laboratory facilities?
Speaker 2: Well, they had some equipment that they needed for the research.  And since I had different research problems at Berkley and at Howard, they had different equipment, but they were equipped to do what they wanted, get research grants from the government (coughing).
Speaker 1: I'm asking because we've heard from, for instance, medical students at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --have told us that at Meharry they'd have to share a microscope or an instrument with some, with a group of other students sometimes because they just didn't have the equipment there.  And I was wondering if there was any difference between the facilities at U-C Berkley and Howard?
Speaker 2: Berkley, yeah.  Oh, well, Berkley, of course, on its own merits got the equipment that they needed.  At Howard, we got most of the equipment that we needed through research grants and so forth.  And Howard was supported by federal government.  So we mostly got what we needed, equipment, supplies.
Speaker 1: Okay, now can you remember what your opinion was of some of the other schools, black schools and what they had to work with?
Speaker 2: Well, they had less because they didn't get as much research equipment and supplies from the government that Howard did through research grants and so forth.
Speaker 1: Was there a huge difference between what North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] had in terms of what Berkley had?
Speaker 2: Yes, sure, Berkley was a leader in the field, got the equipment.  The government supplied them, was proud of them, whereas other schools, whether black or white had to get and argue for what they wanted.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but A and T [North Carolina A&T State University] had most of what they needed, you're saying or--
Speaker 2: A good, pretty good supply of what they needed.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what was it like being head of the department at Howard?
Speaker 2: Just another position, no particular esteem to go with it.  I enjoyed it.  The president supported it.  That was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you, I mean were you--was there anything that you wanted to do that you could now do because you were the head of the department that you couldn't do before?
Speaker 2: No, not that I recall.
Story_ID: 30971
Speaker 1: Okay, now, stop me if I'm going too fast, but in 1960, you go on sabbatical to Zurich, Switzerland, right?  And you worked with Professor V. [Vladimir] Prelog, a Nobel Prize laureate there.  Now, what did you do there?
Speaker 2: Gee, I don't remember at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And it says here that in '60 [1960], your son, Lloyd, Jr., attended high school in Germany.  And--
Speaker 2: Could have, I (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, he goes to high school in Germany.  Now, did you feel welcomed by the scientific community in Switzerland?
Speaker 2: Yes, no problems.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did you meet any other black scientists in Europe?
Speaker 2: Well, not that I recall.  I don't recall any.  They must have been there, of course.  I don't, just don't--it doesn't stand out in my memory.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so in '61 [1961], your mentor, Dr. Melvin Calvin won the Nobel Prize--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --yeah, in chemistry for his work in describing the chemical pathway of carbon dioxide and photosynthesis.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: This is '61 [1961].  So, now did, was there a cause for celebration?
Speaker 2: Oh, proud and happy for him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay, in '63 [1963], one of your former research assistants at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], Ms. Alma Hayden, leads the team of FDA, Food and Drug Administration scientists to the discovery that Crebiozen (ph.), a drug that has been popularly marketed as a cure for cancer has no such properties.  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't think so, but it seemed like kind of an obscure factoid.  But do you remember her, Alma Hayden?
Speaker 2: Oh, hardly.  The name is a little familiar.
Speaker 1: Okay, she was a research assistant of yours, it says here.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And then it says here, now, I didn't see it.  I looked, just looked through the book.  It says here that, in our note that were featured in 'Great Negroes, Past and Present' by Russell Adams, is that true?
Speaker 2: That I was what?
Speaker 1: Featured as one of the people in 'Great Negroes, Past and Present' by Russell Adams who was a librarian at Howard.
Speaker 2: Oh, could be.  I don't remember it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know you have a copy of the book here, and I looked at it, and I didn't find you in it.  So it might be our mistake.  Maybe you're mentioned in it, but you're not featured.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: I just don't remember it.
Speaker 1: But it's, you have the book on the shelf.  I pulled it out--
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and we know Russell Adams, Dr. Adams wrote 'Great Negroes, Past and Present.'  He was a librarian at Howard for a long time.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Story_ID: 30972
Speaker 1: At any rate, in '65 [1965], you joined the faculty of Cal-State, Los Angeles [California State University, Los Angeles].  Now, what happened?  How were you invited to Cal-State, Los Angeles or did you, well, what happened?
Speaker 2: I just don't remember.  I guess I was attracted to it because it was in California, my home state.  But that's the only thing I remember.  I don't remember any specifics.
Speaker 1: You don't remember how you got--
Speaker 2: invited.
Speaker 1: --you heard about the job or how you got invited or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So at any rate, in '65 [1965], you join the faculty of Cal-State University, Los Angeles, and you were in charge of the research program in physical organic chemistry involving more than--and by this time, you had more than fifty publications and seven textbooks.
Speaker 2: (Chuckle) No kidding.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you qualified for--okay.  And it says here that you had previously spent three summers working at the University of Oregon [Eugene, Oregon]?
Speaker 2: Yes, they invited me up there to teach during the summer, and I enjoyed the trip and so forth and went.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is, when you came to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], it was just after, I think the Watts Riots of '65 [1965] or around that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember that at all?
Speaker 2: No.  I remember there were Watts Riots, but I didn't have any contact or exposure to--
Speaker 1: To any of it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did you live in the--what neighborhood did you live in when you came?
Speaker 2: Not in the Watts area.  Well, let's see, my family lived up on Hill--see, I can't even think, Wilshire.
Speaker 1: Wilshire Boulevard?
Speaker 2: Boulevard.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: In fact, we still have a condo there.  I let my grandchildren use it.
Speaker 1: All right, now you were offered a full professorship with tenure at Cal-State, L.A., and so they brought you in with all the full trappings, (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: I guess, yeah, was this a--did you find Los Angeles [California] a better place to raise your children or was there any difference?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  It must have been a difference.  I was impressed by California, of course, since I grew up there in California.  And it was closer to the rest of my family, living in California.
Speaker 1: Okay, now as a research scientist, now, did you have a chance to spend very much time in community projects, you know, as a member of the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] or NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--
Speaker 2: I had the time but I didn't get involved.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any outside activities at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, must have.  I don't remember right now.
Story_ID: 30973
Speaker 1: And what did you do for recreation?  Did you have a hobby or anything?
Speaker 2: No, with my family, and we'd go on, during the summer we'd go on trips.  We traveled, particularly, driving around the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, so motor trips and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, car.
Speaker 1: Okay, would they visit your wife's [Charlotte Welch] people in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: By that time, most of my wife's family had moved away.  See, I think her brother and sister had died, and her mother had moved away, cousin.  So we didn't go back to Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your motor trips, were they mainly to other places in California?
Speaker 2: Just for fun.
Speaker 1: Just for fun, okay.  Now, did you play golf or anything or tennis or (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For a while, I did, I played some golf, but that wasn't an enthusiastic activity since my wife wasn't involved.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was--well, what were your research projects at University of California, Los Angeles?  What--
Speaker 2: Boy, I don't remember at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember what I was working on.
Speaker 1: Okay, was your time spent, how was your time split between research and teaching?
Speaker 2: Oh, whatever was sufficient for each.  I guess most of the time I was involved in teaching and writing, helping students and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any students that you remember that you are particularly proud of that came through the program?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there are, but I don't remember any particular names right now.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there any black students that came through when you were there?
Speaker 2: A few, not many.
Story_ID: 30974
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, Dr. Ferguson, now you became a member of the Food and Drug Administration [FDA] panel on research guidelines in 1966.  Do you remember what you were doing on that panel?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it was just acting on requests by people around the country for research funds.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it was something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in '68 [1968], you participated in the formation of the SEED Program.  Do you remember the SEED Program?
Speaker 2: (Chuckle) No.
Speaker 1: It's called the Support for the Educationally and Economically Disadvantaged of the American Chemical Society.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: So, you don't remember it?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, now it had something to do with getting money for, you know, minority students.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't remember it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that was in '68 [1968].  In '68 [1968] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated too. Does that, was there any particular thing that you remember in relationship to that, that happened at the campus when you were--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there very many black students on campus when you were--
Speaker 2: At Cal-State, LA [California State University, Los Angeles]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 2: Well, it was enough to not worry about it, I mean about being concerned with are there a number, are there enough or not.  It was all right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did, now you were appointed chairman of the Department of Chemistry in '68 [1968].  That's that same year.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968].  Did that come as a surprise or did you think--
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  Okay, all right, so in '70 [1970] they gave you an honorary degree from Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And I saw the program that we have in the file, and it--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --and they gave an honorary degree that same year to Charles Wesley, to [Reverend] Jesse Jackson to you and there was one other person.  I can't remember, but do you remember that ceremony when you were--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Don't remember getting that (chuckle).
Story_ID: 30975
Speaker 1: Okay, and then, now in '71 [1971] you accepted a professorship at the University of Nairobi in Nairobi, Kenya in Africa.
Speaker 2: For a year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went--do you remember that trip?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The president of Kenya then was Jomo Kenyatta.  Did you ever meet him?
Speaker 2: I'm sure I did.  I just don't remember any details.
Speaker 1: Okay, did--
Speaker 2: There's a lady here [Sunrise Assisted Living, Playa Vista, California] on the staff from Kenya.  So when we see each other, we say hello and in that language of theirs.
Speaker 1: Swahili?
Speaker 2: Swahili, yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you say, Abaraghani (ph.) or--?
Speaker 2: Jambo (ph.).
Speaker 1: Jambo.
Speaker 2: Kohari (ph.)
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, all right, there you go.  So, that was a pretty good trip you say for a year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did Africa surprise you at all by what was there and did you have any preconceived notions of Africa?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think of any surprises.  Things would come up we didn't know about, but we'd just take 'em in stride.
Speaker 1: Like what, for instance?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: I don't remember now.
Story_ID: 30976
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember the Minority Bio-Medical Research Support Program, MBRS program?
Speaker 2: I remember, MBRS.  That's all, just the initials.  I don't remember problems and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was, once again, it was a program to help minority students, I guess, in chemistry departments?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  All right.  Now, you were one of the founders in 1972 of the National Organization for Black Chemists and Chemicals Engineers, NOBCCE, they call it, right.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Can you remember how that was formed and how you, what role you played?
Speaker 2: I don't remember any details.
Speaker 1: Okay, but did you feel the need for that kind of an organization?
Speaker 2: Probably did at the time.  I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: And what would be the need for that, a black organization of chemists and chemical engineers?
Speaker 2: To encourage more blacks to get involved in professional chemistry and national activities.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So some of the other people involved were Joseph Cannon from Howard, William Jackson, Dr. William Guillory (ph.).
Speaker 2: Bill Guillory, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Henry McBay (ph.).
Speaker 2: Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: From Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], yeah, Charles Meredith from Atlanta U [University].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Dr. James Porter.  Do you have any stories about any of these people, Dr. Guillory or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, not interviewing.  I knew them as coworkers.  They had the same kind of job I had except different schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, now, it says here in '72 [1972], you were invited by the National Cancer Institute Chemeopathry [sic, chemotherapy] Advisory Committee to the board of that organization.  Okay, and then the National Cancer Institute.  You were on a committee of four to develop a cooperative program in cancer chemotherapy between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Speaker 2: Don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you remember traveling to the Soviet Union for a month?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess so.  Let's see.  I guess I got used to the Soviet Union on one of those years I spent over there in Europe.  So, and met some of the Soviets and so forth.  Nothing stands out in my mind.
Story_ID: 30977
Speaker 1: Okay, it says in '75 [1975], well, '74 [1974], you received the California State University Outstanding Professor Award.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Don't remember it.
Speaker 1: You don't remember it (laughter)?  Well, it was a big honor.  You were outstanding professor.
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Speaker 1: Now, why do you, what is your--do you have a teaching philosophy?  I mean what made you the outstanding professor that year?
Speaker 2: I don't know, having textbooks along the line for the students to use and encouraging blacks to get involved in chemistry and the field and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is not gonna be the first such honor because you get honored over and over again.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  Yeah.  You received the distinguished American Medallion from the American Foundation for Negro Affairs in '76 [1976], and it goes on and on.
Speaker 2: I don't remember those.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You were on the cover of the 'Journal of Chemical Education' in 1978.  So instead of having a chemical on the cover, they had you (laughing).
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: So that was, that's important, a big deal.  Nineteen seventy-eight [1978], you're appointed to serve on the National SEED Grant Review Panel advisory board.  So you got a, in '78 [1978] you got an African American, you're the first African American to receive the American Chemical Society Award in chemical education.
Speaker 2: No kidding.
Speaker 1: No, I'm not kidding.  And then in 1980, you're appointed National Chair of the American Chemical Society's Division of Chemical Education, and Outstanding Professor Award again in 1981 from Cal-State, Los Angeles; '83 [1983] you were featured in an exhibit, a museum exhibit, 'Positive Images,' that featured African Americans who have made contributions to California history.  And so you were chair of the American Chemical Association, the Southern California section.  In '83 [1983], you're honored by the Smithsonian Institution [Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Gee.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) History Project in '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Don't remember it at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And then you were at Bennett College for one year in '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: Bennett College in Columbia, South Carolina [sic, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: So you were visiting--
Speaker 2: The ladies' college.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Women's college.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bennett College, yeah, in Columbia, South Carolina, yeah, a women's college, right.  I'm sorry, it's in Greensboro, North Carolina.  I'm thinking about the other one, but, yeah, it's--I'm thinking about Benedict, but Bennett's a, yeah, you're right, a four-year, liberal arts women's college in Greensboro.  And you retired in 1986 from Cal-State, Los Angeles [California State University, Los Angeles] and a scholarship is named in your honor.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: That's in 1986.
Speaker 2: --don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were sixty-eight then.  And in 1989, you were featured in a museum exhibit, 'Black Achievers in Science' which opened at the California Museum of Science and Industry and then actually was at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago [Illinois] in 1991.
Speaker 2: (Chuckle) That's--
Speaker 1: You can't remember (laughter).  Okay, and you're also featured in 'Blacks in Science and Medicine' by Vivian Sammons (ph.), and--okay, but I guess when all this, and we have a long list of publications and awards and I would just like to ask you this, and you don't have to remember any specific dates and details about this, but when you look back on everything you've done from this point in life, is there any major thing that you would do differently now, if you could?
Speaker 2: Gee, I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That I recall.
Story_ID: 30978
Speaker 1: And when you look back again at what you've done, is there any--what would you say today is your legacy?
Speaker 2: You mean what I, just that, I don't know, teaching chemistry is fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now this is another question we always ask and that is, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: That the children get started earlier in academic affairs and continue that on through college.  That's what I can think of right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what, now did you--I think we talked about the time when you graduated from college, your father [Noel Swithin Ferguson] was still in prison.  What happened to him?
Speaker 2: Oh, he eventually got out.  I don't, just don't remember the details.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you see him again and did he--
Speaker 2: I'm sure I did.
Speaker 1: --rejoin the family?
Speaker 2: Oh, to a small degree.  Gee, I just don't remember how long that was before he died; just don't remember.  Poor memory.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did he get a chance to find out know about you achieving a Ph.D. in chemistry?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure he did.  I'm sure he did (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: I mean did he ever--
Speaker 2: --the family (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you ever see him afterwards?
Speaker 2: Well, a short while.  I didn't see, cause I didn't live there in, here in California.  And so I don't recall an instance when we got together, right now.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wondered if he was proud of you, you know.
Speaker 2: I guess he was.  I'm sure he was.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what about your mother [Gwendolyn Louise Johnson Ferguson] and your grandparents, did they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, yeah, my mother certainly was; don't know if my grandparents were aware of anything, what I did.
Speaker 1: So they were, well, you spent a lot of time with them.  I just wondered--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, they just didn't know the significance, hadn't been to college and not even visiting campuses and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a general sense that, I mean, I guess, if you're the only one in your family to come out of school and go that far and to be in the circles that you were in, did you have a sense that there's no way you could really tell them what you were doing even?
Speaker 2: Oh, I guess I didn't worry about it.
Story_ID: 30979
Speaker 1: Now, well, tell us about your family now.  You have three children and--
Speaker 2: Three children, seven grandchildren, been married sixty-seven years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you and your wife [Charlotte Welch] are still together right here where we are today.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Our son [Lloyd Ferguson Jr.] is a professor of engineering at Cal-State, LA [California State University, Los Angeles].  The other son [Steven Ferguson] is a musician, and our daughter [Lisa Ferguson] works for the State Supreme Court, got her degree at Berkley [University of California, Berkeley].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so you raised a successful family and--
Speaker 2: Yes. (coughing)
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I have not asked you that you wanna discuss--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) talk a lot.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, before I ask my last question.  The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  We always ask people how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Remembered?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: By my family, you mean?
Speaker 1: No, how would you like to be remembered?  In any sense.
Speaker 2: As a professor of chemistry, organic chemistry who was active in his profession and encouraged blacks to get involved and a good father, I guess-- husband (chuckle).  I guess that's it.
Story_ID: 30980
Speaker 1: My name is Costello Brown.  I'm a retired professor of chemistry from Cal-State, LA [California State University, Los Angeles].  And Dr. Lloyd Ferguson, we are interview and Dr. Ferguson was also a professor and head of the Department of Chemistry at Cal-State, LA.  And we're trying to go back and remember some of the historical things.  And one of the things that, Lloyd, that you told me some time ago about Melvin Calvin, you remember him--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --talking to you about taking classes and why you had to take so many classes?  Maybe you can tell that story.  Do you remember it?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I don't remember the (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Oh, you don't (laughter), that he [Melvin Calvin] was telling you to, in effect, the other students didn't have to take as many classes as you had to take.  And so, was Calvin a nice person to work for?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was very friendly and interested in the students and so forth, very nice.
Speaker 1: Did he have a lot of students?
Speaker 2: Yes, he had quite a few.
Speaker 1: Were you the only African American student there [University of California, Berkeley] or you don't remember?
Speaker 2: Well, for the period that I was there, I guess I was the only African American.
Speaker 1: And how long did it take you to do your research there?  Were you working on taste at that time at all, on, you know, the structure and relationship with how sweet things, were you working on sweet compounds or you started that--
Speaker 2: Not sweet compounds, no.
Speaker 1: --you didn't do that.  You started that, when, when you went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I guess some time after working with Calvin.
Speaker 1: Oh, when you went to North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], did you do any research--you were only there like a year though.  So you didn't do any sweet chemistry there?
Speaker 2: Probably not.  Just organic chemistry.
Speaker 1: Just organic.
Speaker 2: Physical organic.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When did you first start writing your textbooks?  Do you--
Speaker 2: Gee, I don't--
Speaker 1: --were you at Howard or were you at (unclear), you don't remember?
Speaker 2: I assume at Howard.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, but Calvin was quite young at that time.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was a young fellow.
Speaker 1: He was not much older than you then (laughter).
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: He hadn't won the Nobel Prize at that time, huh?
Speaker 2: Not in the beginning, no.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: Very enthusiastic.
Speaker 1: A lot of energy, huh?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh.  Did, any other things you remember about when you were at Berkley [University of California, Berkeley] at all?  That was a long time ago.
Speaker 2: In--
Speaker 1: In the lab or the kinds of things you worked on there at Berkley?  What kind of work were you doing with Calvin?  Do you remember any of that?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  It was a lot of, it was nice being there at Berkley.  The faculty were very friendly, faculty members.
Speaker 1: You got along well with everybody.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 30981
Speaker 1: When you graduated were you having any trouble getting a job?
Speaker 2: No, not really, just sort of slide into a job.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, well, you never had any trouble getting a job.  You never got fired from a job anyway (laughter).  When you were at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], did the, when you were trying to get the Ph.D. program started, were the deans and the other people very supportive of what you were doing?
Speaker 2: Yes, especially, the president.
Speaker 1: The president?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He was good, nice to work for him.
Speaker 1: Oh, and so he gave some money--cause it took--
Speaker 2: Encouragement.
Speaker 1: --money to start the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --program.  And so he encouraged you to, cause nobody else, none of the HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities], the black schools, there were no Ph.D. programs at that time.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: And so you actually started the very first one.
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Speaker 1: Cause a lot of schools, it was gonna take a lot of money for them--
Speaker 2: Oh, right.
Speaker 1: --to do those programs.
Speaker 2: They didn't have the background, the equipment and everything for the faculty to work and do that level of research.
Speaker 1: And so it was hard to get grants too at that time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have a lot of grant support.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And so when you first started the Ph.D. program, most of the students came from Howard?
Speaker 2: I think so, as I recall.
Speaker 1: You had a notorious reputation around Howard for flunking students (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't realize that.
Speaker 1: You didn't realize that.  Do you remember the kinds of tests you used to give where you would have twenty different bottles or ten bottles and the students would have to figure out what was in each bottle?
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so--
Speaker 2: May be.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You don't remember.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 30982
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about Sam Ashley or Percy Julian?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was a pleasant fellow and doing his research, and it was nice to see that he was going forth.
Speaker 1: Cause Sam talked a lot though, huh (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh, a little bit.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  He told me a story one time that he came to see you and Charlotte [Welch] wouldn't let him in the house--
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: --because you were working on your book or something.  Do you remember any--
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't aware of that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But any of that.  What about Herman Branson.  Do you remember any--
Speaker 2: Sure, he was--
Speaker 1: He was a good friend of yours, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, and a hard worker and brilliant fellow.
Speaker 1: He was a chemist or a physicist?
Speaker 2: Physicist.
Speaker 1: Physicist.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he was--was he president, was he ever at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] or was he president of Lincoln [University, Chester County, Pennsylvania] at that time.  He became ultimately the president of Lincoln, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went through Howard and--
Speaker 1: Oh, he did go through Howard.
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a faculty member.
Speaker 1: As a faculty member.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, and then he left Howard and went to Lincoln?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  Any other good friends at Howard when you were there that you remember?
Speaker 2: I guess so.  I just don't recall right now.
Speaker 1: At Cal-State LA [California State University, Los Angeles], we have the story that even your secretary went on, so many of your students, even your secretary went on and got a Ph.D., Janet Pugh.
Speaker 2: Oh, is that right?
Speaker 1: She was at Howard, and she married a student (unclear).  Do you remember?  She worked for you for a number--
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: --and your secretary at Cal-State LA.
Story_ID: 30983
Speaker 1: Do you remember playing bridge at Cal-State [California State University, Los Angeles] with--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we played a lot of bridge.
Speaker 1: And they said you were a card shark.  Is that true or they were just making it up?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Harold Goldwhite.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who else was playing with you guys?
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see, Harold Goldwhite and--
Speaker 1: Was Hank Kaiser in that group?  Did Hank play?
Speaker 2: Hank, a little bit.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: I forget who else was playing.
Speaker 1: Who won most of the time?
Speaker 2: Well, we were lucky?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Harold gave the impression that you guys were giving signals, and you'd be coughing and doing (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a pleasant fellow.
Story_ID: 30984
Speaker 1: In terms of working on tastes, how did you get interested in molecules and what was sweet and not sweet?
Speaker 2: I don't recall why I chose that line of research.  I really don't know why.
Speaker 1: But you enjoyed working with--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything that was particularly, made you feel good when you learned something new about it?
Speaker 2: Well, it was good that, various successes in organic reactions related to taste, and that would provide the basis for getting more funds to continue the research.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, so as you got some fundamental studies done--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --you could--
Speaker 2: --observations, right.
Speaker 1: --you could get some more money.  Where did most of your money come from?
Speaker 2: Oh, from the government.
Speaker 1: From the government?  From National Science Foundation [NSF] or NIH [National Institutes of Health]?
Speaker 2: Yes, right, NIH.
Speaker 1: So, you had several Ph.D. students that worked in your lab.  I remember Herbert Smitherman.  He was one of your students.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, several of them went on to get a Ph.D. and so forth.
Speaker 1: So do you have any advice for the young folks coming along now in terms of just based on your own experience?
Speaker 2: No, I, just have to take advantage of the practices that are being made during their research period and the results.
Speaker 1: So would you advise a young person now to go into chemistry or would you advise them to go into business and make money (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I'd advise--I like chemistry.  Think that they would-- I'd advise people to go into chemistry just for the pleasure in the field.
Speaker 1: So what you're saying is you should do what you like then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Why did you like chemistry?  What about chemistry made you like it?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I have no idea, just it was a lot of fun working and out in the lab and sometimes the students say that I enjoyed having people taste something or smell something.
Speaker 1: You would actually have them taste, I forgot, you could have killed somebody (laughter).
Speaker 2: Get the reaction.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE) Just be careful stepping on his lines, if he's saying something, don't jump in too fast.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Go ahead, you were saying what the students say.
Speaker 1: Well, I just was pleased to see them enjoy what they were doing.
Speaker 2: I see.  So, it was just that chemistry and the fact that they were enjoying it.
Speaker 1: Yes, and what it would lead to, a good chance of jobs, employment.
Speaker 2: Anything else that you can think of that you would tell young folks or people today?
Speaker 1: No, just work in the field that you like, particularly, work in the field that you like, what you like to do.
Story_ID: 30985
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about Percy Julian?
Speaker 2: Nothing, we didn't have any close contact.  I admired the work that he did and discoveries that he made and so forth, but I didn't know him personally.
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other people at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] when you were there, that you knew personally?  Do you remember any of them?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time I knew all the faculty in chemistry.  I was trying to think of, oh, at Howard.
Speaker 1: Was Dr. Morris there?
Speaker 2: Kelso Morris?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, cause he was coming in, Kelso Morris, [Moddie] Taylor, those two I remember.  But I don't recall others right now. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What about me?
Speaker 1: Huh?  What did she say?
Speaker 2: She said what about her?
Speaker 1: Well, yes, you're a nice young lady.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Okay, well, thank you very much.  I think we have--
Speaker 1: Well, thank you.
Story_ID: 30986
Speaker 1: Okay, we just had a courtyard dedication for you out at Cal-State, LA [California State University, Los Angeles].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, any comments on that.
Speaker 2: It's a surprise.  I was just flattered and hope that it works out.
Speaker 1: The, your relationship with Dr., the president, you always had a good relationship with Dr. Roscoe?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was very supportive and very active in pushing what he believes in.
Speaker 1: Have you seen the bust that they have in the courtyard, have two new science buildings there, and they have the courtyard (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I haven't seen it there.  I think I have a copy of--
Speaker 1: At the dedication, they gave you a copy.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: So maybe the dedication and so forth was something that--
Speaker 2: Yes, unbelievable.
Speaker 1: Do you think that years from now people will know who Lloyd Ferguson was?  How would you like people to remember you?
Speaker 2: As an active chemistry teacher, encouraging students to do their best and interesting and drawing students into chemistry as a field because I thought it was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: The programs at Cal-State, the MBRS [Minority Bio-Medical Research Support] program, do you remember, there were a lot of students that went on through that program.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And now some of them are professors.
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: You started that program.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Story_ID: 30987
Speaker 1: There, people are interesting in Charlotte [Welch] and you in terms of where did you meet and how did you get together?
Speaker 2: Well, she came out from Arkansas to live in Berkley [California] with her brother.  And his wife invited a coworker over who invited me over, and that's when I met Charlotte that night, and to the amusement of her brother, the next day I was calling for a date.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And we took it from there, for a year, and then we got married.
Speaker 1: So you were only dating for a year and then you got married?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  So she was able to get you out of the laboratory?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I see.  So, in terms of doing your work, she was always there and supportive of--
Speaker 2: Yes, very encouraging.
Speaker 1: Cause you spent a lot of time in the laboratory, huh?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't think it was an unusual amount, what was needed, the time needed.
Speaker 1: What about Saturdays and Sundays?  Were you in there?
Speaker 2: Well, Saturdays.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I don't think I was unreasonable in spending time in chemistry versus something else.
Speaker 1: So it balanced out.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 30988
Speaker 1: Do you remember students being afraid to take your class because you were so difficult?  You had a reputation.
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know I had a reputation of being difficult.
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't.  Well, what was your reputation?
Speaker 2: Just that I liked chemistry, and we had a lot of fun, doing tricks.
Speaker 1: I see.  Your textbooks, how many different places were your textbooks used?  Do you remember any of the universities where they were used?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: They always said that, down in the South that sometimes your textbooks could get into universities where the black students couldn't get in.  Did you ever hear that?
Speaker 2: I didn't hear that, but I know that a lot of (unclear) students were surprised when they learned that the author of the text was a black person, but they didn't stop its use.  That's all.  The students and the faculty seemed to have liked them.
Speaker 1: So initially, I remember when I used your book, there was a picture of you on the cover--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --you know, on the paper cover.  For me that was really (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's a wonder that book got into the school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, that was at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] so.  But I especially, particularly, at the black schools, I think it was very motivating.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: So, what was the response when you first published your, not that many African Americans were publishing chemistry books.
Speaker 2: No, no, not at all.  Everybody was encouraging.
Speaker 1: How long did it take you to write a book?  Did you spend, cause you had to do a lot of research and stuff?
Speaker 2: Oh, see working for about a year and spending quite a bit of time writing and so forth.
Speaker 1: You used to keep all your stuff on little index cards.  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: How did you go from, you typed your stuff yourself for your book?
Speaker 2: Yes, and do a lot of the typing.
Speaker 1: And you still use two fingers?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I could, no, I was pretty good in typing.
Speaker 1: Oh, you were (laughter).  I see.  They didn't have computers back in those days.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It took a little longer?
Speaker 2: I took typing in school and seemed to do well in it.
Story_ID: 30989
Speaker 1: Were there any subjects you didn't do well in when you were in high school [Oakland Technical High School]?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know.  None that, maybe when I found out I wasn't gonna do well, maybe I got out of it.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  So the high school, did you go to high school in Oakland [California]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The teacher was very encouraging.
Speaker 1: You had good chemistry teachers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so they encouraged you to go to Berkley [University of California, Berkeley]?
Speaker 2: I think so, probably so.
Speaker 1: Were you able to do lab work in the--
Speaker 2: high school?
Speaker 1: --in the high school?  Did they have any labs?
Speaker 2: Yes, do some labs, and that's when I built a lab in the backyard and--
Speaker 1: Oh, you did.  Did you blow up anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, once in a while I'd have an explosion and get a lot of fun out of it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Did you ever get in trouble with your parents?
Speaker 2: No, not with my parents and so forth.  Sometimes teachers, the school didn't want me to fool with explosives, and that's where the fun was.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) How did you get interested in explosives and chemistry?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know, by a school teacher who was, let's see.  I guess it was a high school teacher encouraged me to do experiments, and I learned about explosives and colors and so forth.  And I just built a little lab out in the backyard and worked and played out there with the chemicals.
Speaker 1: By yourself or you had--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you were reading the books?  This was in high school--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --so you would read and figure out how to do some experiments and things?
Speaker 2: Yes, and explore a little bit.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  It was always fun.
Speaker 2: So that was, when you were in high school, was it close to being a senior or were you graduating or?
Speaker 1: No, let's see, it was probably junior and senior high years in high school, and I'd have fun with these chemicals.  So I built this lab in the backyard and work out there.
Speaker 2: Where'd you get the chemicals?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: Oh, just buy them at stores.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.
Speaker 1: Some drugstores or some--
Speaker 2: So you just used things that you could buy and then--
Speaker 1: Yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 2: And do you remember what made you apply to Berkley [University of California, Berkeley]?
Speaker 1: To do what?
Speaker 2: To, why did you want to go to school at Berkley?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  It just seemed to be the only place to go.
Speaker 2: It was right there in town, huh?
Story_ID: 30990
Speaker 1: So after leaving Berkley [University of California, Berkeley], you went to North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University] and--
Speaker 2: To teach.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yep, yes.
Speaker 1: But also, in terms of taking some of your sabbaticals, you went to Africa?
Speaker 2: Yes, Africa and Zurich [Switzerland].  It was up in the, up in the Northern part of Europe.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: A college, but the year in Africa was quite interesting, and students were happy to see a black professor come along and teach 'em because they, essentially, there were white professors teaching their courses in chemistry, especially upper division.
Speaker 1: And so you enjoyed, you were there for what, one year?
Speaker 2: I think so, at least a year.  I don't think it was more than a year, family went with me, nice experience for the family.
Speaker 1: So Lisa [Ferguson] and Lloyd [Ferguson].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I remember you writing me some letters from there.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: And you were in Zurich before then or before you went to Africa?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And was that a good experience?  Not that many African Americans were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that was more research in Zurich.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  You were teaching in Kenya.
Speaker 2: Yes.
