Story_ID: 79569
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer.  And Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Amy Billingsley is the observer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us and your date of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Walter Edward Fauntroy.  Fauntroy is spelled F, as in Frank, A-U-N-T-R-O-Y.  I am 69.  I'll be 70 years old by the time anybody sees this.  And I was born February the 6th, 1933.
Speaker 1: You have a birthday coming up.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: I want you also to give today's date and the location we're at.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're at New Bethel Baptist Church in Washington, D.C., at 9th and S Streets, and it is Thursday, January the 23rd, 2003.
Story_ID: 79570
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna start by asking you to give your mother's name and also what you know about her background.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Ethel Vine Fauntroy.  And she was born in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], married to William T. Fauntroy at about 18 years of age, and came from a family that lived in Hyattsville, Maryland, on her mother's side.  And that's about as much as I know.  My father was a native Washingtonian as well and came from a family that lived in Virginia.  I like to joke by saying that they were on the plantation of a Frenchman named Fauntleroy.  And apparently my great-great-great-grandfather said I'm not gonna take that rascal's name off this plantation as mine.  I'mma drop the L-E and make it Fauntroy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Is that a true story?
Speaker 2: That I don't know.
Speaker 1: Is it le--it's legend though?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yeah, well, we all, and many rebellious (laughter) slaves, when they were freed said I wa--I told Jesus it would be all right if you changed my name, 'cause I'm mad at that rascal (laughter).
Story_ID: 79571
Speaker 1: Now do you--did your mother [Ethel Vine Fauntroy]--what kind of person was she?
Speaker 2: Well, she, she was the essence of, of love.  She was a very short and shy person who did not finish high school, of course, and who had and reared eight children, one of whom died in her arms at about two years of age.  And it had a tremendous effect upon her and upon the rest of us who came after her.  But mother was a very loving person and loved her children dearly and treated them, each of them, as if each was the sweetest child in the whole wide world.
Speaker 1: So she, she treated you each individually?
Speaker 2: Yes, the thing that I said at her funeral here at the church was that when I was in elementary school, I was impressed with the fact that she put on what was known as a smock, which is what the teachers wore when one of my brothers was on the way, and not--understanding that I went to the teacher and said my mama's gonna be a teacher too.  She said yes?  I said yeah, she's gonna be a teacher.  And the teacher, Ms. Sheppard (ph.), smiled knowingly.  And about eight months later, I'd told her that, that I had a little brother, and we were very happy to have him in the house.  And I went home from school one day, and she--I saw my mother sitting on the porch holding the little baby.  And when I got to the, to the steps I heard her say, you are the sweetest little baby boy in the whole wide world.  And I said mommy, is that the sweetest baby in the whole wide world?
Speaker 1: She said yes.  I said mm, we got the sweetest baby in the whole wide world.  So I went to school the next day and told the teacher we have the sweetest baby boy in the whole wide world at our house.  And the teacher smiled and said knowingly, yeah, that's right.  So about two years later, when I was in the second grade, I saw mama put on another one of those smocks, and I said ooh.  So by that time I realized that what was on the way, so nine months later she has another baby boy.  And I came home from school, and she's sitting up in the--on the porch with Gerald, my youngest brother.  And she was saying you are the sweetest little baby boy in the whole wide world.  I said wait a minute, mama.  I thought you said Raymond was the sweetest baby boy.  She said son, every baby to his mother is the sweetest child in the whole wide world, and that, that stuck with me.  And in a family of seven you have children of various skills and, and levels of performance and achievement, but all of us knew that we were loved.  And all of us were trained to take care of the ones who were not as, as fortunate.
Speaker 2: I have a sister who was the first child born after Jewel, who had died in my mother's arms with indigestion.  And there came a time--I didn't know about this, but there came a time when she had a very serious fever, and mother was very, very concerned about it.  And the result of the fever ultimately was that there was damage.  And Doris Ann, who was my older sister, did not, did not do well in school, and within about two years I had caught up with her because she was falling back.  And my mother--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: About two years into school, she began falling back in terms of being able to perform.  And when she got back to my class, and she was two years older, my mother shared with me the fact that, you know, Doris Ann had problems and that I needed to help her.  And I got in the habit of helping her, and I think I sort of carried her through elementary school and junior high school.  And then by that time, she was able to go to a high school, where she, she performed.  But the bottom line was that all of us were taught to be concerned about one another, even though some of us had, you know, better skills than others.  And that's why I said she's the essence of love.
Story_ID: 79572
Speaker 1: Now, can you give your siblings' name in their--you know the birth order?
Speaker 2: Yes, my oldest sister was Ella Mae, and she is 12 years older than I; then there was Billy, who is seven years older than I; and then there was Doris Ann, who skipped a child in between, and she was two years older than I; then it was Walter; and then Kenneth, who was two years younger than I; and then Raymond, who was four years younger than he, six years younger than I; and finally Gerald, who is eight years younger than I and was the one who's--around whose discussion I'd understood that everyone of us was loved by our mother as if we were the only child in the whole wide world.
Story_ID: 79573
Speaker 1: Now your father, can--what kind of person was he--William Fauntroy--
Speaker 2: My father was, first of all, a, a loving father and a great athlete.  And I just couldn't wait until I could play ball the way I saw him play and, and the like.  My father was a, first a messenger.  He, he--like when I was growing up in Washington [D.C.], got these government jobs as a messenger in the federal government at a time when he, not having graduated from high school and, and having to marry--became a messenger.  And he worked for the federal government for more than 44 years.  He started as a clerk and ended up as a clerk, and as a consequence, introduced me to something called up and over the shoulder.  He came home one day and sat down at the dinner table.  And I noticed him for the first time with tears in his eyes.  I said what's, what's the matter, daddy?  And he just shook his head.  My mother said what's the matter, Willie?  And he said well, I'll tell you, I have now trained two generations of white people to be my supervisor.  He said 20 years ago I had this job, and they brought this young white boy in and said you teach him, you know, what you do, and he taught him.  And before he knew it, he was his boss, when he had done the teaching.  Then about 25 years later, they bring in another fellow--the other guy's retired now--and says here is so and so's son, and teach him (unclear), and he taught him.  And before long he was his supervisor.  And so daddy was fed up with up and over the shoulder, by which so many people in--African Americans in government here ended up doing the, the grunt work and training their supervisors.  So that was a part of his experience and some of the experiences that tracked me for civil rights.  The other thing about my father is that he was the sole breadwinner for a wife, seven children, and two grandmamas (laughter), the classic extended family.  And he was apparently under great pressure.  I sort of understood it as I grew.  Because you have eleven people in one house and you're the only breadwinner, and the two grandmothers are getting old, and with all of the kinds of things I now know which I didn't understand then, he was under great pressure.  And every once in a while he would do two things that, that would upset mother and me, and the family.  One, he would, he'd get a little high at the (laughter) weekends and come in, the staggering and, and talking.  And I used to think it was funny, but as I grew older and I understood, it was a problem.  And the other thing was that he, because he had eleven people to take care of, he was accustomed to the lottery.  Now you all don't know that right now we used to call it the numbers.  And Willie played the number regularly, and would go around to a place around the corner to a place called Yeah Man (ph.) where you'd get two things: you could get a little bootleg liquor after hours; and you could play the horses and play the numbers.  And some of my fondest memories are of Ethel laying Willie out about gambling his money away when we were tight, and about coming home kind of high.  I think as a result of that experience, I don't drink, and I don't play the numbers.
Story_ID: 79574
Speaker 1: I tried playing the numbers one time because I--she said ma--daddy [William Fauntroy], why do you play numbers?  He said well, son, you just put down--you put a penny down and you win, you get 300 pennies.  I said 300 pennies?  Now a penny would get you five gingersnaps at the store.  I said a penny and you win 300?  I said mm, I'm gonna try to play the numbers.  So I went around to Yeah Man (ph.) the next morning on my way to school.  I said I wanna play a number.  He said shh, boy, don't you--(unclear)--(unclear).  He said I wanna play the--I said I wanna play a number.  I said you don't let me play, I'm gonna tell the police.  So, he said all right, all right, what number?  I said I wanna play 928, which is the house number, and I wanna, I wanna play a penny on it.  And he said all right.  So I went to school that morning, and I couldn't--I said, I said mm, I'm gonna go down there at lunchtime--'cause it was right around the corner--and see if I've gotten these 300 pennies.  I went around there.  I said is the number out yet?  They said shh, boy, shut up (laughter)--said, said don't you play--don't you say that--(unclear)--they said--I said--(unclear)--come back at five.  I said all right.  So I still could see all those gingersnaps, all that 300 pennies I was gonna get.  And I, I, I waited until 3:00, and when 3:00 was there and school was out I rushed around there, and then I said is the number--I said--he said boy, I told you 5:00 and don't talk like that.  I said all right, so then I just played around in the street until 5:00.  I rushed in there.  I said what's the number?  I'll never forget they said 293.  I said 293.  I didn't win?  He said no.  I said I want my penny back.  And she--and the man said no, you lost.  You've got, you've got to--see, you can't get it unless you get--win.  (Unclear)--(unclear) played your number.  I said I want my penny back, and, and he said, and he said I can't give it to you.  I said I'm going to tell the police.  He said here, boy, take this penny, and don't you ever come back in here (laughter).  And I haven't been since.
Speaker 2: That's a wonderful story (laughter) (unclear).  That's a wonderful story.
Story_ID: 79575
Speaker 1: I want to ask you to describe some other parts of your family life.  What was family life growing up?  But I really--let me go back and ask you what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Going to, going to kindergarten.  The school was around the corner.  It was called Grimke--Archibald H. Grimke Elementary School.  And of course, my brother, my brothers and sisters had gone there before me so that when little Walter arrived--this is Billy's little brother.  And I'll never forget being very comfortable myself because my mother [Ethel Vine Fauntroy] took me, and, and I'd been hearing about them going to school, so I was comfortable.  But I'll never forget on the first day Ms. Garrison (ph.) was our, our kindergarten teacher, and these other children were crying.  And I said what are they crying about?  And when their mothers left they'd cry.  And I said well, something must be wrong with me because I'm not crying.  So I, I started crying too, just (laughter) because they were.  And that's my first memory, really, of, of trying to figure out I don't know why they're crying, but it must be right.  So since their mommies left and they were crying, I need to cry too (laughter).
Story_ID: 79576
Speaker 1: So what was family life like?
Speaker 2: Family life in my childhood was, was about the war [World War II].  I was born in '33 [1933], so that I remember vaguely 1936 and something about Jesse Owens outrunning everybody.  And my daddy [William Fauntroy] was excited about it because I later learned he was a track person, and then memories of December 7th [Pearl Harbor], and that Sunday coming home from church and hearing all this about war, not knowing but people talking and talking, and stars in windows on the block because people were being drafted.  And my early memories are of a star that went in--up two doors down, when Charlie Chisholm (ph.) had gone off to war.  He had been drafted and had gone into the military, and after his basic training, was taken--was sent to Europe.  And on that day, he came to the house in his, all of his military gear.  They had combat boots and, and all of those packs and everything that they had, then the helmet.  And I was just fascinated 'cause he was going off to war to fight the Germans and those bad Japanese, we were told.  And two weeks later, Mrs. Chisholm had a star in the window.  And they told me that Charlie had been killed, and that was so shocking.  And, and the whole street was in mourning.  And before you knew it, several others in the neighborhood who'd gone off--a fellow down the street, the sister of whom was still a member of this church, was killed.  And so we were playing war games all the time.  We didn't play cowboys and Indians.  We played, you know, G.I.  And there came a time in 1942 when my brother, Billy, became 17, and they drafted--they were--he was faced with the draft.  And he chose to, to, to volunteer for the Air Force, the Army Air Force because he wanted to be a pilot.  And he, you know, he passed the exams and, and, and, and was qualified.  And the thing that I remember most about that was the anxiety and fear in the household about Billy's going off to war, where Charlie had gone and where the other fellows who weren't coming back because there stars in the windows.  So it's that point that I really became anxious about, you know, 'cause this war had to come to me.  I'd been playing shooting people with my little rifles.  And after we shoot 'em, then they get up and walk away.  I was concerned, and my concern was heightened when my mother [Ethel Vine Fauntroy] and father took Billy down to the bus station with all the other, other young men who were being drafted and who were ready to go.  And she came back, and when she sat down she started crying.  And I said what's the matter little ma?  I call my--we call our mother little mama because our grandmother was big mama, you know what I mean (laughter)?  So that it was, it was an extended family.  I said what's the matter little mama?  And she was crying.  And daddy started weeping too.  I said what's the matter?  And he said well--he just got upset because there Billy was being drafted and I mean, well, you know, was volunteering to head all these, these young people going.  And when they got on the bus, they made all of the black boys move to the back, and my mother was kind of upset.  She said you know, here, here he's going out there and will lose his life, and they gonna put him in the back of the bus.  So, so it just sort of--that's the first thing I, I remember about something wrong about the back of the bus.  I didn't understand it then, but I kept questioning, and so I came to understand what had upset her.  And those are the kind of early memories that I had growing up, as the discussion was war, and after Billy went off to the Air Force, whether he was coming back, and the unfairness of the situation, where some people died and yet were mistreated here.
Story_ID: 79577
Speaker 1: Now what kind of, what kind of youngster were you?  Were you sensitive, were you mischievous, were you--I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was all of that.
Speaker 1: Were you a--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --were you a mama's boy?
Speaker 2: Oh no, I, I did a lot of talking (laughter) in the class, whether it was I, I talked and teachers complained about all the talks all the time.  I did my work, but I talked all the time.  I was mischievous, and I was sharply focused on achievement, so that I couldn't wait until I could get to be a, a Cub Scout.  I see these little guys walking around with them blue uniforms and yellow and caps and so that my first ambition was to be a Cub Scout.  And I'll never forget how, how, how happy I was when I went around the corner here to Cub Pack 508 and had a--the first of many what I call caring adults who were part of the extended family in the black community--J.O. Williams, which he was my cub master.  And never forget struggling along because I had sell papers to get the money for my blue uniform.  And so we used to--we had, during that period, you had a war thing where you packed the papers and take 'em to the junkyard and sold them 'cause they wanted you to conserve everything.  And I got my uniform and became very much involved in achievement.  So I couldn't wait to get my wolf, wolf pin and then the others and put 'em on my shoulders, used to have tassels you wore and I, so I went after all of that.  And cub scouting led me into organized sports so that J.O. Williams was not only our cub master, but he was our baseball coach and boxing coach and everything else that we did at the Boys Club.  And I spent a lot of time, therefore, athletically, enjoyed--couldn't wait to get home from school to go to the schoolyard afterwards and play, very active.  And the big thing in my life became after World War II--when my brother was coming home--getting in the Soap Box Derby, where you made your own soapbox racer.  And so for three years, from the time I was 13, 14, and 15, I knocked myself out trying to win the Soap Box Derby and spending much of my time after school building that, that, and getting to a habit that has not changed since of spending 18-hour days.  I used to think that once I got out of college they would, those 18-hours days would, would end.  And then I thought after I got to be pastor it would end.  And then I, I thought that after I got to be a civil rights activist that it would be enough people to help me that it would end, that I'd get more than five hours sleep a night.  And then when I got into Congress I knew it was gonna end because I'd have staff.  Then when I retired I knew it was gonna end because nobody would bother me.  Well, I'm down to four hours now.
Story_ID: 79578
Speaker 1: When you, when you were young, can you just describe the, the block or the neighborhood that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Yes, I can.  There were two things about the block that you had to be careful about.  First of all was the numbers, because everybody played the numbers.  When I was a kid, there was a song "Mo and Joe had a candy store selling fortunes behind the door.  The cop grabbed Mo, and as Joe ran out, brother Mo began to shout run Joe, run Joe as fast as you can.  The police is holding me hand."  Well, I came to understand that because every time a police car came through, everybody got quiet (laughter) on the block, because it was illegal to play the numbers.  And then secondly, we lived at 928 Westminster Street.  And around the corner it was another street called French Street.  And French Street had a tourist home.  And every once in a while people would get the streets confused, and they'd come to our door and say can we have a room?  And mama would say tell 'em to--it's not 28 French Street.  I said it's not 28 French Street and they would go.  And after I, after I survived puberty, I kind of understood what was going on.  And I remember that there was another house down at 910 Westminster Street that was a tourist home.  Now, because they couldn't go to the hotels, people had tourist homes in our neighborhood.  And people from across town would come to the one over here, and people here (laughter) would go to the one over there, so that I remember the, the, the, the feeling of somehow being under siege by these white policemen because of those two things.  And to this day when I see a police car, a memory (laughter) surfaces that says be careful (laughter).
Story_ID: 79579
Speaker 1: You know, you were talking so well of your neighborhood, I'd like you--'cause you talked a lot about sort of sights, you know, the stars in the window, and things like that.  I want you to sort of take your, you know, smell and--I wanted to know smell and sounds, you know, that sort of remind you of growing up, that if you, you know, smell or experience them now would bring you back to your childhood.
Speaker 2: Well, I have to say this about that: all of my higher education was against the background of what I saw and smelled and felt growing up in what I now know, or what I learned later, was the wickedest precinct in town.  I became aware of that when in 9--at 17 years of age I read a book called "Washington Confidential."  It was one of those books describing Washington, D.C.  And I was happy to get to a, a, a, a chapter called Seventh and T (unclear).  I said that's Seventh; that's just right here.  And when they got through describing the, the highest crime rate, the highest drug rate, the highest everything, I got offended.  It said I lived in the wickedest precinct in town.  I say that because when I went off to college, on my mind was what I'm gonna do when I get back to change the world my mama [Ethel Vine Fauntroy] brought me to.  And I recall my pain and disgust with the fellows who were sitting around the liquor stores, which were every (unclear) everywhere, drinking Wild Irish Rose, and those red eyes, and that slow speech that I sometimes saw with my, in my dad [William Fauntroy] when he, when he came home.  So I--my smells are the smells of musty halls, and urine, and tight quarters in the apartments and homes of my friends and neighbors who were not as--not able to be as clean as, as my mother insisted we do.  And my memories are of parking cars of white people who were going to the, the stadium around the corner to see the Washington Senators play or the Washington Redskins play, none of whom had any black players.  And if you got into the stadium, you, you had to sit in a sec--section, section.  So, all that I've done in my maturity I owe to those experiences in my, my youth growing up in this neighborhood.
Story_ID: 79580
Speaker 1: With--tell me about first going to school, like, you said your first experience was kindergarten and you--and the name of the school was?
Speaker 2: Archibald H. Grimke Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Was--do you know who Archibald H. Grimke was?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  It was a white man.  I never, never, never bothered after I found out (laughter) what things were going on, going--I never, I never really--all I liked was the way it sounded, Archibald H. Grimke.  And I, I--what I recall about that period of my life was that, you know, there was just great excitement among the children when you started school.  And once you were in school, you got excited about the little ones coming along and how you were, you were going to be going to Garnet-Patterson Junior High School [now Shaw Middle School @ Garnet-Patterson] across the street, and how if you behaved yourself, you might go to Dunbar High School.  They were the schools in Divisions 10 to 13, the colored schools in Washington [D.C.].  And it was an experience that, that not only gave me the, the upward mobility syndrome by which my middle-class teachers were telling us, you know, yeah, you know, your "fleecy locks and black complexion cannot forfeit nature's claim" and that you ought to, you've got to better.  By the time I got to Dunbar, I had an excellent English teacher, L.S. Brown, who, in coaching me to--in an oratorical contest, which I won city-wide.  But when I went in the regional competition, while I thought and the audience thought, I'd done a pretty good job, they gave it to some--a white child from, from Montgomery County in the suburban Washington.  And I was furious.  And she said son, I told you for--they can win scoring 80.  If you're gonna win, you have to score 110, and even that's--I said well, I did 110.  She said even that.  So I said to her, well, Ms. Brown, I understand now, said I'm gonna be like Joe Louis from now on.  Joe Louis said don't take any of this--no chance on a decision.  Knock him out, and leave no doubt, and let 'em say you're the winner from his back (laughter).  You know what I mean?  So, so that, that I remember about my best teachers along the way, who were committed to, to a better day for the children.  And it's one of the things that I, I'm really concerned about, now as people gets focused so much on the all mighty dollar, and I got mine, you got yours to get, and the fact that the kind of intact family that we have, though a lot of people, is not now a common experience among black people.  In this neighborhood there's not a single woman--on this block around this church there's not a single woman with children the father of whom is in the home or married to them.  And we are reaping--we're almost back to slavery on this, this block, where every black man was expected to be a stud and every black woman a heifer and have babies by anybody on the plantation, including Uncle Bubba, if you don't mind the expression.  So that I, I--my memories are of experiences that shaped my response to people like [Rev. Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr., who said (unclear)--let's change it, and my response to the colleagues in the caucus, who said, in effect--not all of them--but some of them said we're fired up, won't take it anymore.  And that I owe to a loving mother [Ethel Vine Fauntroy] and father [William Fauntroy] who, who tried, who stumbled and fell but who, by the time he went home, was a member of the church and trying his best not to take little Old Grand Dad every once in a while.  You know what Old Grand Dad is?  (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 79581
Speaker 1: I forgot, you know, there was one thing I forgot to ask you is the--it's usually at the beginning of our interview, and it's just five very simple "People" magazine-ish questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So just bear with me.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Let me think about that a minute because I like all food.  I, I guess I have to say collard greens (laughter).
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Well, it's a, it's a, it's a toss-up between summer at the beach and winter on the slopes.  So I think I like the beach more.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: A beach anywhere, particularly if it's warm water and white sand.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Mr. Say ain't nothing; Mr. Do is the man.
Speaker 1: So you ski?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You ski?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I love it.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's wonder--I--(unclear)--you as a skier.
Story_ID: 79582
Speaker 1: Okay, we--I want to go back.  We were really talking about your youth still.  And I'm wondering if they're any other memories that you can sort of share about growing up in the neighborhood that you were--what, what, what was the name of the neighborhood you were from?
Speaker 2: We were at that time known as the Second Precinct.  And of course, that had to deal with the, the police precincts around town.  And as I indicated to you, I guess my own life was so deeply influenced by what I saw and, and smelled and experienced growing up in, but was at that time considered, the wickedest precinct in town--that those experiences as (unclear) my early youth came to influence all that I've done in my maturity, so that the, the sight of, of wasted men drinking and wasting their lives, the sight of blood on the street, where--on the weekends--where people worked out their hostilities and resentments of what they had to put up with every day of their lives on the--in the workaday world.  Those kind of things I take--I took out of my, my, my youthful years, formative years, on the one hand, and then on the other hand, caring adults.  I can't tell you how much I appreciate people who worked among young people in the churches, in scouting, in the Boys and Girls Clubs that we had at that time.  And we have too little of that now, I believe.  And I sort of pity the young people who have so much more to deal with today than, than I had growing up in what they called later the ghetto.
Story_ID: 79583
Speaker 1: Now were you active in the church from youth, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: In this church [New Bethel Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: In this church, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the minister at that time, he was, was it C. David Foster?
Speaker 2: That's right, C. David Foster was my pastor.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about him?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a remarkable man in the sense that he, he died at 54, rather young, relatively young man, af--actually one year after he had married me and my bride, and about 15 years after he as pastor of the church had announced to the church that he--that Walter wants to be a minister, and we--God's gonna do great things with and through him.  And that did two things.  First of all it, it created in me a self-image that, you know, that I didn't have to turn out the way what I was seeing was turning out in the lives of so many around me.  And also it sort of impressed the people so that when I finished high school, he moved them to, to raise the money on a weekly basis with sales from dinners in the neighborhood to get me off to college.  When I finished college, I went to a very fine divinity school.  And in my second year of divinity school, he married me and my bride [Dorothy Simms].  And before the year was out, he was taken with cancer of the esophagus.  And seven days after I graduated from divinity school he, he expired.  And so fresh out of divinity school, because of his pastorate and because of his investment in me, not a relative, just someone who was in the neighborhood who was fairly faithful in the, in the work of the church, I got off to an early start in my pastorate and in my, in my ministry, and was able to respond to [Rev. Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr. when he needed someone to represent him in Washington [D.C.] with the president and the heads of the Cabinet and other agencies that affected our movement and with the leaders of the Congress.  Without that, I doubt that I would have been involved as I have.
Story_ID: 79584
Speaker 1: I--but with Reverend [C. David] Foster, when did he designate--you, you said it was 15 years before, so what age were you?
Speaker 2: I joined the church when I was 11.  And I had been coming to Sunday school from the time that I wanted to be a cub scout.  And he, he just sort hinted around, you know.  I mean--
Speaker 1: At age 11?
Speaker 2: At 11.  And by the time I was 13 and you move to junior high school and teachers started asking you what are you gonna do with your life, I'll never forget I did a one-page statement of intent and ambition and said I wanted to be a minister.  And so that sort of flowed around in my mind, in my thinking through those formative years.
Speaker 1: So what made you do that?  Was it his statement or your, your thought pro--I'm trying--who, who got to--who--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm gonna tell you, quite frankly, what started it.  I had a younger sibling, Kenneth, who was two years younger than I.  And he used to suck his tongue.  I don't know what that meant, but he used to suck his tongue.  And one of our neighbors used to chide it--chastise him - don't do that, don't do that.  And so I said well, I'll chastise.  And I used to hit him and say don't do that and the like.  And one day we're playing on, on Westminster Street.  I was about, about five and he was about three.  And I was chasing him around and out into the street and then back in between the cars.  My mother [Ethel Vine Fauntroy] (unclear) called out the window and said stop that, Walter, there's cars out there.  And so we played on the sidewalk.  And then another time, here I had--I was race--chasing about the street.  And I, I chased him around the car and heard this screech of an automobile and boom, and I saw his feet go up in the air.  And when I got to the street, he was down on the ground and unconscious.  And of course, at that age, I thought if you get moved, you were dead.  And my mother came out and they screamed, and the people called an ambulance.  And they came and picked poor Kenneth up and took him to the hospital.  And I, I had heard about God and about prayer.  And when the sirens went off and they left me, I went up in the attic and got on my knees and said Lord, if you will send Kenneth back here, 'cause I know he's dead, but if you send him back, I promise I'll never hit him on the, the hand and tell him not to suck his tongue anymore.  And that evening, they walked in with Kenneth walking in.  I said oh, God answers prayer.  He's a pretty good fellow (laughter).  And I, I, I began thinking I guess.  I gave you some background of that.
Speaker 1: So do you think Reverend Foster saw--he--did he see something in you, or did you proclaim it to him, or--
Speaker 2: No, no, I, I never, I never understood that.  I really don't understand that.  But, again, these are very personal things that, things that, you know, individuals have in their own, own thinking.  And I just, just for me--you asked a question.  That's how it sort of developed, and that's why I see David Foster was so important in my life, among many caring adults who, who did not abuse or take advantage of the innocence of children.  I think back over my life all the people who could have taken advantage of my innocence and the innocence of children around me who did not because they were caring adults.  I say that because I am so distressed during this period at the ease with which people abuse and neglect children and, and handicap them for life out of their own selfishness, and greed, and desire for self-satisfaction.
Story_ID: 79585
Speaker 1: Now, at Dunbar High School, what were you--was there anything that you were particularly interested in or that you, you know, did or active with or--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I'm an athlete.  My father [William Fauntroy] was a good athlete.  And I, I--and I was small but fast and quick, so I, I loved to play sports.  And I owe that to my father and to, quite frankly, the caring adults who had us playing baseball, and football, and boxing rather than cutting and shooting.  And so I, I, I loved that.  I loved making soapbox racers so that I couldn't wait--I remember as a small, as a child, roughly I guess I must have been 7 or 8, seeing these soapbox races.  But when the war came in '41 [1941], and '42 [1942], and '43 [19432], they had no soapbox races.  And in 1946, after the war was over, they had their first soapbox race--races again.  And I was 13, and boy, I, I knocked myself out for two years when I--three years, when I was 13, 14, and 15, and then you have to leave it, making soapbox races and trying to win, and always losing.  And when I got to Dunbar Junior High--Dunbar High School, you began to look, look forward to what you were gonna do with your life.  And I, I got involved in an oratorical contest that was put on every year by some caring adults who were Elks.  And they had in Divisions 10 to 13--those were the colored schools in Washington [D.C.] at that time--an annual competition, by which at each high school students competed in an oratorical contest, and then you went up to a city-wide competition.  And so I, I tried at Dunbar, and I won in 1950, and then I won the, the city-wide competition.  And I was, I was very focused; in fact, now that I look back on it, my subject was fulfilling the aims of the Constitution.  And that sort of fit for us who grew up in Washington because, as I say to people now, I didn't grow up on a farm, so I don't know very much about chickens and ducks.  And if I, if I had to kill a chicken to eat, I'd be a vegetarian.  I didn't grow up in, in West Virginia, so I don't know anything about mining.  I grew up in Washington, D.C., where, from my early waking days, I saw these things called the Capitol and the White House and, and these buildings around it were the Department of Agriculture and Commerce and the like.  And so I became curious.  And, and so in my 17th year, my senior at high school, I, I did this speech on fulfilling the aims of the Constitution.  And to do that, I had to study what government was all about intensely.  And it served me well in a career that had me representing [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] during the decade of the '60s [1960s] and then in the Congress for, for two decades.  So that's what high school meant to me, getting out of the Soap Box Derby and getting into oratory, and government, and its relationship to the gospel.
Story_ID: 79586
Speaker 1: Now you were married in 1951, right?
Speaker 2: No, I was married in 1957.
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 2: I went to Virginia Union.
Speaker 1: That's right, fifty--okay, that's--
Speaker 2: Went to Virginia Union in '51 [1951].
Speaker 1: Fifty-one [1951], okay, great.
Speaker 2: And I tell the story because they sent me there to study.
Speaker 1: Here?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) the people at church [New Bethel Baptist Church] were paying for me to study.  And when I came back for Christmas vacation, I was telling Dr. [C. David] Foster about a young lady [Dorothy Simms] I had met when I got on the campus.  And I joke about the fact that, that I was standing on the campus, and all of a sudden the other freshmen looked at me and said Walter, why are you looking to the sky?  I said, I said I think heaven has declared a holiday.  They said (unclear)--what's wrong with you?  I said I think--yeah, because I think I see one of those angels walking across the campus (laughter).  And that began a four-year love affair that resulted in my, when we graduated, that it going to New York to work for the United Nations.  And I, I went to divinity school at Yale [University] in New Haven [Connecticut], which was just 75 miles from, from New York.  And when we--when I finished my second year at divinity school in 1957, we, we planned and had our marriage here at, here at her home in, in Petersburg, Virginia.  And Dr. Foster and busloads of members went down for our wedding.  And as I said, it was hardly a year later then that Dr. Foster, who seemed to be in perfect health when he married us, was gone.  And so, coming fresh out of divinity school, we came here [New Bethel Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 79587
Speaker 1: Now tell me, you went to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me what, what that experience was like, because your world had pretty much been this neighborhood [Second Precinct, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And, and--well, anyway, if you could start with that.
Speaker 2: First of all, it was historically black college and university; and two, it, it had this emphasis on, on, on religious values.  So, the thing that most impressed me there was two experiences that I had with truly outstanding African Americans.  One was Vernon Johns, who was just a brilliant man.  And as many people here will know, he was [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s predecessor at Dexter Avenue Church in Montgomery [Alabama] and a man of great courage and great wisdom.  I was just in awe when they introduced him as a person who, under--who read Greek and, and who, who could memorize whole books and who, when he spoke, was just eloquent beyond words.  And the other was Howard Thurman, who, again, is just one of those geniuses who, who came by and who has so enriched our lives.  And I mentioned the two of them because of our generation of, of, of activists, from, from [Rev. Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.], to Andy [Andrew Young, HM], to, to Ralph [Abernathy], to all of us.  These were the intellectual and spiritual giants.  I don't think I would have gotten that, had I gone to an Ivy League school or had I gone to a school that did not emphasize role models in a fashion that those of us who had been conditioned to think of ourselves as not being equal to or less than might, might be exposed and follow.
Story_ID: 79588
Speaker 1: I was asking about Howard Thurman and, and Vernon Johns.
Speaker 2: Yes, I appreciate so much being exposed to those men and many others like them because Richmond, Virginia, where Virginia Union [University] is, was a, was a contrast to what I had experienced here in Washington [D.C.].  There, I experienced firsthand what I'd only heard about in the South, what I call royal racial segregation and discrimination.  In Washington we had racial segregation and discrimination, but we were, were--well, rather, I was protected pretty much because we didn't go very mu--very far from, from where we lived.  We were around the corner from U Street, and the Dunbar Theater, the Howard Theatre, the Booker T. and the Republic up on U Street.  And the Howard Theatre brought all of the outstanding black entertainers here, so I saw Nat King Cole there; I saw Moms Mabley, Louis Armstrong, the Clovers. And so, we didn't have much interface with racial segregation and discrimination growing up.  You--when we went downtown, my first experience of it was when my mother [Ethel Vine Fauntroy] took me down on F Street, and I went plat--by a place called The Blue Mirror.  The Blue Mirror made strawberry shortcake, and they had these big strawberry shortcakes.  I said mama, can, can (unclear).  She said no, you can't go in there.  I said I want--they, they comin' out with it.  I want a strawberry shortcake.  And she uncomfortably explained to me that because we were colored, they wouldn't allow us to eat in there and that she was not gonna go in there and buy and walk out 'cause you can't eat out on the street.  That troubled me.  When I got to a boy scout and we wanted to take trips to places, we would go downtown to the Capitol and the Washington Monument.  And I'll never forget we went to Arlington Cemetery where they buried all of the war dead.  And we used to have to, you go down to 11th and E Streets on a district--D.C. transit bus.  Then you had to switch to an A, B, and W bus, which bus took you into Virginia and Maryland, bringing commu--the residents there here to make work--make money and take them out.  And when you crossed the 14th Street Bridge and you got on the other side, you had to get up and move to the back because of--I didn't like that.
Story_ID: 79589
Speaker 1: So, by the time I went to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], I was a little annoyed about not being able to get my strawberry shortcake when I wanted, and a little annoyed about having to get up and go across the bus.  But when I got there it was rigid.  Every--you know, it was just you left the campus, you had to sit in the back of the bus.  I'll never forget I went to the Thalhimers, which is a major--was--I don't know if it's still there--department store.  And they had white water and colored water right next to one another.  I said now you know this--and I went to the white--(unclear)--start drinking (unclear)--boy, don't you see you can't do that?  I said, I said I'm white, and I went on and (laughter), and, and, and drank.  But I was there my, my very first year.  They were considering having a baseball team in Richmond, AAA ball, for the Brooklyn Dodgers.  And the question was will they let Jackie Robinson play in the Minor League there.  That was his first year.  And they were beginning to bring other African Americans on to the--(unclear)--raising that question, and they raised the question: shall we allow them to sit where the white people sit?  Well, I was a freshman at Virginia Union, but I (laughter), I got on a baseball uniform and went down and testified (laughter) at a hearing where they were deciding whether or not the government's investment in a new stadium would mean it'd have to integrate the stadium.  And so that was a shock of, of having to confront segregation raw and naked, as (unclear) against being sheltered here [Washington, D.C.] in Divisions 10 to 13, which were the colored schools.  You just didn't have much interface.  And it was tho--it was those experiences that sort of made me ready by the time I met [Rev. Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr. for the first time.  And that was when I was a freshman [Massachusetts] at Virginia Union, and he was traveling from Atlanta [Georgia] up to Boston to begin his graduate work, and had decided with his parents that he rather drive and stop at schools on the way, rather than have to be humiliated, you know, and stip--and sleep in dives and, and be, be forced to eat in the car all the way from Atlanta up to, to, to Washington.  So at that point into that period came the May 17th, 1954 Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education] that fired us up.  And we, we, we decided that on our watch something was gonna change.
Story_ID: 79590
Speaker 1: Now I still wanna go back to Howard Thurman and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --okay and Vernon Johns.  Do you have any things to sort of share about them individually, you know, your impressions of them or interactions with them, or anything like that?
Speaker 2: What impressed me was their--they had the courage of their convictions.  Vernon Johns told a story about a time when he was just furious about having to endure rigid segregation and discrimination.  I didn't know as much about him then as I know now.  But he, he, he, he went through a period of his speech where he pointed out that a white man had insulted him in, in his youth.  And that he was on a train one day when he ran into a white person who was in, in dire straits and he mistreated him, and had a dream, he said that was not, not unlike that of Dives in hell, saying send him to, to cool my tongue--talking about Lazarus.  And he--the bottom line was that, that he was judged by what he did and was apologetic because we're all God's children, and we are de--we, we, we should treat one another with, with compassion and concern beyond race, creed, and color.  That was very impressive to me because I was hot and mad by the time (laughter) I was at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] at this awful system.  And Howard Thurman could just keep you spellbound, telling stories of, of our experiences and how we've got to overcome.  I'll never forget he did a speech relating to a visit to Africa, in which he, he really took us on a sentimental journey and had us in those slave ships and had us surviving and recognizing that on the first slave ship, only one of every six made it.  And since we made it, we must have something, only the strong survive.  And if they could go through that, we can go through anything with faith in God and with having the courage of our convictions to act on what we say we, we believe.  So that's the sort of capsule of the kinds of people with whom we had interface in that, in that experience.  Women teachers, boy, I had a professor named Oxendine (ph.) for history, who--I mean it was just wonderful to have had that opportunity in the segregated schools of that period to run into people who were committed to teaching.
Speaker 1: Now did you--were there other people in your, you know, there at the same time whose names we would recognize?
Speaker 2: Oh, without question.  First of all, you'd recognize Doug Wilder [L. Douglas Wilder, HM], who later became the governor of, of the State of Virginia.  You'd recognize people like [Rev.] Wyatt Tee Walker [HM], who was a senior in the divinity school--I mean school of religion, when I got there--and who had been summa cum laude in, in undergraduate school and the same thing in, in divinity school, and who, who was a good close friend of [Rev. Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  And it was that experience that gave--he was--it was he who gave Martin the idea that maybe you need to get Walter to be your representative there [Washington, D.C.] and sort of stay in touch with these people for us.  You'd, you'd, you'd (unclear) a young man named, named Virgil Wood, who is now a pastor at Pond Street in Rhode Island, Providence, Rhode Island.  Pond Street was the church that was in the pastorate of Samuel DeWitt Proctor, who was the dean of the school of religion when I, when I went to Virginia Union, who later became president, and who then became the first Peace Corps director in the new frontier years of the John F. Kennedy Administration, and--who was another legend who had great impact upon young people, not only at Virginia Union, but across the nation.
Story_ID: 79591
Speaker 1: Now Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], can you just give a little short history of its (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, and it's importance.
Speaker 2: Yes, founded in 19--in 1867, the way so many of our universities were founded in that period, when there were philanthropists and churches, and people understood that you need five things to survive: income; education, to make money; healthcare, to live long enough to enjoy it; housing; and justice.  And the best way to equip our people they felt, rightly, was to invest in education.  And so a number of universities, the colleges were cre--were, were created during that period by people primarily white and primarily from Northern churches who were concerned that they would not allow us in the South to be free of what slavery had imposed upon us.  And that was ignorance and a, a, a quality of life and style of life that promoted Snoop Doggy Dogs and Bow Wows as men and B's and hoes as, as women, so that the schools were generally church schools, church supported, as was Virginia Union, as it is still church supported.  And I'm just proud to have been a part of so many of those 44 UNCF [United Negro College Fund] colleges and universities around the country.
Story_ID: 79592
Speaker 1: Now, you--when you graduated, you went--you got married, and then--did you go to Yale [Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut] before Reverend [C. David] Foster's death--no.
Speaker 2: No, I went to Yale after college [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And after two years there, my wife [Dorothy Simms] and I married after a six-year courtship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I came back that year--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that next year.
Speaker 1: Now what did--how, how did your Yale--what, what made you decide to go on to Yale?
Speaker 2: Quite frankly, when I did my, my--in the seventh grade, my civics teacher had all of us to write what we wanted to do with our lives.  And when she read my paper, she said oh, said I knew a very fine minister who--from Yale Divinity School.  And that sort of put that in my head (laughter).  I had great respect for that teacher, and I decided, well, maybe I'll, I'll go there.
Speaker 1: And how did you find that experience?
Speaker 2: It was one of the most valuable experiences because, as a good friend of mine suggested, when you went to the black colleges, you found out that you were somebody.  And when you went to the integrated schools, you found out you were nobody, but you learned that you could become a nobody--you could take a nobody and maybe become somebody if you, if you dug in.  The thing I remember about Yale Divinity School is that having had a full dose of, of the, the Howard Thurmans and the Vernon Johns of the world, I knew that I could score 110, and I had to score 110.  I had a wonderful instructor at, at Dunbar High School named L.S. Brown, our English teacher, who was our coach for the oratorical contest.  And when I won the you--the Divisions 10 to 13 competition, they then put me into a competition in the region, where we had to compete with white young people.  And she said now you could win--they can win scoring 80, but you're gonna have to score 110.  And so I understood that.  I understood, as I said, why Joe Louis said don't take any chance on a decision.  Knock him out and leave no doubt (laughter), so that it was a real challenging experience at Yale Divinity school.  And as a result, I learned a lot because I, I, I was being prepared for a, a, a life with people of like mind who, as [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] put it so eloquently, said that "Fleecy locks and black complexion cannot forfeit nature's claim.  Skin may differ, but affection dwells in black and white the same."  And I must be judged by the, the measure of my soul.  That's the kind of thing that happened in that transition from the streets of Washington [D.C.] to Virginia Union, and then to Yale Divinity School, and then to come back here [Washington, D.C.] and fight (laughter).
Story_ID: 79593
Speaker 1: Reverend Fauntroy, you know, this is (unclear)--it's an interesting period.  I mean it's a period, you know, sort of mounting, you know, activism, but coming out of the time when African Americans were strongly sort of integrationists in many ways--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, wanting to be part.  Now, you're, you're--who appreciated the fact that you had gone both from Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia] to Yale Divinity School [New Haven, Connecticut]?  Was--did anyone understand the magnitude of what that represented, that was, you know--did, did Dr.--did Reverend [C. David] Foster, did he understand that?  Did--
Speaker 2: I'm sure he did, and--
Speaker 1: Your family would not?
Speaker 2: They, they--no, and I'll tell you, that's another thing that's rather refreshing for me.  When I came back to be pastor, having graduated from Virginia Union and Yale and being trained, I explained to the members of the church who had been accustomed to my singing in the junior choir and in the, in the youth choir that I could no longer sing as a minister, because a minister was trained to either--to preach the gospel and not to, to sing.  And that went well for about three weeks.  And Sister Mary Stokes (ph.) came over to me, said son, if you don't sing my favorite song, said I'mma, I'mma call a church meeting.  Don't you think you got so uppity.  I don't know anything about no ed--edumacation you got, but I want you to sing.  And I've been saying ever since, so I do, to my detriment--not really to my detriment, but I, I, I say that I'm a member of six inferiority reference groups.  First of all, I'm black, so that if I was chairman of a significant banking committee, and the, the lobbyists came down and saw me in the center and presiding.  They say, well, who is that?  He can't do know anything about banking because he's colored.  Then on top of that, I am an athlete.  So you never--you don't know who he is?  He's the first baseman for the Democrats.  You ever see him play ball?  They said oh Lord, 'cause athletes don't have any since.  You know, they, they bounce a ball through school.  Then they say you ain't never heard him sing?  And they said oh, my God, he sings.  You know, entertainers don't have any sense.  They just, you know, they just mouth things.  And then I, I, I used to think that being a politician was a superiority reference.  But after I got elected to Congress, I'd say I'm a congressman.  They'd say oh Lord, watch him.  He's, he's a lie--he'll lie, he'll steal.  And in Washington [D.C.], because I could not vote on the floor, they said oh my goodness, you can't even vote (laughter).  And so, so that, that kind of imagery had me sensitive on the one hand to Sister Stokes, who, who, who didn't want me to think that I was uppity, on the one hand, and others who, who wanted to--us to get from under what I call the inferiority reference that is attached to our color and to our speech and to the things that we do.
Story_ID: 79594
Speaker 1: Now when you--when Reverend [C. David] Foster died unexpectedly, had he--had there been--how did you come to--'cause you are--were his immediate successor, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: How had that--had that been preordained?
Speaker 2: Well, for those of us who be--believe in providence, yes, without question, because I don't know what, what moved him to say to me, you know, you go ahead and you'll, you'll be somebody, and the Lord's gonna use you.  Well, you know, from all I'd seen and heard, I'll never forget I was a boy scout at one of the inaugurations of I think it was [President Harry S.] Truman.  And a white man said to me downtown, well, I know you're gon' be Republican when you grow up 'cause [President Abraham] Lincoln freed the slaves, you know.  And, and I, and I blinked at that.  Dr. Foster was a Republican, as was any black leader in that period who had any sense, that is, that is black people, I've learned, are very keen on politics.  They, they know which parties serve their interests in terms of income, education, healthcare, housing, and justice.  And Dr. Seadit--Dr. Martin Luther King, Sr.--was hard-time (unclear) become a Democrat because Democrats in the South were the social conservatives and racists, and they voted for Lincoln--I mean for the, for Republicans.  And so that when that kind of thing--I, I was in that tension because Dr. King--Dr. Foster--was a Republican.  Then, but when I, I became clear on the way things had shifted with [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who did some things with Democrats to provide income, education, healthcare, housing, and justice for our people, I found that we in the, the area were, were more inclined to be Democrats.
Story_ID: 79595
Speaker 1: Now, so how--do you remember--was there a church vote [at New Bethel Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] or how did it come that you were, you know--and your ah--at what age are you at this point?
Speaker 2: When I came back?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I was 25.
Speaker 1: So you're young.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was 25.  And the chairman of the Deacon Board, Edward Brent (ph.), who could not read, but was very faithful and whom I loved dearly, just--just said to the churches and all the people who called and said will you have us come by and let me preach and see if I can be the pastor, nope, said that's already done.  The Lord has laid his hand on this boy, and we, we have--so that was--it was a fait accompli, so it wasn't any problem.
Speaker 1: Do you remember when you first stood up in front of the congregation, how that felt?
Speaker 2: Without question.  Of course I was so comfortable by the time I was pastor.  I mean from the time I was 13, I, I was the bulletin board monitor, so I had to put up--you know, change the board every Monday and every Friday to get ready.  And Dr. [C. David] Foster was wise enough to say Walter, you come read the scripture, or you lead this song, so that, you know, I was--it, it was just a blessing.  I had, I had no problems in terms of adjustment, because it was just understood and, and, quite frankly, one of the reasons I never left the church.  I've been pastor for 44 years.  [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], after we did the March on Washington, was trying to persuade me to, to come to Atlanta [Georgia].  And I felt--I said Martin, I'd be very happy to do that, but I, you know, these people have invested so much.  I really--I can serve you best here (laughter).  And then when I got to the Congress, I'll never forget there--those who were political supporters and in the Congress who were saying you can't--you know, church and state have to be separate.  You have to leave the church because you can't serve both.  I said watch me (laughter).  And so, I've just been comfortable throughout.  And there have been those, of course, who're a little concerned about the amount of time that I've invested.  I had to invest, first in the neighborhood, because my first 20-year plan was a plan to somehow free us from urban removal.  And I--we, for 30 years, we staved off what is now happening here and in every major city around the country, as market forces are driving low and moderate income people generally and black people in particular, off of the valuable land in our cities.  But I--it took a lot of out of my time in pastoral ministry, and the church had been very generous about providing me paid staff, assistant pastors and ministers who do the, the, the nuts and bolts of the care of the parish, the visiting and the, the sick and the caring for the aging and so forth.  And they pull me in when, when it's necessary.
Story_ID: 79596
Speaker 1: Now when you were the [Washington] D.C. director for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: You say that Reverend [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], you know, tapped you to do that.  And I'm wondering, what are the things that you did during that period that you're, you know, proud of?  'Cause that happened 19--
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 2: He, he called me in '61 [1961].  And as his representative, in '61 [1961] I worked very hard on the, the Freedom Rides.  And so I had to talk with the head of the in--Interstate--Inter--Interstate Commerce Commission because it had a relevance to that function that's now subsumed under another agency.  I had, of course, talk to the Attorney General and all, all of that, and that was in '61 [1961].  In '62 [1962], we went to a place called Albany, Georgia, where we had a very wise and sophisticated police chief named [Laurie] Pritchett, who would not be as cooperative as Bull Connor and Jim Clark was later to be in Birmingham [Alabama] and in Selma [Alabama].  And, and through all those, those, those periods I was having to talk to the Attorney General, Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], and to key members of the House and Senate who were our supporters, I'll never forget the relationship that developed with Hubert Humphrey, just a jewel of a man during that period.  And that was only because I was asked to do that by Dr. King.  So those are the kinds of things that, that happened in that period.  The first major thing, of course, was the March on Washington, where I found myself thrust into the role of making the arrangements in Washington for the march, which had me working very closely with the Attorney General, Bobby Kennedy at that time, who was under great pressure from a group and a fellow by the name of Carl McIntyre, who after a while was--these were right-wingers in that period, and they were complaining that the government was putting on this march because we were working together to--for this--for the safety and the, the effectiveness of this, this nonviolent demonstration.  And that came out very well.  I, I'll never forget the, the relief that I felt when those buses were leaving town, row--just line after line after line.  It took a lot of organizing to get it arranged so that people could come in and go out in one day.  And I--you have to give Bayard Rustin, masterful organizer out of New York, a great credit for that, and quite frankly me, because I had to (laughter), to, to see to it that the toilets, and the parking places, and the--and all that were.  So I was very relieved.  I was relieved because I had the fear that if things went badly, they would say we should never have allowed that young man (laughter)--we (unclear) sure he could not have done it.  And I had the anxiety that if it went well, nobody would know it (laughter).  Everybody would have claimed it.  And that's what happened, but I was happy that it happened.
Story_ID: 79597
Speaker 1: So sir, I want you to take, take you back to that day [August 28, 1963 March on Washington].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I want you to describe sort of so as if someone were experiencing what actually happened that morning.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I, I was, of course, very uptight because of, of the destruction of the cable before and wondering whether or not other things were planned.  Secondly, I was a little tense about, about [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and the fact that, quite frankly, during the course of building up toward the march, there, there was tension between Dr. King and the other leaders.  There was a sort of resentment that this young man had done Birmingham [Alabama] and that had (unclear)--so that he was the, the focus of attention.  And they--because we wanted such a broad coalition, they made a decision that we'd be all day if everybody gave a long speech.  So what we wanna do--(unclear)--gonna divide nobody to speak longer than, than five or seven minutes.  And so we had the, the task of trying to figure out what Dr. King could say in seven minutes to sum up all of the, the drama of what had brought us to this day from Montgomery [Alabama] to Birmingham, Montgomery in '60--'55 [1955] and Birmingham in '63 [1963].  So we had spent the weekend in New York before trying to figure out what he would say.  And he just wanted some guy--some help.  And right up until the evening before, we said well, you know, you can't le--you got to do the, the canceled check piece.  The I've--the "I Have a Dream" has got to be done.  And so in frustration, we sort of left him.  We said look--I said to him there's no way in the world you're gonna cut it down to seven.  Do what the spirit says do, you know.  And he did and the world responded.  So I was, I was tense about that, whether or not, you know, they were going to try to stifle him, when he had a serious message, and a little worried about if anything happened, you know, I would get the blame (laughter), quite frankly.  The thing that had me uptight all night was all this work we've done, everything covered from, from buses to toilets to water and spe--fountains all over the place, and here we won't be able to hear.  And so that when that happened, when the, when the, when the sound came on (laughter), I, I was ready to go to sleep.  I was so relieved.  And what picked me up was to look out over that, that audience, look out over that crowd and feel the spirit of people, black and white together who were just caught up in, in this movement of, of brotherhood and sisterhood, made it a very wonderful afternoon for me--Mahalia Jackson singing "How I Got Over" (laughter) and then Martin's wrapping it up with that, that magnificent speech, and the, the, the feeling that we had, that we'd gotten over the hump and that inevitably now we were going to have what we'd all been dreaming about.
Story_ID: 79598
Speaker 1: And now, so The [Civil Rights] Movement was really sort of buoyed by that, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: And, and that's the year that the Voting Rights Act--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh, no, voting rights ha--in nineteen--
Speaker 2: That's a--
Speaker 1: --sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 2: That is another story.
Speaker 1: That is another--but wait, not--oh no, no, the Civil Rights Act passed in 1963.
Speaker 2: Yeah, let me tell you what that, that's--
Speaker 1: Okay, sorry.
Speaker 2: Let me tell you a little bit about that because the March on Washington was a classic example of the exercise of the First Amendment rights of peaceful assembly, to petition the government for a redress of grievances.  And I'll never forget talking to Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] about that, because he was concerned that you really don't want 100,000 people here because all the things that can be done, you know, to disrupt it and, and, and make the Movement look bad.  And I said but, Bobby, we have an opportunity to demonstrate to the world the, the master's wisdom of saying you can change things nonviolently by peaceably assembling, and petition the government for redress of grievances, and he bought it.  And the thing that was so wonderful about that day was that we did it; we pulled it off.  We'd gotten the attention of the American people, and it pricked the conscience of the American people with the discipline of, of the nonviolent expression there.  And so we went away from here sky high, until a month later when they, they bombed the church [16th Street Baptist Church] in, in, Birmingham [Alabama] and killed those children.  And I got the same, I got the feeling then that I got years later, when having been arrested to start what was called the Free South Africa Movement.  Nelson Mandela had been allowed to leave, and sanctions were imposed, and we were getting toward the point where they were about to end apartheid.  And right-wingers went crazy, just killing people.  Well, [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] said this is, this is--these are just the death throes of that movement, of the--of racial segregation and discrimination, when they killed the kids a month after this magnificent expression of the American dream.  And within a year, I stood in the--I sat in the East Room of the White House with Dr. King on July 2nd, 1964 [Civil Rights Act of 1964], one year to the day that we had assembled in New York and decided that we were going to put on this march in August of 1963.  And that was a great--so it was an up and down.  Sometimes I'm up, and sometimes I'm down, and sometimes I'm almost in the ground, but we kept saying yes, Lord.
Story_ID: 79599
Speaker 1: Now what was--can you also for history's sake sort of describe SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] at that time, you know, who was its key membership?  Was there dissension in the group in some respects, you know, between the, maybe the old line ministers and you know, and new ones like yourself, and you know, and, and at this time also organizations like SNCC and you know, are--I mean are, you know, playing a role in there?  So I'm just wondering if you can do a little bit of that.
Speaker 2: Let me give you two scenarios of what happened, one with respect to the ministers, and the other with respect to the young people.  The Southern Christian Leadership Conference was what it named--its name indicated.  We wanted to root with our movement in Christian faith and nonviolence, and we wanted to lead, so we called it a Southern Christian Leadership Conference.  And when we--and we wanted to base it in the church, the church because there were 24 million people meeting every week in 40,000 places across the country, black churches.  And so there was a communication network, plus it had the, the values taught of nonviolence, you know, through your personal life.  So, one of the first things we did, and that was my real first experience with [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] after he asked me to serve as his representative, was to go to the National Baptist Convention, U.S.A., Inc., the largest aggregation of black people in the country.  And our--the idea was that the church needs to come forth and support a Southern Christian Leadership Conference which seeks to project the values of, of faith into this segregation and discrimination experience.  And when we did, Dr. J.H. Jackson, who was the president of the National Baptist Convention, U.S.A., Inc., a Republican (laughter), and the con--and responsive to the fiscal conservatives, who didn't want big government taking their money and then redistributing it to take care of the old, the young, the sick, and the poor, was very resistant.  And we had a very painful experience in Kansas City [Missouri] that year, when a, a fight broke out, quite frankly, because the younger of us were pushing a fellow by the name of Gardner C. Taylor, brilliant prince of a preacher out of Brooklyn, New York, Concord Baptist Church.  And our appeal was to get a leadership that would support the movement for racial integration and freedom for this hu--from these humiliating For White Only signs.  And we were embarrassed and pushed off the stage.  And at that time, a group led by L. Venchael Booth of Cincinnati [Ohio], a Republican, decided we needed to have a Progressive National Baptist Convention.  And as a consequence, we started down the road toward mobilizing people who Dr. King had appealed to when the question was raised what can we do about segregation in Montgomery [Alabama], and asked the question that was asked of Ezekiel: Can these dry bones live?  The people said if the neck bone connected the head bone, and the head bone to the backbone, the backbone to the leg bone, and these bones walk around for a year, somebody's gonna hear the word of the Lord.  And that imagery was what was behind the theme of the movement, "We Shall Overcome."  Beat us with billy clubs, but we'll ca--we'll overcome; knock us down with fire hoses; bomb our churches on Sunday morning, and kill our children, but we shall overcome.  Because there's something within us that fire can't burn out, and that we got from the church.
Story_ID: 79600
Speaker 1: Now, with the young people, there was tension because it was never fast enough, you know, and, and no settlement was, was adequate.  If you're gonna take--not only take the For White Only signs, but, but give me that job that he has, and, and give me reparations now (laughter).  And it was a wonderful desire, but one that could not be responded to.  And so, the younger people, and I wish we had more like that today, wanted to be--to make their mark, and they wanted to have a role in changing the world their mamas brought 'em to (laughter).  And so, there was always that tension.  In fact, I was looking at a picture the other day, when in 1960 [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] met with a group of young people, included John Lewis [HM], and Marion Barry [HM], and a number of the young people who were the, the leaders of SNCC, who decided, we won't be a part of SCLC.  We'll form our own, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC].  So--(unclear)--we're not gonna pick up a brick and shoot, but, but we'll, we'll do that.  And so that, that little tension developed.  There was a little tension between us that reflected itself in them calling SCLC Slick and themselves Snick.  They called us Slick because we dressed in shirts and ties, you know, and were edumacated (laughter), and they were with the people (laughter).  So they're, they're uniform was, was blue jeans and the like, and--but it was just a--now that I look back about it, it was, it was, it was fun.  I wish, I just wish we had a generation and of young people today who, who decided as that generation did, that we're not gonna live out the rest of our lives humiliated by these For White Only signs, and we're gonna change it.  I wish we had a generation like that that said we're not gonna live out the rest of our lives seeing our brothers destroyed by, by crack, and cocaine, and, and, pot and pornography, and promiscuity.  And I'm looking for that generation to step forward, as we make our way home.
Story_ID: 79601
Speaker 1: Talk just--briefly talk about who, who were the key people you were dealing with?  Were you interacting--you were interacting a lot with Reverend [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.].  You were interacting with who else?  Were you interacting with Andy Young [Andrew Young, HM] or--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --Marion Barry [HM] or--I mean who were the people you were interacting with?
Speaker 2: In the, the period leading up to--there, there are two periods.  One was the, The Civil Rights Movement that, that climaxed with the Civil Rights Act of '64 [1964].  There I was interacting with, with a fellow named Bayard Rustin and the labor movement that was led by A. Philip Randolph that had become the conscience of, of the country in terms of access to income.  I was interacting, of course, with, with Martin and with [Rev.] Wyatt Tee Walker [HM].  And when Wyatt left with Andy Young, who was this nice fellow who had gone to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and who was from a middle-class community in New Orleans, who was a minister and just a jewel of a guy, I was dealing with a fellow by the name of, of Hosea Williams, who was a cross between SNCC and SCLC (laughter), in that he would take it to the street in a minute (laughter), and, and oh, I miss them so much.
Speaker 1: He was sort of a loose cannon, right?
Speaker 2: Well, yes and no.  He and [Rev. James] Bevel [HM]--you can't, you, you really can't, you can't understand the success that we had without the tension, the creative tension, that Hosie, as we used to call him, and Jim Bevel brought to those of us who wore shirts and ties and would have been (unclear) (laughter) at these universities, not that they hadn't been, but they, their emphasis was, you know, getting the people involved.  Bevel's insistence that, that now that they locked up Dr. King and locked up all the adults, we got to put the children in it (laughter).  And the children's box was one thing that, that Bevel understood and, and pushed us to.  And Hosie Williams, let me tell you a little story about that.  Because what happened was that after we got the Civil Rights Bill, Dr. King, Andy, Ralph [Abernathy], and I met with President [Lyndon B.] Johnson at the White House to thank him, of course, for a good year and for all that he had done in supporting our, our civil rights quest for--to take the For White Only signs down.  Then we said now, Mr. President, we must have, we must have a voting rights act, because we, we shouldn't have to go to the streets every time we want to change public policy.  Let us vote.  And Johnson's advice to us was that we need to give these white folks a little rest now, because they're uptight, you know, about--let, let's, let's go work on my Great Society program.  And we at the White House said no, Mr. President, we have got to, we've got to get a voting rights act.  And Hosea was--Hosie Williams, Hosea Williams was shining at the bit to go to Selma [Alabama], you know, where the SNCC people were being mistreated, and where we needed to go in there and straighten it out.  And so we launched a Selma movement that spring as soon as we left the White House and Johnson had said no.  And we got the thing going, and I was--where were we?  No, we were in Washington [D.C.] for a meeting, Martin, Andy, and, and I.  And we looked on television, and there Hosea was, leading the group across the bridge, and they were beating 'em up (laughter).  And so we had to rush down there 'cause Hosea was gonna--he wasn't gon' wait for us.  We're gonna have a march, and he and John Lewis [HM] and them came across that bridge.  And that's when we had to spring into action to, to really--and really, the same president who told us we'll not--I'll not introduce a bill in--at December of '64 [1964], by March of '65 [1965], had called a joint session of Congress and said we shall overcome; pass this bill of mine (laughter).  And on August the 6th, 1965, Dr. King and I sat in the East Room of the White House, watched Lyndon Johnson sign another piece of paper that sent federal registrars South to protect our right to register to vote.  And I owe that to the kind of, of SNCC/Slick [SCLC] combination that Hosie Williams (laughter) and his, his supporters, and his activists among the young people who were identified with SNCC brought us.
Story_ID: 79602
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's, that's good.  Now, tell me what your thoughts were about the--both either the candidate or/and the Johnson Administration.  You know, I--you hear different things.  You hear that--I mean recent, you know, that [Robert F.] Kennedy really was forced to do everything he did, that he--you know, that they weren't really as supportive.  And it was all, you know, sort of a farce, and that [President Lyndon B.] Johnson, on the other hand, you know, really was trying to do something right.  Is that--what are your thoughts on that on--
Speaker 2: Well, mine are, are colored by my experiences with them.  And my experience with Bobby Kennedy [Robert Kennedy]--he was the one with whom I had most interface--was such that I, I don't have that attitude.  Bobby was a kind of guy who saw things black and white, right and wrong.  And he was very upset about the kinds of things we were saying about the FBI.  There was a great tension between Bobby Kennedy and J. Edgar Hoover.  And the thing that I, I say about those who, who say you had to push the, the Kennedys is that yes, you had to push them, but they were pushable.  I tried to push [President Ronald] Reagan, and he was unmovable (laughter).  In short, they were not so fiscally conservative that they didn't want to use government to tax the wealthy, and redistribute their income as programs to provide assistance to those who were too old, too young, too sick, or too poor to have a decent quality of life.  So that, that was a difference.  Johnson was a real surprise, quite frankly, just as Justice [Hugo] Black had been a surprise when appointed to the Supreme Court.  And I can't say enough about President Johnson.  Again, it's personal, because he, he not only championed Home Rule for the District of Columbia, which was very dear to me, but also asked me to, to serve as the vice chair of something called the White House Conference to fulfill these rights.  And it afforded me personally an opportunity to come to understand the 14 functions of the federal government that decide who gets how much of what, when, and fair--where, and to put it in a kind of a comprehensive context that was, was really the, the basis for what became in my chairmanship with the Congressional Black Caucus the first constructive alternative budget of the caucus, which covered every function and integrated tax and, and fiscal policies, budget policies, in a fashion that you created jobs and, and a higher quality of life.  Johnson was a surprise, and the only thing that I would say negative about it was that we had to push him (laughter) to get the Voting Rights Act [1965].  But when he got the message, he got up there and gave a very--I was there--he gave a very moving speech.  He said, in effect, you know, I, I feel bad about what we've subjected these fellow citizens to, and we've got to change it.  And it went like [finger snapping] that, and within a matter of three months, the bill was passed, so that I have great appreciation for both, both of them.
Story_ID: 79603
Speaker 1: And now, with you, you're in, you are in the center of all this activity, I mean in the center, besides the marches that are occurring.  But you are doing this and activity with the church, or is it all just--
Speaker 2: It's all a reflection of, of the Sister [Mary] Stokes of the church [New Bethel Baptist Church] saying leave him alone.  He's doing the Lord's work.  And so, Reverend Ball, you visit the sick.  Reverend Jones, Reverend Wilson, you all help.  And everybody was comfortable with that.  And earlier I said to you that--when you asked me how my parents took the, you know, understood all of this, and I didn't understand it then.  But I graduated from Yale Divinity School [New Haven, Connecticut] in 1958.  In 1969, the president of Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], with the decision on the part of the board of trustees, decided to honor me with an Honorary Doctorate of Laws degree at Yale University.  Remember I was with then Secretary of State, whose name evades me right now, who was honored at the same time.  And knowing how, how I have aspirations for my children and the children of the church, I, I, I can't get over what I didn't understand then, but I understand now, how proud Sister Piper and Sister Epps, my church schoolteachers, were when they went up to Yale to see the fellow they had invested in, you know, get that honor, and how Willie [William Fauntroy] and Ethel [Vine Fauntroy], my mother and dad, who had struggled to raise eight children on one salary (laughter) with 11 people in the house, taking care of, of mommy--grandmommy and granddaddy, how they must have felt that, that their investment had yielded this dividend.  And by the same token, I'm, I am just as in--I am just determined that more parents will make investments in, in their young to get them out of the, the slippery slope that pot, pornography, and promiscuity had put our young people on in this year.
Story_ID: 79604
Speaker 1: Now I have--okay, I--when did--when Reverend [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated, when he was assassinated, that created somewhat of a, a leadership with--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: SCLC.
Speaker 2: Oh, without question.
Speaker 1: So what was--what--can you talk about the aftermath of--you know, but wait, before we do that, can you talk--where were you when Reverend King died?
Speaker 2: I was the vice chair of the City Council of the District of Columbia, appointed by President [Lyndon B.] Johnson on January--on December the 19th, 1967.  And I took the position after a long conversation with Dr. King and with others and in The [Civil Rights] Movement who were very concerned about this, this transition from pol--from protests to politics, one, and two, who were uptight about our growing alienation and dissatisfaction with Johnson's leadership on the war.  And so, Martin said, you know, you do what you want to do, but you know you're identifying with, with a force that's, that's really wrong.  So I, I was vice chair of the council, and we decided we're gonna have a, a poor people's campaign.  I'm the vice chair of the City Council of District of Columbia and gonna organize a poor (laughter) people's campaign in Washington.  So at the time that he was assassinated, I was in our office at 14th and U for the Poor People's Campaign, organizing as he had asked us to do.  And I'll never forget I was there over the protests of some of the people in the Johnson Administration, who, who were very incensed, as were members of Congress at that time, that a appointee of the president would be out here organizing these rabble, you know, to march on us.  And I had to tell them just what I'd said before and as I said later, the Lord is my shepherd.  You appointed me, you can disappoint me.  But I'm an ambassador from another kingdom, backed by the authority of the one who sent me (laughter).  And so they let me alone.  And I was awaiting Bernard Lafayette's arrival from Memphis [Tennessee], with some things that he discussed about what we needed to do to prepare for the Poor People's Campaign while they were finishing up in Memphis.  And the irony is that when I got the word, I was in a prayer meeting at the church.  And I rushed over to the office not far, and began calling around to see what, what had happened, 'cause y'all--all we got was that he was shot.  And by the time Bernard arrived, he did not know Dr. King had been killed.  And I remember that, that experience.  And shortly thereafter, after he arrived, we looked out the window and Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Toure] was bringing a group of people up 14th Street, going in and out of businesses closing 'em down.  And I was very concerned about that because things were getting up kind of hot around here and all.  I talked to Stokely about, you know, Dr. King wouldn't want this.  Let's not, not do that.  And things quieted down that night, although I had, as the vice chair of the council, to summon the police sidecar and run me through the various neighborhoods where problems were, were in danger of, of developing, urging people not to strike out in hatred and violence against people who were not responsible for Dr. King's assassination.  So I was in that, that man in the middle situation, as I had been, and have been, so many times.
Story_ID: 79605
Speaker 1: --sixty-four [1964], the [Civil Rights] Act; '65 [1965], Selma [to Montgomery Marches]; '65 [1965], the act on voting rights [Voting Rights Act of 1965].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So now we're ready to participate.  And [President Lyndon B.] Johnson's starting his second term.  I mean, you know he's--now he's (unclear) on his own, having been elected in '64 [1964].  He's now president for four years.  And he wants his mark to be that he not only presided over getting the For White Only signs down, but also he did some things with government to make sure that people who went to the restaurant could buy the hamburger or went to a hotel could, could check in, you know, check out 'cause they had the money.  And his idea was that to, to, to justify and rationalize what I want to do in terms of an OEO, in term of, of Pell Grants and guaranteed student loans and those kind of things.  I need a White House Conference [on Civil Rights].  It would be designed to fulfill these rights.  And key to that was a fellow by the name of M. Carl Holman.  Carl Holman was one those who labored in the vineyard, but seldom tasted the wine of our appreciation for his, his uncommon wisdom and understanding of the nature of our struggle.  Carl Holman was a member of the U.S. Civil Rights Commission, and had been director of the Civil Rights Commission, and became the chief operative staff-wise at the White House Conference to fulfill these rights.  He went on from there to, to found and do something called the National Urban Coalition, which was in an effort to address Watts [riots] and beyond.  I say Watts and beyond because when we left the White House on August the 6th, 1965, happy that we had the Voting Rights Act, the first thing we ran into were questions of [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]--what are you gonna do about Watts, that was burning at the time, at a time when the, the Stokely Carmichael, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], Black Power, Burn Baby Burn thing was developing.  And we were in a race to try to get some things done that would deal with income, education, healthcare, housing, and justice for people, lest it would explode, because expectations had been raised by the taking down the For White Only signs and the right to vote, which didn't produce money (laughter), such that we had to do something.  And so we went into '66 [1966] instructed by what had happened in Watts and what had happened in Detroit, in an effort to do our very best to fashion constructive Great Society programs that would make--that would raise the qua--the quality of life for people.  That's 1966.  In 1966 also, a fellow by the name of James Meredith, who understood why they killed Medgar Evers, and why they beat [James] Chaney, [Michael] Schwerner, and [Andrew] Goodman to death in Meri--Meridian, Mississippi, and in the Black Belt--said there's a residue of fear.  We've got federal registrars down here now to protect our right to vote, but people still are scared to vote or register, because they--these white folks will, will, will continue to lynch us.  So he [James Meredith] decided that he was going to have a March Against Fear.  He started in Memphis [Tennessee] and go straight down the highway to Jackson, Mississippi, and as he passed through the various jurisdictions in the Black Belt, he urged people to come out and register.  And so he took off on his own, marched from Memphis, got across the Mississippi State Line, and somebody shot him.  And Dr. King said we must pick up that march.  Walter, go down there and organize, you know.  You know, make sure that people can come.  And I said Martin, you know this is Mississippi.  It's not Alabama.  It's not Georgia.  You want me to go to Mississippi (laughter) where they killed those kids?  And--but he said in his inimitable way--man of great courage, and he had the courage of his convictions--the same thing he said when, when they, they, the provocateurs ruined the march in Memphis, we must go back and do it right, so we can't allow him, to hap--that to happen; we must pick up the march.  And we did.  And it was just an effort to follow up on the Voting Rights Act and to get our people involved.
Story_ID: 79606
Speaker 1: Now then, take us then into '60--is '67 [1967] when [President Lyndon B.] Johnson tapped you to be [Vice Chairman of the D.C. City Council]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: The early part of '67 [1967] or the middle?
Speaker 2: Late, late--
Speaker 1: Late.
Speaker 2: --part of '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Late in '67 [1967], okay.
Speaker 2: Because by that time, our disgust with the war in Iraq.  I meant to say in, invest in Vietnam (laughter).
Speaker 1: Vietnam (laughter).
Speaker 2: Our disgust--
Speaker 1: You don't wanna say that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: I hope that's not something to come, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, not, not hope, but any talk of it.  But we're going through some of the same thought patterns that [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] went through, when on, when on April the 4th, 1967, he gave a speech [Beyond Vietnam] that was later to cost him his life.  And he called upon the country and people of conscience to rise up and get us out of Vietnam, and use the money to deal with the problems that were causing the riots, you know, in, in Watts and, and elsewhere--so that, toward the end of that year, Joe Califano [Joseph A. Califano] from the White House called and said look, president wants to appoint you vice chair.  I said I gotta think about that.  And that's when I went through this, these discussions about whether or not for the sake of the district and my people here I should not take it and remain as vigilant as I've always been about who I am and whose I am.  And I made that decision to, to accept the vice chairmanship.  And not long after that, I was in the dilemmas whether or not I would organize (laughter) as I've been accustomed to doing, for the Poor People's Campaign, and I did.  It was a sort of funny position, but I did it.
Story_ID: 79607
Speaker 1: So now were you pleased or not pleased with the Poor People's Campaign [1968], how it came, came to--I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was determined that we were not gonna allow them to kill the dreamer [Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and get away with killing the dream.  That was our sort theme at that time - they've killed the dreamer.  They will not kill the dream.  So I, I wanted it to happen very badly, and we worked very hard.  But by that time, the nature of the provocateur, counterintelligence operations that was being run on us in the early '60s [1960s], had gotten very sophisticated.  And we had a time out there.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about that just a little bit?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let, let me just say that we developed in my subcommittee [Subcommittee on the Assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr.] (unclear) investigated the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. a case actually for negligent homicide, negligent homicide against the FBI generally and J.--J. Edgar Hoover in particular because of what they did to create a climate within which it was inevitable that somebody would try to take Dr. King out.  They crafted editorials and cartoons in the FBI office here, and fed them out to their favorite newspapers and reporters as things that they might want to see in editorials and in commentaries, and cartoons they might want to use, ideas.  And throughout the year in 1967, after his speech at Riverside on April 4th, he was under siege.  Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. is a danger to the American way.  He is, he is supportive of Communists.  He is doing their will, trying to get us out of Southeast Asia.  And that climate, as it--I became very much aware of it, and he was very, very much aware of it, at the same time that some people were pushing the Black Power, you know, forget all this nonviolence; let's fight.  So it was, it was very, a very difficult year for him.  And by the end of that year, '67 [1967], you can understand why he was very--had mixed emotions about my even being identified with, with that group in the White House.  And he went along with it.  And I promised that I would, you know, work as hard as if it--I were, you know, still the representative [director of the Washington Bureau for the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SNCC)], and I did.
Story_ID: 79608
Speaker 1: And--but were you--the only reason I'm asking, when we interviewed Ernest Green [HM] the other day, he said that he almost cried when he saw the Poor People's march when he went out there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you know, came--he said that he, he, he had gather himself up and you know, and he then ended up sleeping there.  But he had to gather himself up first.
Speaker 2: Sure, I--let me tell you what he was talking about.  I told you I know a little bit about counterintelligence and, and the COINTELPRO [Counter Intelligence Program] program run on us.  And quite frankly, they not only gathered some people who were certifiably committable (laughter) to mental institutions around the country, and encouraged them to go to Washington [D.C.], but I think they had some people who, who were there for the purpose of disrupting.  I'll never forget we had a wonderful group of Catholic nuns who were preparing food.  And they were particular--these people were particularly abusive to them.  I remember--and of course the weather didn't help us.  I mean it just rained and rained, and, and we were sticking in the mud (laughter) week after week.  And then three months later they killed Bobby Kennedy [Robert Kennedy].  And someone, it was Sren Kierkegaard who said that "despair is the sickness unto death," and people were in despair, and nothing works, nothing works.  They've killed our leaders; they kill one by one.  By that time, [Rev. Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] had gone; Malcolm  [X] had gone; and now Bobby.  After June the 5th, 1968, and Bobby Kennedy's assassination, we went into depression, I mean almost around the country.  As an experienced minister, I can tell you that when people--there are four stages to grieving--grief.  One is shock, and then there's anger that this would happen to my loved one, and there's depression, and then finally there's acceptance of what has happened, let's go on.  After the assassination of Bobby Kennedy behind Malcolm, Martin, and [President] John [F. Kennedy], we got quickly through the shock of it, but the anger, you know, good men gone because they were trying to help us.  And the anger and bitterness was such that, that it was hard.  We just said close the camp up and leave.  (Laughter) And I'll never forget how happy I was when we closed it up.  Because I, I, I wasn't sure what would happen and had--and if I knew then what I later learned when I did my investigation of Dr. King's assassination, I would, I would have gotten out much (laughter) earlier--so that, we went through a long period of anger that then deepened into depression.  And I cannot help but think that the, the drug epidemic that hit us in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s], was a function of our collective depression.  And I'm hopeful that we're out of it now and can accept what, what happened, and are determined as it can be that it will never happen again.
Story_ID: 79609
Speaker 1: Now what--so the Poor People's Campaign ends.  That's what--is that 196--
Speaker 2: That's 1968--
Speaker 1: Nine--
Speaker 2: --toward the end of '68 [1968].  Actually--
Speaker 1: Was it 1969?  No.
Speaker 2: No, no, it was April, and let me tell you what happened.  We were going to be in Washington [D.C.] in April in '68 [1968], when we decided to go through Memphis [Tennessee] where there was a group of poor people, garbage workers who were being mistreated.  So we wanted to address the poor people's issues in against that context.  And when provocateurs disrupted it, and some people knowing [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] would always go back to try to get it done right--and we went back and he was killed--we decided we're gonna, we're gonna go through with this thing anyhow.  So we left Memphis after the funeral and everything was done and came to Washington in late April.  And the first month or so was, was nice.  I mean it was--we were building those nice people, and people were, were moving in.  And then they killed Bobby Kennedy, and things went downhill.  And through the rest of 1968, we were in shock and anger.  And the anger spilled over into the defeat of Herb--of, of [Hubert] Humphrey for president by [President Richard] Nixon.  And by 1969, when we had two million new black voters on the poll--on the roles, because of the Voting Rights Act, and blacks were being elected into Congress, like nine members who later performed the Congressional Black Caucus, the decade of the '70s [1970s] ushered in a year--a decade--where we began to recover by meaningful participation in the political area.  In 1965, there were only six black mayors in the country.  But after two million new veters--black voters, we had 60 black mayors.  We had only 600 black elected officials in 1965.  By 1972, when we were doing the Congressional Black Caucus, we had over 2000 black elected officials.  And so our frustration was beginning to express itself in meaningful political action and electoral politics augmented by a ber--battery of programs, like guaranteed students loans for those who had the minds, but not the money to go to college, like Medicaid, healthcare for the sick-poor, like the OEO, which provided not only organizing, but training, CEDA programs.  Those kind of things were coming along, and we were beginning to, to recover until Newt came along, until, until we had a change in control of who gets how much of what, when, and where in the Congress of the United States.
Story_ID: 79610
Speaker 1: And you--now, you became a member of [D.C.] City Council, right?
Speaker 2: I was appointed city councilman.
Speaker 1: Appointed.
Speaker 2: By [President Lyndon B.] Johnson.
Speaker 1: After--okay.
Speaker 2: In '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: In '67 [1967], at the same that you were made, you know, you became vice chairman ?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They, they happened simultaneously?
Speaker 2: Simultaneously.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause Johnson could appoint.  We couldn't elect here, so he appointed me and I was a vice chair.  And Walter Washington was, was appointed to be the mayor-commissioner.  And we were to act like a council, but we, we could--didn't have the powers.  And I stayed there for, for a year and a half as vice chair until [President Richard] Nixon was elected behind Bobby Kennedy [Robert Kennedy]'s assassination.  And I left the council because he wasn't gonna, he was not gonna appoint (laughter) me to be the vice chair, and began a process of working with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] to get our people registered and voting in a place called Florence, South Carolina, where the chairman of the district committee had hailed for 33 years, 22 years of which he had been chairman of the district committee and refused to consider Home Rule.  And when we made an effort there and failed to get Home Rule, President Nixon signed a bill creating an office in the, in the Congress of Delegate, a person who would have all the powers of a member of Congress except a vote on the floor.  And I ran for that position because I knew a member of Congress had something called the frank, that is the ability to sign his name on a piece of paper and have envelopes reproduced with that name, and you could send mail all over the country free.  So I won the, the delegate seat.  And since I'd kept the names of tens of thousands of people whom I'd organized to come for Washington to march and for Selma to march, like, I was able to write them.  And it helped a great deal to communicate--to set up a communications network that was under the radar screens, because they were, they were determined by that time that there would never be another [Rev. Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr., a personality in the black community who could pull together these disparate interests from the young to the old to the, to the educated and uneducated as he did.
Story_ID: 79611
Speaker 1: Now who was also emerging at this period of time?  You have Reverend [Jesse L.] Jackson [HM] emerging up in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Without question.
Speaker 1: You have Julian Bond [HM] elected to the state.  Well, he--right, the--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --city-state legislature.  You have in the voting, in the voting area, who was, you know, who was registering?  I know--
Speaker 2: Well, we had, we had something called the Vernon Jordan [HM]--first of all, John Lewis [HM] and then Vernon Jordan led the--
Speaker 1: FE--no, F--no, VEP--
Speaker 2: VEP--
Speaker 1: --Voter--
Speaker 2: --Voter Education Project [VEP].  And we were rolling in getting people registered, and people of African descent got energized in New York.  They elected Shirley Chisholm to the Congress; in, in Cleveland [Ohio], Lou Stokes [Louis Stokes, HM]; in Missouri, Bill Clay [William Clay, HM]; in, in California, Ron Dellums [Ronald Dellums, HM]; in--and in New York, of course, Charles [B.] Rangel [HM]; and of course we had [Augustus F.] "Gus" Hawkins [HM] out in, in California as well; you had Ralph Metcalfe.  You know I love being the congressman here because he was, you know, fast (laughter), and you know he had been Jesse Owens' cohort--so that things were beginning to happen, and we were beginning to come out of the depression that had gripped us at the end of the decade of the '60s [1960s].  And Ossie Davis [HM] sort of set it up for us at our first Congressional Black Caucus dinner, when he said give us a plan of action, a black ten commandments that we can carry in our hearts and reach out and touch and feel the assurance that's behind everything that we do, a simple, moral, intelligent plan, so that even if our leaders one by one fall in battle, someone will stand up at the funeral and say, brothers and sisters, our leader died, but while we were on page three of the plan.  Now that, that the funeral is over, let us proceed to page four, because it's not the man now, it's the plan.  And people acted on that, and the number of black elected officials exploded in terms of that kind of activism in the decade of the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: And the caucus played a, a critical role in many ways.  These beginning days there had not been a--the idea of a caucus had not even existed, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  And once we did that, it was just beautiful.  People got a new vision and new hope.  And so there were state caucuses.  We each had formed something called the Joint Senate for Political Studies.  And it became the catalyst for putting together what we call NBCLEO, the National Black Caucus of Local Elected Officials and NBCSL, the National Black Caucus of State Legislators.  And you began to get black caucuses in the state, in the State Houses of the country and in the cities.  So that was a very hopeful period, and one which was, was brought out of the production end of it, some policies, public policies that enabled the upward mobility of many people into decent housing, better quality education, better health, and, and at least a better shot at justice, although on all four of those things we've now gone backwards in recent years.
Story_ID: 79612
Speaker 1: Now, can you talk or give any more stories about the caucus and the role that it played, some of the important things it did in you know, in--
Speaker 2: Oh, I certainly can.
Speaker 1: --those early years?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Let me say that, that we owe a great debt of gratitude to Congressman Charles Diggs.  Charlie had--was the senior member of the group that formed the Congressional Black Caucus in the 92nd Congress in 1971.  And Charlie was--had been there with Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] and with [William Levi] Dawson and the like, and he understood the Congress well enough to suggest two things to us that worked very well.  One was that we need to spread our member out among the standing committees of the House, so that we would have input, not only, on welfare (laughter), but also on banking, on armed services, on commerce, on, on education.  And so we began the system in that first year of getting our members positioned on committees so that we could bring collectively together what is in view and what needs to be done in those areas to increase, for our people, income, education, healthcare, housing, and justice.  And in order to sort of focus on that, Charlie Diggs, with the help of Dick Hatcher [Richard G. Hatcher, HM] and Imamu [Amiri] Baraka, put together in 199--72 [1972] the National Black Political Convention.  I had the privilege of sharing--serving as the issues chair for that and had the joy of working with a young man by the name of Dr. Ron Walters [Dr. Ronald W. Walters], who was a professor at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] then, who has now become just a wonderful asset to those of us who have followed his movement over these years.  And we began to focus on public policy, and we began seeing our people organize mimicking the Congressional Black Caucus at the local level.
Speaker 1: And, 'cause I, you know, I, I know that we had done a project in, you know, in state, and they were talking about how they mirrored them--themselves after the Congressional Black Caucus.  Now what things--let's look at the, you know, sort of the '70s [1970s], '70s [1970s], you know, early '80 [1980].  Those were--were those our Republican years?  No, the Republican years started in--
Speaker 2: They started with--well, let me--I'll give you the history now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The decade of the '70s [1970s] started out with Richard Milhous Nixon in the White House.  There, because progressive voters had been so demoralized and confused that we didn't support a progressive for president.  And I'll never forget not long after I was elected to Congress in 1971 for the Congressional Black Caucus, I was leading a demonstration at the Washington Monument, at which I had my son [Marvin Fauntroy], then eight years old, to read a statement.  And kids were around there saying Nixon doesn't care.  And they were saying that because the new policies were first of all, I'm not gonna take care of crazy people; put 'em out on the streets, huh.  And so we began to get this homelessness of people who really needed care.  You had cuts in the Great Society programs, Pell Grants, guaranteed student loans, the Medicaid idea that fiscal conservatives in both the Democrat and Republican parties were saying don't tax us and redistribute our income to take care of these old people, these young people, these sick people, and these poor people.  And so we had a serious cutback in those programs.  And the struggle was to try to hold the ground that we had gained.
Story_ID: 79613
Speaker 1: You, you were just describing the, you know, the '70s [1970s] and what happened, and that, you know, why the--you know, that there were starting to be cutbacks--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, like the Pell Grants and things like that.  So, let's see, he served Nix--oh, [President Richard] Nixon was in just one term, though, right?
Speaker 2: He was in--yes, he was in one term--one term and a half.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Because what happened was--
Speaker 1: People felt--
Speaker 2: --he, he won by a landslide in '72 [1972], but only after the, the Watergate [scandal] thing had, had surfaced.  And the next two years he went down.  And [President Gerald] Ford, of course, was elected to carry out the same policies.  And into that picture came a Southern governor [President Jimmy Carter] who understood the new arithmetic of black political power.  He decided he was gonna run for president beginning at the Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, Georgia, where he went to put his arms around Martin Luther King, Sr., and said daddy, I wants to be president.  And at that point, two million black voters would become active in the South alone, said we like him.  And he recognized that if he got that vote, the South would vote for a Democratic president for the first time since Strom Thurmond left the Democratic Party in 1948 because of [President Harry S.] Truman's activism on desegregating the military and the feeling that the Democratic Party was, was no longer socially conservative.  But he, he got that, he got that over that people who had been voting for Lincoln in New York, and in the South, and in Cleveland, which takes Ohio, in Pittsburgh and Philadelphia, which determines where the electors go in Pennsylvania, in Cook County [Chicago], which determines where the electors go in Illinois, decided we're gonna vote for him because he seems to be sensitive to our need for five things, income, education, healthcare, housing, justice, and he became president.  And a president appoints 102,000 people to cabinet level positions that determine who gets how much of what, when, and where.  And in the first years of the Carter Administration, we had the privilege of having key people in the Department of Commerce, particularly in Small Business Administration, key people in the Department of Health and Human Services, key people in the Department of Education, who became responsible for trying to implement and guide federal expenditures into areas where low and moderate income people, generally in black people in particular, needed help.
Story_ID: 79614
Speaker 1: And then what happened?  What--why, why did people feel that--so, these things were happening.  That's all positive for the black community.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I felt I, I was very much involved at that time in getting Home Rule for the District of Columbia, which really happened under [President Richard] Nixon.  And then Andy [Andrew Young, HM] had come to the Congress, and Andy had become very important to the, the [President Jimmy] Carter strategy for getting, you know, the Southern vote.  And when he was elected in 1976, Andy went to the United Nations, and we began to attempt to mobilize the kind of governmental infrastructure persons who could deliver on why people had voted.  And of course, the thing that disappointed most of us, many of us, about Carter was the fact that he cut Andy lose because of his efforts to resolve, by nonviolent means, the Middle East conflict by at least talking to the PLO [Palestinian Liberation Organization].  And that, that blow when he, he and Cyrus Vance made a decision that Andy had to go was the beginning of great disappointment with Carter and with what has become known as the DLC, people who, in the Democratic Party, not a structured part of the party, but in the party, formed a Democratic Leadership Council that was pushing the party more toward the fiscal conservative view.  Now fiscal conservatives are those who want to conserve and preserve their favored position in the economic order, and they didn't want to be taxed and have the government redistribute their money to provide these things for low and moderate income people.  And that shift began.  It continued because of the fiscal conservative dominance that emerged with the election of [President] Ronald Reagan after Jimmy Carter's defeat and this strange Iranian thing [Iran Hostage Crisis 1979-1981] had went on and on and on until after (laughter) he was defeated, and then got resolved.  And you have to hang that out on the closed mind--line--of your mind that, that the Holy Spirit blow over it before you get to understand what I just said (laughter).
Story_ID: 79615
Speaker 1: But, now, I wanna address one of the things.  So you are--are you what you would call a shadow congressman?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: You're a congressman?
Speaker 2: I was--wait a minute.  I was a congressman for 20 years.
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: --and--
Speaker 1: --but you couldn't vote.
Speaker 2: --I couldn't--no, I couldn't vote on the floor.
Speaker 1: Floor--what does--okay.
Speaker 2: But I had all the other powers of a member of Congress, which means I had seniority.  So I loved the seniority systems, 'cause the longer I stayed, the better I liked it.  I, I was--I rose to be chair of a subcommittee on domestic monetary policy, which had responsibility of overseeing for the Congress the functions of the Federal Reserve Board.  So I learned a little bit about monetary policy, and the Open Market Committee, and increasing the money supply, creating wealth for the wealthy every month.  I was chairman of a subcommittee on international development, finance, trade, and monetary policy, which gave me a great understanding of what, what was going on in South Africa.  And that against the background of what other members of the caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] were learning enabled us to produce during my chairmanship the first Constructive Alternative Budget of the caucus that covered every function, and was really the dream of, of Charlie Diggs come true.
Speaker 1: Now just let me understand.  Because you couldn't vote on the floor, does that mean in critical times you couldn't make a difference?
Speaker 2: Na--yeah, that's, that's precisely--but it's rarely that anything is decided by one vote.  My forte in the Congress was that I had the frank and that I could work for the caucus organizing people in congressional districts to support members of Congress who supported caucus agenda.  And one of the reasons I left was that after the black vote in five states took the Senate from [President Ronald] Reagan in 1986 and caused Strom Thurmond to step down as chair of the Judiciary Committee, and Ted Kennedy to step up as chairman and to hire a young man named Ron Brown to be staff director of judiciary, and because every Republican fiscal conservative staff person had to leave the Senate while Democrats were--people were a little upset and they figured out the best way to handle this is to pass the Fauntroy substitute, or Faunt--Fauntroy Amendment, which was, in effect, no member should be able to write into another member's district with his frank.  If you're gonna write into other people's districts, you spend the money out of your pocket.  Well, I'd been sending millions of letters (laughter) out.  No way in the world I was gonna do that.  And I didn't wanna be a eunuch at an orgy.  I mean I didn't want to be in a, in a body where I had no, no ability to affect others.
Story_ID: 79616
Speaker 1: Now, at this--when did, when did Marion Barry [HM] become the mayor [of Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Marion Barry became mayor in 1978--
Speaker 1: Oh, so it (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --toward the end of--
Speaker 1: --making his--
Speaker 2: --the decade of the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And he as the second mayor, and the first mayor from The [Civil Rights] Movement.  It makes a difference when you have mayors from The Movement.  Maynard Jackson was a mayor from The Movement.  And more blacks are doing business at, at that airport than anywhere in the world because he was in charge of who gets how much of what, when, and where.  Harold Washington, magnificent former colleague, who having taken [Ralph] Metcalfe's seat here when Metcalfe died, prepared to run for mayor of Chicago [Illinois] and made a difference.  Marion Barry, when he was elected, made the difference.  Before Home Rule, only three percent of the government's contracts in the District of Columbia went to African Americans.  After 10 years of Home Rule, and largely due to the activism of Marion Barry, 33 percent of the contracts went to people of African descent, which meant that you, you, you improve the quality of life and upward mobility for a great many people.
Story_ID: 79617
Speaker 1: So that was happening toward the end of the decade of the '70s [1970s], and it didn't begin to wane until after a new, a pharaoh who knew thy Joseph became president in 1981 in, in [President] Ronald Reagan.  And he began to implement a, a package of public policies based on three faulty theses.  The first was that the poor have too much money, and so they cut 280 billion dollars out of programs that were meeting the needs of the old, the young, the sick, and the poor.  They said the rich have too little money, and so they fashioned tax policies that gave the top five percent income earners of the country 35 percent of all the tax relief, 750 billion dollars in tax relief on the theses that they would reinvest that in new plan and equipment, and put the American people to work.  What they did was to convert their dollars to yen, and marks, and francs, and rubles, and rand and invested in cheap labor around the world, and the jobs began to leave here rapidly.  And of course, the first jobs to leave were the jobs that we had.  And then he did a great favor to the very rich of the world by increasing our deficit spending, our deficit by 2.3 trillion dollars over a five-year period.  A investment in a T-Bill is the most secure investment that a rich person can make, because the federal government, if you buy their bills, they will hold up the whole country in tax (laughter)--taxes--to pay you back your in--your, your, your interest.  And what happened thereafter was, of course, that with 60 percent of the world--of the, the money available for, for economic expansion invested in the government spending, that left only 40 percent out there for small businesses and people who would generate income for people to deal with.  And when the supply of a product is tight and the demand for it is high, the cost of it's going to be high.  So we had the high interest rates, and our economy sort of went south for low and moderate income people.  But for the wealthy of the world and of this country, who were getting the tax breaks and converting them to cheaper labor markets abroad, they were having a field day.  And that's why you saw this growing gap between the poor and middle class and the very rich of the country.
Story_ID: 79618
Speaker 1: Now did you work very closely with Marion Barry [HM] during those sort of, you know, golden days?  Did you work--
Speaker 2: I worked with him--I--my work was on the Hill [Capitol Hill].
Speaker 1: Your work was--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: on the--
Speaker 2: --primarily and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --try to protect what decisions were--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --being made, and we didn't have much of a problem.  I did--recognizing that when you are effective in spreading income, education, and health, and housing to the least of these, people go after you on how you handle PM and S.  I'm not, I'm not--I'm talking about power, money, and sex.  And so he was scrutinized very carefully in terms of power and money, and some of his finest operatives were arrested and jailed.  And when they couldn't get him on P and M, they went after him on S.  And it was a very painful period for all of us.  It's painful for me because I recognized that if you're gonna keep people doing what [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] said, and that is the most important step that oppressed people can take, is a short walk to the ballot box.  If you're gonna keep them involved in politics, you've got to show them something at the, the other end of the tunnel.  Something's got to come out.  And when things stopped coming out in terms of income, education, health care, housing for me and my family, then many of our people began to turn off in the decade of the '80s [1980s] and now '90s [1990s] to politics and left the field to the fiscal conservatives who want to preserve their favored position in an economic order, and the social conservatives who want to preserve their favored position in the social order, namely with whites, free, and twenty-one--so that we're in the midst of a great struggle right now to balance things out and to respond to a situation where fiscal conservatives are back together in control of the policies of the country the way, the way they were for the first half of the ni--of the 20th century, when Southern Democrats and Conservative Republicans ran the country.
Story_ID: 79619
Speaker 1: Now, you--in the last 12 years where have you been focusing your efforts and to--(unclear) the Congress?
Speaker 2: I have been focusing both what, what I've always done, on my city [Washington, D.C.] and my neighborhood, and on networking to empower our people through the political process.  I sort of got stuck on that when [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] asked me to, to help with the Voting Rights Act march and with lobbying the Congress.  So I got--so I'm very clear on that.  So I, I am now president of the National Black Leadership Roundtable.  And it's composed of the heads of about more than 200 national organizations who were put together by me as chairman of the brain trust on black voter participation when I was in the Congress, in the caucus.  And our aim now is to fashion a massive nonpartisan voter education, voter registration, and to get out the vote effort over the next two years, to make sure that we get back in the game and begin to balance out the politics of the country which are now unfortunately for us, securely in the hands of fiscal conservatives and social conservatives in both the Democrat and Republican Parties.
Story_ID: 79620
Speaker 1: Now do you--when you look back on this last 40--50 years, and I know early you were saying that the area around this church [New Bethel Baptist Church] is--has been reminiscent of the times of slavery, and what I'm wondering, or what I'm trying to ask is what, what do you--I mean do you have regrets at all, or do you, do you have regrets about where things stand for black people right now, and do you have any view about what happened, what went wrong?  Though you've been very clear and, and--I mean the clearest description that I've heard of what things have impacted, you know, issues, you know, on what the, what, you know, as we move through the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] (unclear) '80s [1980s] what was happening.  So that's a very clear description you've posed, but from a personal standpoint, as someone who has dedicated their life to the improvement of the condition of, you know, of black people, what do you look--I mean sometimes I feel that it's worse.
Speaker 2: Well, let me assure you that it is worse.  The quality of one's life is determined by five things: how much income he has, how much education he and his children get to make money, how much healthcare to live long enough to enjoy it, how much housing or shelter from the elements, and how much justice, so that if you have the income, education, and healthcare, and housing, nobody can take it from you with impunity.  And the fact is that we are in many ways worse off now than we were 50 years ago.  We are at the bottom of the barrel in terms of income, education, healthcare, housing, and justice in this country, on the continent of Africa, and in the Diaspora.  And I would be discouraged, had I not gone through these experiences and come to believe as [Rev. Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] believed, that we shall overcome.  Now we got a lot more to overcome.  One of the things that most distresses me is that I spent a lifetime trying to get us to refer to our men as Mr. and our women as Ms., and lady and gentlemen.  And we have a culture that's telling our boys you are Snoop Dogs and Bow Wows and call your women B's and, and hoes, which has resulted in a kind of vicious cycle that has most of the children on this block around this church living in homes where the mother is not married to the father, nor is he in the home.  When a boy grows up in a home where, where the father's not there to teach him how to play ball, to teach him how to be a man, he resents that.  And if the only time he sees that man is when he comes and beats up the woman who's taking care of him, he hates that man.  But he can't beat that big man up, but he can transfer his hostility to his peers, other boys.  And I've been greatly distressed at the extent to which our young men can gun down one another without a pang of conscience because of, because of the sins of the fathers, the fathers are visited to the third and fourth generations of them that hate me.  And when a little girl grows up without a man in the house to teach them, to them you're the sweetest little girl in all the world, you miss that for 13 years, and the first man that comes along and says baby I love you, she's gone.  So we have a vicious cycle of teen pregnancy and, and children rearing children.  And, and at a time when the public is not making the investment in the education of the least of these, public education is their only hope.  I would not be here had not we had--had we--not we had public--I would've had to get into a lottery see (unclear) I might get into a school that would teach me the three R's and teach me enough to make it in this life.
Story_ID: 79621
Speaker 1: So I'm, I'm discouraged.  I'm discouraged that Africa is dying, dying from AIDS and dying from the, the repeated use of religion and race as excuses for taking the resources from under the people there and sharing not enough of it with them--so that, as I said, when you look across this country and look across Africa, people of African descent get the neck of the chicken and the rumble seat ride.  You may not know about that, but I didn't know a chicken had breast until I was about 15 years old because I never saw--I saw the chicken neck and the back, you know.  And I know you wouldn't know anything about a rumble seat ride.  But when I was a kid, I remember cars that had a, had a little thing you pull out the back like the trunk, and you sat in the rumble seat.  The, the, the real people sat up front, and your rumble seat you ride, ride the back.  We ride in the back in Africa, and in the Diaspora, and in the United States in terms of income, education, health care, housing, and justice, and I could run some statistics now that suggest very strongly.  And even at this point, in this year, in the midst of a economic recession, income is rising for whites and other minorities, but it's dropping for us.  And I just feel that we've got to raise a generation of young people who on their watch will say what we said on ours.  I'm not gonna live out my life at the bottom of the barrel.  I'm gonna do what I can with others of goodwill, black, and white, and red, and brown, and yellow together to, to lift our people.  And I think it will happen.
Speaker 2: You felt--you feel positive about that?
Speaker 1: I, I feel it--I, I'd--sometimes I feel discouraged when I see kids walking around with the, the prison garb.  You know, this drug thing that started in the '70s [1970s] has ended up with, with half our young men in jail.  And I joke about the, the pants, no belts and like.  When you're in jail, you don't--(unclear) for belt 'cause you might hang yourself.  So you walk around without a belt and let your pants drop, and then you make it a style when you come out (laughter).  Well, I'm just--but I, I do, I like to see things in order, and I want to see our young people get it in order.
Speaker 2: Now do you think that the, do you think that black people themselves are at fault in any way?
Speaker 1: Oh no, I, I, I--yes, we're at fault for falling for the game.  When I was in high school, I read something in Chaucer's, something that said, that the apparel oft proclaim the man--the apparel oft proclaims the man."  And there are those who calculate to have clown suits for the least of these.  It's an industry, and it's targeted to create the mindset that will not value education, health care, housing, and justice, and gets us in trouble in those areas, so that I am disgusted.  And every time as a kid I was disgusted.  Why all the, why all the liquor stores in our neighborhood, huh?  I go to other neighborhoods, you--people not hanging around, you know, drinking Wild Irish Rose.  Why are all the drug-infested places in our neighborhoods, when I know most of the people who use it are in 'nother in other neighborhoods--and come in here to pick it up, you know--in an industry that is destroying our families, destroying our neighborhoods, destroying our schools?  So we've got a lot of work to do, and don't talk me into being despair now.  We're gonna make it (laughter) because there are young people who are going to see what you do and decide I can do it too.  And--
Speaker 2: Do you think that new problems deserve new solutions or new approaches?
Speaker 1: You know, I'm very clear on that too.  There's nothing new under the sun.  What everybody has always--I heard someone the other day say that the history of mankind is the account of one's struggle to get his daily bread, period.  Everybody in every generation needs five things (laughter) for himself and for his family: income, education, healthcare, housing, and justice.  And people use racism and religion as excuses for gettin' it for themselves and denying it to other people.  And politics is a process of determining who gets how much of what, when, and where in those five areas.  And so [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was right.  The best thing you can do is become involved in a nonviolent process for affecting public policy.  Take up the sword and you're gonna get hurt, particularly if you got a .22 pistol going after a tank.
Story_ID: 79622
Speaker 1: I believe that, that the black church is the hope of our people.  Religion is a unifying system of values that gives meaning and purpose to one's life.  And I don't know what we would have done without weekly meetings to remind us that though the world said we're not equal to and less than, and you cannot become, that we are somebody.  And if we invest the time and give the vision to our young people what, what can be, it'll make a difference.  And that's why we chose to be a Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC] and to tie ourselves to that once a week meeting, where people are reminded that you're a child of God and that whatever anybody else can do, you can do, you can do it if you put your mind to it.  It's important in this era because there's a reason that politicians show up at black churches on the Sunday before the Tuesday election.  It's because they know that you've got a block of people who have been tutored every week about the importance of taking care of the least of these.  And if I can get their votes, I may win.  And so I'm hopeful that the black church will be, remain as relevant as it was in the '60s [1960s] for civil rights in this era when we need more than ever to get our people to vote.  We need to get so many people to the polls in 2004 that they won't be able to chad and, and, and chads and, and throw out ballots and, and refuse to count the marginal vote as they did in Florida or in a number of other states.  Florida was surface, but there were a lot of states where the black vote was suppressed and where I'm confident they said don't count 'em.  Don't count 'em because they might get in a position to determine who gets how much of what, when, and where.  They might get a mayor who will do what Marion Barry [HM] did.  They might get a mayor who did--who will do what, what Maynard Jackson and, and Harold Washington did.  They might get a black lobby in the Congress that would feed on the fact that blacks are the marginal vote if they turn out in 142 congressional districts across the country.  And if we turn out, there will be good news, not just for black people, but for all of low and marginal income people, the country generally, and poor whites in particular who have been fooled by the fiscal conservatives into thinking that more important is social conservatism, maintain your status and in your poverty, so long as you don't have to be bothered with them, these people you see on BET [Black Entertainment Television].
Story_ID: 79623
Speaker 1: Now, Reverend Fauntroy, you have been--you know, people there are ministers and yet there are--I don't--what--how would you describe your career, because you have been as much involved in social change, you know, which is not always the role--what I'm asking--maybe I should ask about the role of the black minister, because--
Speaker 2: Yes, okay, I will--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let me put it this way, Mr. Say ain't nothing.  Mr. Do is the man.  And I'm a part of the Abraham federation, that is every Jew, every Muslim, every Christian claims to be a part of the Abraham federation.  Abraham is the father of the faith, we will all agree.  Moses is the lawgiver, we all agree.  They were not 10 suggestions.  They were 10 commandments - thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not commit adultery.  Those are not suggestions.  They were commandments to which all of them say we believe and, and say we, we adhere.  All of them believe, with Isaiah, that we are anointed of God to declare good news to the poor, to bind up the brokenhearted and set at liberty them that are bound.  And we as Christians say the master said when this warfare of life is over, the question will not be how many sermons you preached, how many, how many songs you sang in the choir, what kind of designer clothes you wore to church.  The question would be when I was hungry, did you feed me?  When I was thirsty, did you give me a drink.  When I was sick and imprisoned, did you come to see about me, because as much as you did it, not unto the least of these, you did it not unto me.  That is the gospel.  And that is what every Jew, every Christian, every Muslim is supposed to be about.  He has shown the old man what is good and what that the Lord require of you, but to do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with your god, and to be concerned about the least of these, 'cause if you don't, the god who you serve is gonna tell you to go to hell.  I mean go--is to depart from me, because when I was hungry, you didn't feed me.  So the problem with some ministers, and there are jackleg preachers in Islam who blaspheme the name of Allah, whom some of us call God and others call Jehovah.  There are Christians who blaspheme the name of God, using religion as an excuse for denying the least of these three things, five things.  And there are Jews who talk east and walk west what they believe, so that I am hopeful, and I remain of the conviction that serious ministers will no longer be jacklegs, talking east and walking west, being high on the ceremony and stuck on praise, and doing little to see to it that the least of these get five things.  And how do you do that?  You've got to be involved in the political process.  And that's what has been my, my, my passion.  And the signs of nonviolence is itself a political process.  The founding fathers gave us two means of influence in public policy, that is who gets how much of those five things.  One is to go to the polls and vote for people who (unclear) elected say I, when I vote, am gonna make it possible for the least of these to get some income, education, healthcare, housing, and justice.  But they kept us out of that.  They lynched you if tried to, to do that.  But the founding fathers gave us a new means.  It was a, a second means.  It was the First Amendment, which say that no citizen shall be debued the right, the right--denied the right of peaceful assembly to petition the government for redress of a grievance that he has.  And we were fortunate under the leadership of [Rev. Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr. to find some fools in Birmingham [Alabama] and in Selma [Alabama] who said if you will--if you do that in our streets, we will beat you with billy clubs and knock you down with fire hoses because we'll not allow you to raise this public issue.  And we said do it in front of cameras that take it to people of conscience all over the nation.  And before long, people were saying to their members of Congress, having been--their conscientiousness been pricked--don't let your name show up on my ballot unless you voted for that Civil Rights Bill; don't let your name show up on my ballot unless you voted for the Voting Rights Bill, because we don't wanna see black people beaten back across a bridge just because they want to vote.  It's a science, and we mastered it.  And I just don't like to have to go to the streets when I can go to the suites.  And I want to go the suites by having our people elected and elect people of every race, and creed, and color who will be committed to being good Jews, and good Muslims, and good Hindus, and good Buddhists, and good Christians who are concerned about the least of these.
Story_ID: 79624
Speaker 1: What do you--what are your hopes for the black community going forward and for the generation that's--
Speaker 2: My hope for African people on the continent and in the Diaspora is that we who live in the United States who have the potential of being the marginal vote in 142 congressional districts will do our part in making sure that our policies as a nation provide five things to our people in Africa and around the world where we remain together victims of the use of religion and the use of racism as excuses for denying us a decent quality of life.
Story_ID: 79625
Speaker 1: And Reverend Fauntroy, what do you still wanna do before you leave this earth?
Speaker 2: I, I, I--two things: I don't want to--I don't want my, my body to outlive my mind (laughter), so I don't want to die of, of Alzheimer's; and secondly, I want to remain on the battlefield until the very end.  And to do that, I've got to be concerned about the present age, to be concerned and do something about the state of our families where women are struggle to raise, raise--struggling to raise children by themselves because men aren't being responsible.  I wanna do something about little girls who miss families (unclear) become vulnerable to selfish and self-centered men and women who abuse them.  And I want to see us become clear that the most effective nonviolent means of expanding our pool of income, education, healthcare, housing, and justice is to participate in this great process we have in this country of settling things with votes and not with guns, because we cannot win when they got the guns (laughter), and we got .22 pistols.
Story_ID: 79626
Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about Reverend Fauntroy, about you?  What do you want people to say at the end of the day?
Speaker 2: That he was consistent, and clear, and unyielding on the mandate to declare good news to the least of these.  And that he did it not only because he loved the Lord, but he did it in self-defense.  Quite frankly, I'm working and will work until I do to try to get income spread around, because if my neighbors don't have income, guess whose income they gon' come for?  If my neighbors don't have good education, guess whose schools they're gonna mess up?  If my neighbors don't have good health, guess whose gonna get TB and any other communicable disease?  And if my neighbors don't have house, whose house they gon' break into?  I'm out here for self-defense.  If the people remember nothing, I'm out here because I love people, and I want to see people have a decent, abundant life, which is five things.  And I'm out here because I want to protect my income (laughter), education, healthcare, housing, and justice by providing others with something that won't have them taking from me.
Story_ID: 79627
Speaker 1: And when you think back, what do--what age was, what age were you when your mother [Ethel Vine Fauntroy] passed away?
Speaker 2: She passed away in 1973, so I was what, 40 years old, yep.  And she--'76 [1976], I'm sorry, '76--43.  And she passed away having lived long enough to see the pain that she endured raising eight children in a place that demeaned them to be a member of Congress of the United States.  And I don't know whether she really understood, 'cause we never talked about it.  But when I see so many of the mothers who are struggling today, I try to, to tell them to hang in there, and don't give up, and don't give out, and don't give in, and you don't know what your investment in that child is gonna produce.  And that's what I remember about my mother and so many others who were mothers.  We had an extended family, and we're not doing that enough in our communities.  I--and we've got to do more.
Speaker 1: But she saw you get elected to Congress?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you say--did you say she did not understand?
Speaker 2: No, I said I don't know whether--'cause we never talked about it.
Speaker 1: You never talked--
Speaker 2: I mean I didn't--I didn't know--she, she was not, you know, boastful.
Speaker 1: She was a quiet person.
Speaker 2: Quiet, not a boastful person, it but it had to be--I mean I didn't understand it then because, you know, I was just charging on, charging on.  But when I think about--the thing that makes me happiest is that she must have gotten some satisfaction that my boy didn't end up in jail, did not end up here at the corner, you know, drinking Wild Irish Rose, was not shot on the street.  It had to be very rewarding, and it's the kind of thing that I hope every black parent aspires to.  Invest in your children and try to, try to extract them from, from what's happening all around them.  I say over and over again to my congregation: I'm glad (laughter) that I don't have to put up with all the things that impact upon the minds and, and values of the children coming up nowadays.  And therefore, we've got to instill those values that enable us to overcome systematic efforts to destroy our families and destroy our self-worth.
Story_ID: 79628
Speaker 1: And one last question, will you put The Civil Rights Movement in context?
Speaker 2: The Civil Rights Movement is simply a reflection of religious motivation.  The movement, the, the religious movement of which I'm a part, the Christian movement, is designed to give people--that they may have life and life more abundantly, which requires five things. And in The Civil Rights Movement we found a way to impact public policy so that we would no longer be humiliated by For White Only signs, so that our kids would be able to go to quality schools, and that they would be able to earn some money (laughter), get some health care, housing, and justice when they got out.  We're still a far--we're still a long way from that.  And I tell people finally--and I'll say this finally--something that Elijah Cummings, who is the new chair of the Congressional Black Caucus, had to say when we installed him.  He said our children are the messages that we send to a future that we'll never see.  And I thank God for the message that fau--C. David Foster and Willie [William Fauntroy] and Ethel [Vine Fauntroy] sent to a future that they will never see.  And I want to be able to send our young to a brighter future that I will never see.  'Cause I won't live long enough to see us forget the pot, and the crack, and the cocaine, and look back upon that era as I now look back upon those For White Only signs.  I won't live that long, but I think that if young people, inspired by the instructive example of the, the Howard Thurmonds, and the Vernon Johns, and the [Rev. Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jrs. who inspired me, will, will, rise up to the occasion and not give up and give in to the mess that's imposed upon them by a racist, sexist, and oppressive society.
Speaker 1: Thank you, thank you.
Story_ID: 79629
Speaker 1: When I was chair of the--yeah.  When I was chair of the committee investigating [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s assassination [Subcommittee on the Assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr.], I came upon memos written for J. Edgar Hoover, at his instruction, that said we can no longer have leaders who emerge from the black community.  We must pick them.  And so what we will do is we will destroy Martin Luther King's effectiveness and raise our own leader.  So that's, that's, that's by design.  They made a decision after they made the mistake of putting on television an articulate, clear, and courageous black man.  Because of that mistake, he became the singularly most important man with the most important message for the most violent century in the history of mankind.  His message was either we learn to live together as brothers and sisters, or we will perish together as fools.  J. Edgar Hoover was so furious about that, that when he got the Nobel Peace Prize, hmm, he did those memos, we got to get rid of him.  And they ran a counterintelligence operation that was, was brutal to try to destroy him on how he handled PM and S [power, money, and sex].  And then thereafter, they have systematically prevented the emergence of a leader who could pull everyone together.  We understand that.  And so, if you, if you form--if you're going to get on television, we'll have new models for you, but not that.  There's not gonna be any black educational television focusing upon the serious accomplishments of others as role models.  They'll be some other role models for you.  That's the way it is.  And as a result, we have got to do as Ossie [Davis, HM] said, you know, if they knock off one, keep the plan, which is to improve the quality of life for everybody.  It means everybody reaching back and helping others, each one teaching one; it means if everybody does a little, nobody has to do a lot.  One leader is an excuse for not doing things.  We, we--I can't do it.  No, you can, each of us has a responsibility.  And if everybody does a little in his home, in his neighborhood, the aggregate will be that we'll be better off.  So I'm not as distressed about what happened after they decided that there'll be no other Martin Luther King.  And I don't blame 'em for being concerned because we went on to, to make his birth a national celebration and we--and something we do for this person, we do for no other person in this country.  And not only that, but 130 people--countries--around the country, around the world--130 countries around the world have said America has a good idea.  We ought to stop on January 15th and, and, and say that something important happened for us on January 15th, 1929.  Somebody was born with a message that said we've gotta rise about race and, and, and ethnicity and all of that, and learn to live together or we're gonna all perish in twin towers.
Story_ID: 79630
Speaker 1: I was down, I spoke at the [Rev. Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] thing in, in Florida where, you know, in order to give them their thing, you got the holiday, and we'll name a street for him.  But on this street in Florida in (laughter) Tampa, in St. Pete [St. Petersburg], they want--they, they haven't taken the old name off because the white people that live on the street don't want--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --to have their address Martin Luther King, because they think it's a black thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The fact is that the nation--and I was there.  I worked for 17 years to get the bill that John Conyers [HM] introduced a day after he was killed, 'cause he understood the meaning of the man's life.  But once we got it, I was there when they debated and said look, the man is the embodiment of the American dream.  And, and people had more respect for him than any other American, 'cause nobody around the world has a holiday for an American, but these 130 nations.  And so we've got to work on our people and white people to understand this is not--King is not, you know, a black people's holiday.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It's your holiday.  If you don't believe it, think about Twin Towers.  You know what I mean?  We'd better learn to treat other people right--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or they will--your nuclear weapons and your, your star wars will not deal with a person who is so in such despair--
Speaker 2: That they'll do anything.
Speaker 1: --they'll do anything.
Speaker 2: They'll kill themselves and--
Speaker 1: They'll kill themselves and--
Speaker 2: --and other people.
Speaker 1: --and, and, and kill a member of my church because he opened the mail out at the--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --out at the thing.
Speaker 2: They did--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --(unclear)?  Anthrax?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  It's painful, painful.  Because when it's all over, when the elephants fight, the grass, the grass gets wore--messed up.  And shoot, I walk around the world with a sign saying when I traveling abroad, I'm African American, African (laughter).  I'm not like, like them.  Don't get me (laughter).
Story_ID: 79631
Speaker 1: That is the year 1981.  I was at that time chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus.  And that's my son [Marvin Fauntroy] reaching across the table to talk to one of my visitors on the day that he had won a citywide competition on the issues confronting black people.  And I was sort of proud of him that day.
Speaker 2: Now this is a picture of the day, July 2nd, 1964, when we participated in an event that fulfilled the aspirations of black people over a hundred years on that day.  That pen that he's handing to Martin Luther King, Jr. was one that signed the Civil Rights Bill that said from henceforth, you all shall de--humiliate them with public policy that says get behind me.
Speaker 1: Do you know who--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, that's Peter Rodino is next to me.  He was, he became the chairman of the Judiciary Committee at a time when I needed to get Home Rule passed in the Congress, and was chairman of the District Committee of the Judiciary Committee when we got the Voting Rights Amendment passed. And that's Mr. Halleck, who was the minority leader of the House at the time of the passage, and was a part of the "Evan and Harry Show" between Evan Dixon and Johnny Halleck.
Speaker 1: So now, he, his name is spelled H--
Speaker 2: H-A-L-L-E-C-K.
Speaker 1: Okay and then Rodino, R-O-D-I-N-O?
Speaker 2: Yes, and that's Lyndon Johnson, of course you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, we should say Lyndon Baines Johnson.
Speaker 2: President Lyndon Baines Johnson, the one and only.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Now that is, that date is February the 7th, 1999, on the birthday of my Melissa.  The little girl is our adopted daughter, Melissa Alice Fauntroy.  And there President [Bill] Clinton is with me and my son, Marvin, celebrating her birthday.
Speaker 1: This is August the 6th, 1965.  [Rev.] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and I had been at the White House that day earlier for the signing of the Voting Rights Act.  And that evening we went up to 14th and U Streets, Northwest and began a march of Washingtonians down to the White House, thanking the president for what he'd done for voting rights for our people across the, the South, and asking him to help us get Home Rule for the District of Columbia.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Now who can we identify in there?  We see where Dr. King is on the right.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  We just go from him across the (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, next to Dr. King is of course me, then my wife, Dorothy Simms Fauntroy, then the, the Anglican  bishop of Washington for the Episcopal Church, Bishop Paul Moore.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Is he spelled M-O-O-R-E?
Speaker 1: That's right.  And the gentle--next gentleman I don't know--I remember, but I don't remember his name.  He's an activist in the District of Columbia.  And the gentleman on the far left is a SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] representative and activist whose name evades me right now, but who was a very strong SNCC representative in Washington.
Speaker 2: Yes, that was in 1996, when the president invited pastors and ministers to the White House for a religious affairs reception.  And there you see myself and my wife flanking the president, William Jefferson Clinton.
Speaker 1: This, this is the year 1940, when Dr. C. David Foster, my mentor, was being installed as pastor of New Bethel Baptist Church.  The gentleman in the center is one of his mentors.  Dr. Foster is to his right.  And the others are officers of the church, both deacons and deaconesses, all of whom were among those who called me to be pastor some 19 years later.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Would you be able to identify the man who you referred to in the interview who--
Speaker 1: Who made--yeah.  This is Deacon Edward Brent, the chairman of the board who led the congregation to, to select me as pastor.  This is Harry B. Epps, the Sunday school teacher.  And all of the others have now gone home to be with the Lord.
Speaker 2: That was in 19--[Rev.] Jesse [L. Jackson, HM] had just come back from, from--1980--no, when was [President Ronald] Reagan--yeah, 1981, when, when Jesse had just come back from Syria, picking up that--
Speaker 1: Oh, when he got the hostage [Kevin Sutay]?
Speaker 2: The hostage, yeah, that, that bishop--that abbot.  And that was here at the church [New Bethel Baptist Church].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is the Yale University Divinity [School] Class of 1958 with all of my distinguished classmates who survived--who got out of there (laughter), plus all of my professors, kind of a lily white operation there (laughter).  And that's, that.
