Story_ID: 618473
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sam Gilliam, Jr., Gilliam, G-I-L-L-I-A-M [HistoryMaker Sam Gilliam].
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is your name Samuel or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eleven, thirty, thirty-three [November 30, 1933].  Tupelo, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an artist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's the--
Speaker 2: It's the 28--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: July 28th.
Speaker 1: Two thousand--
Speaker 2: Two thousand eight [2008].
Speaker 1: Okay.  We do that because it's oral history.  They want you to confirm when it is (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In my studio in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 618474
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.  The first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  Sardines.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: November.  Winter (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Studio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's me.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  That's a good answer.
Story_ID: 618475
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side first and then I ask about your father's [Sam Gilliam, Sr.] side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Estery Gilliam, E-S-T-E-R-Y.  Her maiden [sic. middle] name is better.  It was Purella, P-U-R-E-L-L-A.  She was a Cousin, C-O-U-S-I-N [Estery Cousin Gilliam].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It was March 15th, I don't know the, the year.  Somewhere in the eighteen--about 1889 [sic. March 24, 1897].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Buena Vista, B-U-E-N-A, V-I-S-T-A.
Speaker 1: Is that Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what can you tell me about her side of the family?  Can you trace them all the way back to slavery or?
Speaker 2: Well, Mom said she--said her mother was enslaved.  Her mother was a Baskin, B-A-S-K-I-N.  And my mother had maybe seven brothers and one sister.  She was married to a minister.  My, my mother's father was a minister.  Possibly an Indian [Native American].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Reverend Cousin it would be?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Isaac.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories from that side of the family that are passed down about what life was like in--
Speaker 2: Oh lots.
Speaker 1: --in Buena Vista?
Speaker 2: My mother grew up on a hundred acre farm or hundred acre piece of land that was put together by fifty acres from Isaac Cousin and I think Isabella Baskin [Isabella Baskin Cousin].  All of the--all of the brothers went to college and were teachers, and so was my mom.  She went to Mary Holmes Senior College--Mary Holmes College, which was in Columbus, Mississippi [sic.].  And those of whom I met were really wonderful people.  I mean easy going and, and caring, very caring.  I went to that--I went to the farm twice.  I went when I was, I don't know, six or seven years old. Guinea hens, horses, large cotton acreage, and there was a store.  That was the wonderful thing where all the people come to buy farm goods or various things from the store.  I remember also the beautiful name that my mother's sister had was Palace [Palace Cousin], or most of the names of her brothers came from the Bible.  Is that enough?
Speaker 1: Well, that's pretty good.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she have any particular memories or stories that she related about growing up in the--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Buena Vista?
Speaker 2: Most beautiful story was actually marrying my dad.  She thought that--well, one thing is that the father, her father, all the girls practiced what was called cotillion, that is that they learned to sew, they learned to care for a house and various things.  And Palace, her older sister, was sort of ahead.  I mean I think it is the custom that the older sister marry before the younger, her mother being younger.  And when my father came courting she thought that he was seeking to marry her older sister, but instead he had his eye on her.  That's as much as I know.  I don't know how they hooked up (laughter).  But they moved to Tupelo [Mississippi] and, and we had--there are eight of us, three boys, five girls.  My dad drove--
Speaker 1: Now where do you fit in the order?
Speaker 2: I'm number seven.
Speaker 1: Number seven, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 618476
Speaker 1: My dad was like a builder, I mean that's--and a truck driver.  But part of that is that he, he did a lot of farming--
Speaker 2: Now, let me just go and get his full name.
Speaker 1: Sam.  Sam Gilliam, Sr.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what is his date of birth?
Speaker 1: I think it's like 1887.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And was he born in--
Speaker 1: He was born in Sparta.
Speaker 2: Sparta, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Mississippi.  Which is the Delta [Mississippi Delta].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Are there any stories from his side of the family about--
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: --that go way back.  I mean are they--
Speaker 1: He loved baseball.  And he was sixth or eighth spelling champ before his grandfather, named Peter [ph.], took him out of school to farm.  I think my mother [Estery Cousin Gilliam] was his second wife.  I don't know his first wife's name.  And he delighted in the fact that in growing up is that in farming it's that you carried a pistol to kill the snake as you farmed.  But late at night when there was no snakes he said you still carry the pistol (unclear).  Until that he was converted to Christianity and he became rather a rigid Christian, in fact a deacon, a deacon in Rising Star Baptist Church [Rising Star Missionary Baptist Church] in Tupelo [Mississippi].  And the church, church was, was across the street from our house.  And the church was built very interestingly.  They built the basement aboveground and then covered the basement, and that's where services were held until they completed the upstairs and put a roof on it, and sort of beautiful church.  It was, was made of brick, Rising Star (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 618477
Speaker 1: Is there a reason why your parents moved to Tupelo [Mississippi]?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Tupelo was a city, was sort of a northern city, a city in northern Tupelo [sic.].  And--
Speaker 1: This is a bigger place--
Speaker 2: --had factories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --had factories, had stores, had a larger white community, which meant that there were larger opportunities for blacks.  Also had a high school.  Yes.  I think that's it.  I think the educational possibilities for all the kids that didn't exist in Buena Vista [Mississippi].  And everybody--everybody wanted to came to Tupelo.  My mother [Estery Cousin Gilliam] mentioned that some of her nephews and various things that they kept.  She ran a school, a home school, and that she educated them until that you could go to--could go to the school.  And Tupelo was, was like a lot of northern cities except for people cared for the future of kids and that they moved kids to Tupelo to be educated, go to school Tupelo, give them residence in Tupelo, and send them--educate them.  And then they went back home or, or they went other places.  Dad [Sam Gilliam, Sr.] drove a truck for a grocery company called King groceries [King Grocery Company, Tupelo, Mississippi], which was--and he worked on the church [Rising Star Baptist Church; Rising Star Missionary Baptist Church, Tupelo, Mississippi] or he helped to build other houses.  And that was all the interesting--there's other, a beautiful memory growing up, that your father parked this big truck in front of the house.  I remember looking in the mirror, therefore I knew who I was.  Until in 1942 he decided to move to Louisville [Kentucky] because there was work, was better there.
Story_ID: 618478
Speaker 1: Did he [Gilliam's father, Sam Gilliam, Sr.] have relatives in Louis- in Louisville [Kentucky] already, or friends?
Speaker 2: My older sister had moved there.  And he worked for Kentucky Pipe Shed [ph.].  It was concrete place--until he got a job with Louisville Nashville Railroad [Louisville and Nashville Railroad], where he drove a tractor.  And an interesting story is that from in Louisville initially is that we, the family came to Louisville from Kentucky [sic. Tupelo, Mississippi] and lived with my older sister while--until we rented a house, and then immediately he started to build a house on Southern Avenue.  And I like this story now.  He drained the land and started to build a house on a block.  Second hand lumber, second hand bricks and things like this, but he built a very large house for all of us.  And that in memory is that you wonder where Dad learned how to do all of that?  Of course it's in Sears books plans.  The experience from actually working on a farm where that you--if you didn't have a barn you built a barn, so that he could do all of these--but the most interesting thing was how he--there were other people from Mississippi came to live on that same block.  But how that they moved houses, they would take a vacant house, put it on rollers, move it to another piece of land.  All the men worked on Saturdays so they were very efficient--
Speaker 1: So he, he built his house from plans out of the Sears catalogue?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.  As you find in a lot of, in a lot of neighborhoods that you go, particularly in Norfolk [Virginia], from the type house with an upstairs and the people, the more modern people who built out of brick.  There are a lot of construction workers that lived in our neighborhood and a lot of people were actually contractors.  You'd see people leave in the morning with a large flatbed truck pulling a cement mixer to go work someplace.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  I didn't realize you could do that, you know, get your plans from Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].
Speaker 2: All the houses, all the houses really that were built were built from Sears plans or later is that Frank Lloyd Wright produced the Usonian house that were built.  There were a lot of those that were to be seen in Louisville too.  Beautiful homes with sort of beautiful courtyards with the houses around.  That-these were built in the white community, but now they're inhabited by, by black people.
Story_ID: 618479
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities and their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most, your mother or your father?
Speaker 2: Maybe on Monday I'm like my mom [Estery Cousin Gilliam], on Friday, Saturday, Sunday, I'm more like my dad [Sam Gilliam, Sr.].  That is that sense that the, the urgency with my father to, to solve problems, to get things done.  I remember when Dad got sick, sick once is that--and couldn't go to work, he cried.  And that is because he remembered his responsibility and that everything he thought depended on him.  And the most pleasant thing was that when we got older we (unclear) what he said: "And that's what I wanted you for, that's what you do, that's why you're my kid, that's why you're just like me."  But he would work two jobs just to support the kids.  And he was, he was very religious, but not so religious that he was a fool for the minister, so that he was very critical of the way the church was managed and various things like this.  He was very helpful to the church.  I remember his big Bible, which he read every night and he carried.  Now, that's not me. My mother, my mother was, was a very elegant person with a hat and a hatpin on Sunday, with a toothpick and snuff on the weekdays.  She could cook real well.  Great chocolate cakes, which became our favorite.  And I always thought that it was she who had the insight for the future.  But it was actually perhaps my dad as much, because he was taken out of school.  He could have done things, he said.  But at the same time it's that he could have been a baseball player, so he took you to see Jackie Robinson and things like that.  And he had quite a--quite a great outlook.  I mean he--they--both of them, both of them had pride in who they were and also had pride in their, in their kids.  Particularly the girls.  And he gave us who wanted to go to college had a chance to go.  He usually had to borrow the money.  And so I think that mutually it's good they got together.  Mom and Dad had a record. They said that they never, never argued or fought.  And of course they just never argued or fought in front of the kids.  But it, it tended to work.  And from listening to my sisters it's that they were crazy about Dad and they were crazy about his kindness, as well as his sternness too.  And so--and we're still very tight as a family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was the name of the neighborhood that you grew up in Louisville [Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: Parkland.
Speaker 1: Parkland?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Parkland on--Parkland in town, they called it Little Africa when we were--I think that that--well, that's the thing is that southerners, southerners moving into Louisville moved into the West End and the school [Virginia Avenue School, Louisville, Kentucky] that you went to starting in junior high school was the middle part of town.  And then there was Central [Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky], at about 10th Streets.  Parkland, Parkland started at 28th Street for whites and was 34th Street, 32nd Street for blacks.
Story_ID: 618480
Speaker 1: Now, do, do you have an earliest memory in the family?
Speaker 2: Yes.  As number seven is that I'm certain that my, my middle brother wouldn't--who was a paperboy--wouldn't know that he was a little scared to get up at five o'clock in the morning and take papers, so he took me.  And we're still kind of quite closely bonded for that.  I remember that.  He taught me how to ride a bicycle.  They accented the name Junior all growing up until I demanded that they call me Sam [HistoryMaker Sam Gilliam].  And yeah.  I also, I think, six or seven years old, if you were seven--if you were not seven in September, you couldn't go to school, so I went to school at home and learned to read.  And for--until the next year, and then I went.  And I think someone told my mother [Estery Cousin Gilliam] that I was always very quiet and that she saw that I was using paper to draw on and that if she kept me supplied with paper she knew that I would be quiet.  But even better is that she had to pay attention to my talent to be an artist.  And I think that, that created a certain observation.  There were always older women who, with their experience, passed on clues to, to the younger women and this was how to raise certain kids or how to do this.  So I was one of the kids that benefited from the advice that, "Take care of him, he's special, he'll make an artist," or something, and that's exactly happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 618481
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  Let me back up a little bit.  And what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Tupelo [Mississippi] particularly.  I remember the sky at night.  I remember we could ramble anywhere.  There was a farm down the road with a barn.  We played in the hay, played in the barn.  I remember the kind of trees, Chinaberry trees, which were fun to climb and get up on the top of the house.  Chinaberry tree limbs made good bows for arrows and plays.  I think that even both Louisville [Kentucky] and Mississippi, you were free to roam.  I mean (unclear) commons or walk the railroad tracks all the way to the fairgrounds.  It was just, just open.  The great thing was wearing short pants.  And if you didn't have short pants you made them, you cut them of.  And rain made mud.  It's just--it was rather pleasant, I think, that--and one of the things that was good is that the kind of person that you or the kind of life you had, you found in books.  There're always books that's, that were given at Christmas so that you're even, you know, with, with what your ambitions be.  Dogs barking.  We had a dog.  And there were things that you, that you knew that they didn't think you knew.  You knew that there was a well under the house and--which was interesting because there was also a faucet later on, one near by where you had these areas where people would come to get water.  Someone wrote that the kind of communities that existed today in some day were in the same place as they were in slavery times, or at least--yes, during slavery time.  Because I--the large farm that we had was a tenant farm where people came to work, pick cotton, so that immediately it's that you knew both past and present.  There are a lot of factories that surrounded us in Mississippi, but there was also sawmill or sawdust or plywood.  And the large factory along the street before the railroad that is very interesting, I don't know what was made there, but it was during the war [World War II, WWII].  So you know, you could see the lights of--into welding steel or something, doing something that was some occupation.  Anytime I sort of remember these sort of things, I remember to ask one of my sisters or brothers exactly what was there.
Story_ID: 618482
Speaker 1: There was a cafe up the street with not a record player, but a Victrola that played.  It was sort of a bad place, you couldn't go there.
Speaker 2: Not a jukebox?
Speaker 1: A jukebox, yeah.
Speaker 2: A jukebox, okay.
Speaker 1: And it's actually that the tracks in Tupelo [Mississippi] met with the tracks in Humboldt, Tennessee, the L and N [Louisville and Nashville Railroad] and this is where--if there were trained whistle guitarist which are sort of the guitar players that came from Biloxi [Mississippi], they came to Tupelo, Panama Hotel to there.  Oh, one thing I wouldn't forget is that my brothers say the actual place where Elvis Presley lived was over that way and that now is that most of our community in Tupelo has been torn to make a lake in honor of Elvis Presley.  I do know this, is that the street that I lived on, our street, has been shown in the film and the people that are six blocks up the sort of style houses with the tubs on the side, these men are shown playing banjos or guitars and that this is where Elvis actually walked into.  And that was actually where he lived was apparently behind the church.  So there was lots of music and lots of fun.
Speaker 2: In Tupelo and in Louisville [Kentucky] or in Tupelo?
Speaker 1: Louisville, yes.  Louisville had--Louisville--Louisville had lots of places.  There was one bar on the way to school called Trainland [ph.] and that was--there were a lot of people who made liquor, you could tell by the smoke that you saw in the summertime.
Speaker 2: Over the stills and?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 618483
Speaker 1: You were just talking about the music--there's a lot of music when you were growing up and some people were actually making their own liquor, too, it appears.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Both of my brothers played in the band.  My brother kept a trumpet, the middle brother kept a trumpet.  They played in church.  And all of colleges, there were two jazz groups that played.  Louisville [Kentucky] was not a country town at all.  I mean people owned houses, there were Victorian houses on a certain street.  And but there was--there was that life around music.  You learned how to dance quite early, you had a Victrola or record player.  In school, during recess, guys harmonized in the corners and things.  In fact, it was at least three jazz bands by the time that I was in college or so that played.  And they're still playing.  Yeah.  There was a lot of music.  And the fact--the great thing was we had clubs that listened to jazz on Saturdays.  We were acquainted with Miles Davis quite early, Dizzy Gillespie and various things, and same thing that kids did all--Detroit [Michigan] and Chicago [Illinois] and every place else.  Yes.
Story_ID: 618484
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest memory of religion?
Speaker 2: From Tupelo [Mississippi], yes.  And (laughter) my mother [Estery Cousin Gilliam] said it didn't take, but it's that I worked for the church completely through college and in summer school I went to those religious camps, Camp Dan Beard.  And was slated to become a minister.
Speaker 1: Oh now, who identified you as a future minister?
Speaker 2: They--everybody.  They try it on every kid.  But we had--we were--had Vacation Bible Schools that were taught by the Southern Baptist seminary [Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, Louisville, Kentucky] and that anyone I guess who could read could go to ministers camp.  And you notice in camp that most of the kids didn't have teeth, they were extremely poor, and that they were applying for this occupation.  And, and I said, "I don't want to be a chicken eating--grow up chicken eating, white socks wearing kid." You want to be on your own, you know, you want to be an artist or something.  And funny story is that when I was about two years in college because I went to, to U of L [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky], I saw one of my teachers from Vacation Bible School out on the town at ten o'clock at night.  I was dressed, I was going to a bar.  And she said, "What are you doing out at this time of night?"  And I mentioned that I was going uptown.  And she said, "But I thought you were going to be a minister." And I says, "Not exactly." She says, "Aw Sam [HistoryMaker Sam Gilliam], you forgot to pray," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, what was it about you do you think that they--that made people think--now did your mother think you were going to be a minister?  Or did she want you to be a minister?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: She didn't?  Okay.  These are other people in the community.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I--we--we went to Baptist training and we were all ambassadors, boys growing up.  And in Baptist training it's that you--after you memorize an entire chapter of the Bible or you do bible drill, and literally this was against my sisters.  And I would make--I mean I could, at twelve, I mean I could compete good with any of my sisters, and I'd win the bible drills, I would do those sort of things.  So they said, "That kid's going to make a good minister."  And I decided--I still have the Bible that I won in bible training in summer camp.  Future minister.  But, no.  I think that--I think that most, most black youth in the South were looked upon as ministers, were looked upon as sort of leaders that would actually--
Speaker 1: Well, are you saying that--
Speaker 2: --be able to contribute and help their--
Speaker 1: You said because you had a capacity to read and kind of knew how to conduct yourself, that kind of made you identify you as--
Speaker 2: No, I think they had a plan.  I think they knew that they--it's still evident today that people want to keep their own for their extended support.  I've seen--I've seen this over and over again with lots of kids that they want to hold on to--they feel a loss when these kids are gone.  They still--they don't have hope for the future.  And they know if they do they have--they have that.  I know that's true in my family with my--when my mother died my sister said, "You'll have to promise that you'll come back and see us."  When they make 'The Matrix' now, the movie, it's obvious when they say, "You're the one."  Well, they--that's what happens.  People are, in all cultures nominate people who will help them succeed at all ages.  I mean that's just insurance.  And I was a good kid.  And it was pleasant to know, but it wasn't something that I wanted to do.  It meant that the minister used to call me Sammy, and I got to, to write on the blackboard for Sunday school.  I taught Sunday school.  I was on the issue board, I was in the junior choir, you know.  As were my sisters and brothers so that literally as much of a kind of education development that really came, came through the church, so that was--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the name of your church was--this was the Sons--
Speaker 2: New Zion, New Zion Baptist.
Speaker 1: New Zion Baptist Church [Louisville, Kentucky], okay, all right.  That's different from the one in Tupelo [Rising Star Baptist Church; Rising Star Missionary Baptist Church], okay.  New Zion Baptist.  Now--
Story_ID: 618485
Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I went to University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Well, grade school, that's what we're talking about first.
Speaker 2: Virginia Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's called Virginia Avenue School [Louisville, Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you--I get a sense that you always did artwork, from what you were saying before.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you aspire to be an artist when you were in school?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a cartoonist.  In school, we started doing stick people and they became cartoon figures: the Black Bee, Lightning Man, Gas Man.  And--
Speaker 1: Are these your own creations?
Speaker 2: Yes, but this was a group of us that would draw these.  Wonder Girl.  And we'd fill tablets full of this.  And this happened almost until about the tenth grade or such.  But every, every group would do these comics.  And it, it was, it was very entertaining.  And the--we started to study how to get these comics published or how to do things like this, the books on Little Henry [Henry] or Bob Rogers [sic.] and, and Draw Me, which was the contest that you had in the paper where everyone would send in a picture of the girl from the paper and then they--
Speaker 1: You know, that was on the back of every comic book.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Draw Me.  And then you'd have--it was a girl.  I remember, there were about four images, different images they had.
Speaker 2: And everybody won.  Everybody didn't draw, but everybody won (laughter).  And then you thought about the cost of the course.  One kid did get, did get the course, which was the books and papers and you send your drawings back in, but my parents [Estery Cousin Gilliam and Sam Gilliam, Sr.] wanted none of that (laughter).  It came up in Minneapolis [Minnesota], yes.
Speaker 1: Now, I remember the Draw Me.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I had a even--I worked on the Great Northern railroad [Great Northern Railway] out of St. Paul [Minnesota].  And I met the cartoonist [Melvin Tapley] who did Breezy in the Chicago Defender and was working on the road as a waiter.  And we're doing--we're waiting tables through the summer just because of summer jobs.  And I talked to him about my desire to be a cartoonist.  And he said, "Yes, if you want to work on the Great Northern for life, you should."  But Breezy, the thing about Breezy was this kid from Chicago [Illinois] and the wind and this boy with peg pants on and big glasses, and he drew that.  And it was, was quite interesting.
Speaker 1: Now, this would have been about what year we're talking about?
Speaker 2: This was fifty--'58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958], and then this is--this is a black cartoonist drawing Breezy for the Chicago Defender, which still had pretty wide distribution so you got to like--did you do the Tri-State Defender in Louisville [Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.  The only thing is that it probably was the first time that you realized that what you were doing, I mean, there was Walt Disney, a lot of syndicated comic books, there was King syndication [King Features Syndicate, Inc.].  You realize that there was a difference between the thing you wanted to do, because you were black, and what you could do in general, you know, in America.  So that the fact that he told me that, "Oh no, don't become a cartoonist.  It's, it's nothing for you."  In fact, in Minneapolis, most of the patrons had houses and things, but they also all worked on the railroad.  And I went there for an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] convention meeting.  It was interesting.  I think it was just--no one told you that, you'd say, no one told you that you couldn't do that.  You were encouraged by teachers in art to do what you wanted to do.  You make your breaks, you know.  But any part--as long as you're in school, get something good (laughter).
Story_ID: 618486
Speaker 1: Did you have any other favorite subjects in, in grade school when you were coming along?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I was also good in math, I was good in English, literature, particularly science.  I was a good student.
Speaker 1: Did you--was there any teacher that emerged as kind of like mentors to you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My, my fifth grade teacher, my sixth grade teacher, and a good experience with my music teacher.  And I particularly liked my history teacher.  And I, I replaced my sixth grade teacher in teaching at Virginia Avenue [Virginia Avenue School, Louisville, Kentucky] when I came out of [U.S.] military service that I, I taught the sixth grade.  But I had been a student then.  And that was unusual, because that--they weren't hiring many teachers in Louisville [Kentucky] at all from the time that my sisters went through.  There was always sort of a quota that they would hire.  And we were the--friend and I were the first two male teachers that they hired in elementary school, so.
Speaker 1: But back to grade school now, you said you had a teacher that--your history teacher was very important.
Speaker 2: My sixth grade teacher who was very interested in art and she was one of the few teachers that held every Friday, Friday afternoon, this is the class to draw.  And she was very good.  And--Mrs. McKinney [ph.]. And I think the most thing that--the most important thing in these classes was that you was given an opportunity to do things over and over again.  You're praised for doing it.  And whatever you did was done in a pleasant atmosphere.  Teachers didn't scream or holler or they seemed to enjoy what they did.  And so--and that was the same thing at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you go to middle school or did you go straight through eighth grade and went to high school [Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: I went to middle school.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your middle school?
Speaker 2: Madison [Madison Street Junior High School, Louisville, Kentucky].  I think my real start started in Tupelo [Mississippi] because I skipped the second grade and I went from the first grade to the third grade, and then the fourth, fifth, and sixth at that Virginia Avenue and then at Madison, great old Madison, is that my social studies teacher [Frances Gilliam] married my brother [Clarence Gilliam, Sr.] so I had a (laughter)--my name changed from Sam [HistoryMaker Sam Gilliam] to Little Clarence in that she had to catch herself because that was my--that was my brother whom she was engaged to.  But we really became friends, and we're friends, friends now.
Story_ID: 618487
Speaker 1: Now where'd you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Central.
Speaker 1: Central High School--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in Louisville [Kentucky], okay.  And, so did they have a decent art department at Central?
Speaker 2: No.  They didn't have art at all.  But I think that was good.  Because I was--I was on my own and I could, could find books in the library or I could find books at--in town that I could buy.  And we had clubs and now I think it's that what would art have been?  Someone would pass out materials and a vanilla sheet of paper and you would draw.  But actually, on my own is that it's exploring, it's that you got into so many things, you know so many more things than you would have.  And also, media, went to the museum on my own.  You know, you like wandered, and that's, that's--that was great.  And--
Speaker 1: So was there any encouragement from the civics teacher, social studies teacher, anybody?
Speaker 2: The music teacher.
Speaker 1: Music teacher.
Speaker 2: I had--I had started by high school, there was a dollar store where you could buy things that projected images like little movie projectors.  And I had gotten very interested in that, owning several of those things, making my own images to project in various things.  And that--this is what I kept going doing in high school.  I had a theater actually.  And I offered once to do a projection display to a song in music, but I couldn't get it together so I disappeared.  And fact is that the teacher saw me upon graduation, but she didn't say anything.  But then I came back after about two years in college and she said, "I've been looking for you."  And she pointed out to me the importance of, of continuing to do what you have in mind, if you don't know how, you find a way. And I really liked her so that I paid attention to that, but I did--it really didn't sink in until two years ago I asked my sister, "Why would Mrs. Crooms [ph.] say that to me?" And she said, "Well, probably because of her husband," that she was married to a man who had a lot of talent, but what he really settled for was to--was teaching school and probably drinking on the side.  So that she didn't want to see the same thing happen, you know.  That you accomplish by actually trying.  And it meant as much two years ago as it did when I was in the second year of college [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky].  In fact, it means more now because of what you do, anything you want to do has obstacles.  So you always need a refresher course in saying try, you know?  Or overcome.  Or you have to think things out.  And so that was that thing from--a push from the past that was very, very good.
Story_ID: 618488
Speaker 1: Were you a member of high school clubs and that kind of thing when you were in high school [Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky]?  Or did you run for office?
Speaker 2: I was member of a high school club, yes.  We had an art club.  I was a fraternity member in college [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky].  I was a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  Still am.
Speaker 1: I was going to try to get you out of high school first (laughter).
Speaker 2: We're in high school.  Yeah, in high school is that between high school--after high school--is that high school in certain ways were very difficult because there were these football players, there were the, the smooth guys who had cars, and there was us, the cartoonists and stuff like this.  The nerds (laughter).  And but when I--it was interesting, when we formed an art club is that even some of the football players became members of the art club, and that kind of lightened things up.  And yes, I think the, the art school, the art club was actually in the--what's it called--the home ec [home economics] department and we would have clubs, meetings.  This is because of the principal.  The principal actually had been an English major, and he allowed clubs once a month or so and that we--if we had a teacher as a sponsor we could go into a certain classroom and could paint or do things.  And the arts club, all you needed was a canvas board and a brush and a tube of paint.  And I still laugh about who, the kind of guys that you got.  There were tailoring clubs, all sort of clubs.   This was a, it really, you know, exciting.  Our high school was actually a block long.  And, and that big football field out back.  And now it's a very present (unclear) and our assistant principal was a woman named Ms. Porter [Maude Brown Porter].  She didn't want any smoking on the school grounds.  And if she found smoke over on the bleachers she'd, binoculars, and she found out who was smoking.  And she would call your name out when you came out or appeared after recess.  But yes, they were clubs.  And the thing was it was such a fun little idea that those of us who went to college in Louisville [Kentucky], we kept the same club and it was filled then with younger members and people who were thinking about the arts.  And at the same time is that we did theater, we did--we sang, we wrote songs.  We did everything.  And even this followed after college in Louisville from it.  We had a club after college called Gallery Enterprises, which still goes on in Louisville. And that's where Ed Hamilton, who is younger, is still a part of that.
Speaker 1: He's a sculptor from Louisville (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm.
Story_ID: 618489
Speaker 1: When you were a senior were you--is there anything special about graduation from high school [Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky]?  Were you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Had you--
Speaker 2: I skipped out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I graduated number seven in my class and therefore I spoke.  But what is really exciting is that most of the--most of the group of seven, I think all six of them, maybe five of them, were male.  And I think our victorian [sic. valedictorian] was a boy and, and I was seven, six, I remember it was is that most of us were boys.  And most of us went to University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky].  And I still think that, god, how smart that damn Winston (Unclear) [ph.] is. I mean he was bad, but he was smart.  And that it--or his friend, Eugene Goatley [ph.] was particularly smart.  I mean the thing is I've had friends later in the fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], they ask, "Why didn't you like me," and this is because you made me feel bad that you did your work and things like that and you were what they call smart.  But these guys were really equally smart and it took the pressure off.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So okay, so you went to University of Louisville.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And right there in town.  And did you ever think about going someplace else? Did other places seem more glamorous than that or places?
Speaker 2: No.  I, I didn't, I didn't really think about going to college.
Speaker 1: Now, did your--well, what, what--yeah, so what eventually got you there?
Speaker 2: Because my father [Sam Gilliam, Sr.].  I decided to work. I had a job.  And, and Dad said--he saw me spend the money that I was supposed to be saving for college for clothes.  And he pointed out that I'd never--I may be very well dressed, but I wouldn't be--I wouldn't have an education, so he offered to help.  And so I went to school.  I went to school actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is 1951 when you graduated?
Speaker 2: This was 1951, yes.
Speaker 1: Fifty- is it fifty- fifty-one [1951], okay.
Story_ID: 618490
Speaker 1: One of the things that I didn't ask you about growing up was about the, some of the people in the, in the community.  We talked about them off camera before we started, but Muhammad Ali, did you, now did you know his family growing up in Louisville [Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: No, I taught his younger brother at the school [Virginia Avenue School, Louisville, Kentucky].  But I didn't know--I did know I knew who they were.  But I'll tell you that Ali came along when I was like a senior in college [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky].  And in some ways is that--
Speaker 1: He's about nine years younger than you or so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In some ways is that Ali is the reincarnation of, of, of somebody that never existed.  I don't think that he can draw.  I don't think that the drawing is actually his.  I think it's his father's [Cassius Clay, Sr.] drawing.
Speaker 1: Ali?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he does art? I didn't know that--
Speaker 2: He does art, yes.  And I think that most of the between Bundini, "Float like a butterfly, sting like a bee."
Speaker 1: Yeah, Drew Bundini Brown, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And between, between the, the poetry and things like the Gaines [ph.] and Foxy John [ph.] in high school, which our school is full of that.  I think that that's where that comes from.  And it wouldn't have been in the younger high school as much, but that was--we had--there was a friend that played in the Lusitanian boogie--bogey ['Song of the Lusitanian Bogey,' Peter Weiss], which was and our there were a lot of people that just had talent, you know, I mean--
Speaker 1: Oh, was in a play.  The Lusitanian bogey, who was by--that's--was that--that's Clay Goss [sic.], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And when you think about things, just musicians galore.  But Muhammad Ali's mother [Odessa Grady Clay] was a schoolteacher, but his father was an artist.  But he was not that he, he actually there were several boxers that were trained by policemen and that he brought along and brought him along.  But I never, I never, I never thought that Ali was Ali.  He wasn't that smart.  But and he wasn't Louisville actually.  I mean I don't mean to say this, but he wasn't, he wasn't, as someone says now, is that he wasn't as he, he would let's see.  He wasn't as outstanding in a Louisville coming up as so many other kids were and so many other particularly the girls.  And his father was a sign painter and Ali and his brother would pull the wagon filled with paints and things like this.  I Ramadan--I taught Rahman [Rahman Ali], and Rahman was no, was no John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  And I don't think that Ali was that smart either.  And he was, he was beautiful.  He was beautiful.  And he, and he could deliver what, what he, what he did at the cost to his life now.  Louisville possibly, Louisville possibly didn't have that much opportunity for people period.
Story_ID: 618491
Speaker 1: I mean there was, there was--I can't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well there was a lot of potential in Louisville [Kentucky] is what you're saying.
Speaker 1: Well, well, but there were not a lot of means.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But you're saying--correct me if I'm wrong, but I think I hear you saying that he's someone who he didn't have any greater potential than a lot of people.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And yet, he's an international celebrity now, but, but --
Speaker 1: Oh, he really isn't.  I mean Ali's [Muhammad Ali] book was sold for four thousand dollars with a shark, the balloon which is Jeff Koons, the artist who the kitsch artist whose work sells for $40 million.  It didn't have a black element on it.  I mean it was something that was made for a corporate table, so that it's he's away, he's out of there.  You know, he's out of reach every time you see him.  Is that someone sort of said that Ali now has loaned his name to a peanut butter or something.  I mean it's, it's, it's not even Jack Johnson.  I mean he's not real, because he's been used and that he is and that the way that he's been has not it's not been sufficient for his own needs and things like this.  The Ali Center [Muhammad Ali Center, Louisville, Kentucky] was, was made by a similar man who tried to really build a museum and destroy the old museum.  I mean it's just sort of corporate dealing.  And Louisville is that way.  Louisville is that way.  I don't think Ali was not Thurgood Marshall.  He wasn't in charge of his own destiny.  And but he, he could sway, he could sway the whole city.  I mean at Christmastime when he came home and he bought drinks at the bar, I mean, like the whole most of the high school, I mean high school is really as far as most of the Louisvillians went anyway.  When the--is that they're--I don't think that--I think he's a symbol, but I don't think that it was really him, you know?
Story_ID: 618492
Speaker 1: Now at University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky].  Now what was your first day like at the University of Louisville?  Were there many other black students there?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I was, I was one year after the school was integrated and that there were a lot of black students there.  I think that between '52 [1952] and maybe three years ago is that the university was a tragedy, tragedy--was tragic for most people coming there.  It meant that they closed the black college [HBCU], and that actually by closing the black college most of the persons who would have been teaching went to the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].
Speaker 1: So there's a black college in Louisville [Kentucky] that's been closed down?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: When they integrated University of Louisville?
Speaker 2: Louisville Municipal [Louisville Municipal College, Louisville, Kentucky].  But they didn't integrate the university, you know--
Speaker 1: Louisville Municipal was the black college, you said.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And the library from the University of Louisville, library for Municipal stayed wrapped in the University of Louisville library for, for a long time.  There was one professor from the black college that went into the University of Louisville, Dr. Parrish [Charles H. Parrish, Jr.].  Most of the most of us went into ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] who were ROTC was the perhaps the best way to do something.  Someone pointed out is that there are--that B was a black A.
Speaker 1: B was a black A (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it was.  I mean there was pretense, the restaurants around the campus didn't allow you in at all.  And it was only until '58 [1958], '59 [1959] that all of that was discontinued.  Yet, is that and lots of, lots of people, I think people from--and then from the Korean War and veterans and people came to college and things like that.  And our most beautiful cheerleader from Central High [Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky] was on the cheerleading team, and I think that did more to aid well, you know, it's very strange is that I don't think that Louisville I don't think that Louisvillians that in the South white Louisvillians were any better off than black Louisvillians.  And so there was a quick merger, a friendliness that existed I think in the student body.  And particularly in attending the sports because of Unseld went to Louisville.
Speaker 1: Wes Unseld, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Basketball player.
Speaker 2: And, and Leonard Lyles and George Cain.  George Cain was from Cincinnati [Ohio] and so we had we had enough power to win, you know, football games.  And therefore it was very good, it was very good sort of mixing.  So the kind of club aspect that you had everybody sort of mixed up in their department, and also socially, white and black, better than you did better I mean there were the professors.  The professors were all screwed up.  They were, I mean--
Speaker 1: Well, what you described is that they wouldn't give a black person an A if they deserved--
Speaker 2: Well, but that was from the top.  I think it was sort of the weird.  I think it was the policy of the university.  There were people that were--that didn't want anybody an integrated university.  So you worked at it.  I mean you did things.  I think that individual teachers, when they became interested in students they would push those students to, to do things.  And finally I think it, it, it worked.
Story_ID: 618493
Speaker 1: Did you have any particular teachers that, that kind of looked out for you in, at University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: All through (gesture)?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, or even in part.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I in, in growing, yes, I did.  We had one teacher early, Mrs. May [ph.].  And in graduate school I had the greatest teacher [Charles Crodel] in the world.  And he was from Munich [Germany] and he had been released from concentration camps by black soldiers.  So he particularly wanted to come to America to find black students and to pay back, so that it was (unclear) from there.  There was a great thing of even a French teacher who, who came and he was interested in knowing more about Marian Anderson so that you had teachers that had--so you brought up commonalities that began to work with.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have any--so you majored in art the whole time?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And education.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's art education, the intention was to become a--make sure you were certified to teach--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the public schools.
Speaker 2: Well, the chairman of the art department was said that he thought enough artists in Germany before World War II [WWII] staggering around with nothing to eat and things like this, so he wanted to make sure that ours were prepared doubly through education.  They wanted to have an education degree before they could get into graduate school.  So his son wanted to be an artist.  Instead, he made him an architect, so.  And you know, I don't see what, what I exact- I don't see what's so special about being an artist anyway.  I mean if one knew how tough it is and maybe how disappointing it is, and I read the obituaries of a lot of jazz musicians, et cetera, and they talk about camaraderie with the people and things like this. I don't see--I don't hear them saying how great it's been, you know.  And it, it, it has not.  And most of the ones you--some of the ones you read about, other than Miles [Miles Davis], is that went to Europe.  And if in Miles' biography if what he earned and what, you know, he had a apartment building, he had a Lamborghini, maybe this, but how much you really earned or maybe, you know, I don't (unclear) it was.  So it was really for pleasure maybe that he worked and as talented as he was.  And but, but we don't work for money necessarily anyway.  We do something for ourselves.
Story_ID: 618494
Speaker 1: So you, you took ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] in school and, and so when you left when you graduated from University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky] in 1955, you're twenty-one.  You went right into the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you go in as a second lieutenant?
Speaker 2: No.  I quit ROTC because I wanted to major--wanted to tend to my art major.  And which meant that I didn't go into the final year of ROTC.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had to go in as an enlisted man.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you drafted?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were drafted right after you graduated.  And where did you serve?
Speaker 2: I went through Japan.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And how'd you find that?  Had you ever been very far away from home before?
Speaker 2: Nope. I went to some weekend trip, but no, I hadn't.
Speaker 1: So what happened in Japan?  Did anything happen that really impressed you or influenced you or influenced your art?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I one thing that happened is that I have a friend from the Army that is still my friend who lives here in Washington [D.C.], and we were in the same unit.  He was education NCO [non-commissioned officer] and I was a company clerk.  And we spent a lot of time together, talked, talked together.  But and for art is that on weekends is that we'd travel to Tokyo [Japan] or around, see shows in Yokohama [Japan] and there's something that people talk about Japanese art.  Japanese is the most Japan is the most class oriented place in the world.  If you are--if you're a master or if you are president of a company, wherever you are, you come from a certain class in society.  And the only company that's the only class that's stronger is the mafia (laughter).  Just the mafia just shot the mayor of a certain town.  But whoever this is, I mean this is where they are in the class--
Speaker 1: So it's hard to break out of the class once you're born into it.
Speaker 2: You don't have to be born.  You're elected.  You have money.  I mean you're--I don't know how you get to be at the top, in the dyad, any place, but what this meant, we worked with a group, my friend and I, worked with a group called the English speaking society.  And that became the ticket to move around and to do things at a certain level.  But what I certainly realized is that we, we, we were more aware and dominant of the chance of breaking through the glass ceiling than they were.  I mean and that was the fun.  That, that if there was an experience of dealing in a place because that you were black, it wasn't that bad because that everyone that you knew or that you taught were less.  And one of the great things was that Yokohama [Japan] was actually the place where black soldiers were stationed during World War II [WWII]. Not during World War II, during the Korean War.  The unit that we were in that was actually the black unit called Triple Nickel.  And the sense is that there was a kind of a harmony, I mean that existed in the town in the bars and things like that.
Story_ID: 618495
Speaker 1: So you were, you were with the 555th paratroopers [555th Parachute Infantry Battalion]?
Speaker 2: No, I was with the ordnance company.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Triple Nickel was, was, was ordnance, I was with 81-86 AU--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because they had integrated the unit in '56 [1956], maybe '57 [1957] and a half '55 [1955] and a half.  Fifty-five [1955] was but there there's something that you, that you, you, you have a good feeling about yourself because that you're able to move and to be of help.  And that I used I mean I, I had come up learning folk songs and things like this, so that I think Motown [Motown Records] did a Japanese folk song.  And at that time is that we, we picked up on that and I knew a lot of Japanese songs and things like this.  We'd go on hikes and various things and they weren't satisfied to learn Japanese songs, they wanted to sing the American songs.  So the 'Bunny Hop.'  We did the 'Bunny Hop' all the way from the top of a mountain onto the ferry and onto the land dock.  And someone said, "(Unclear) general."  But it was, it was this sort of openness, I think, that really established me for life, that the things you could do.  And of course I was a company clerk, which meant that he didn't tell me until thirty years later that someone tried to take my position away from me, but I knew that the mayo--the major of the company had he had grown up in Harlem [New York, New York], he said, and he had more respect he had as much respect for, for us as he did for anyone else.  So that the [U.S.] Army was good in a sense.  In fact, it was very good.  It was kind of a, a growth experience, that was almost equal to Louisville and the university [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky].  And so that I felt equally good is that I could do things in a social way as well as I could do my art.
Speaker 1: Now so you could do art in Japan.
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: You couldn't.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't have time.  I think that it was very important not to do art, but just to learn things, I mean to find out things.  Japan at that point was probably just as, just as knowledgeable about things in Western art as was New York City [New York, New York].  They were extensions of everything that was happening both in Europe and New York were taking place in Japan.  And you still find that they're very, very strong.  So the newspaper, going to the department stores which was where some of the art galleries were.  But we--but, and joining a few groups to, to make art was, was exciting.
Story_ID: 618496
Speaker 1: So you came back to Louisville [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky] in '57 [1957], I guess, was--
Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958].
Speaker 1: Fifty-eight [1958]. And to complete, was it an M.F.A.?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Master's of Fine Arts in painting, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, at that juncture, we talked about earlier in school you wanted to be a cartoonist and that sort of thing.  But what kind of painting were you doing in those days?  Were you doing representative work?  Some of your paintings (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Representative, figurative work--
Speaker 1: --abstract art.
Speaker 2: --having as hard a time as everybody else is.  Having the--supposedly having as dismal a time as everyone.  But Bob Thompson was a student at the university at that time and I think he'd been in Boston [Massachusetts] before.  Yeah, he was a student at the university [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] and Bob had spent time in New York [New York], had spent time in Provincetown [Massachusetts], had sold work in Provincetown, and he was as wild as the West.  And that the thought that the university was never going to be quiet again--and thus--and his things were just good.  I mean the sense is that you had someone in your presence, even though he was younger, who was who had been successful.  Maybe the only second person in the history of the university.  So that people paid attention and everybody began to work, so it was an atmosphere which was good.  And so I taught the sixth grade [at Virginia Avenue School, Louisville, Kentucky] and I went to graduate school.
Speaker 1: That's after you got out.  But I, I want, I want to go back a little bit to ask you about what painting technique you were developing when you were--when you received your Master's of Fine Arts.  What kind of things were you painting then?
Speaker 2: I was painting figurative art.  When I was a master's?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when you're working on your M.F.A.  What were your--what was your subject matter?  Like for instance, were you painting black people?  Were you painting still lives or landscapes?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: That's interesting.
Speaker 1: What medium were you--
Speaker 2: It was not until graduate school that I learned to paint black people, because everybody was painting white people.  You were painting the kind of people that were actually in the pictures.  Then I started working in, say for until the last year of graduate school, I started, as everyone did, started to work after the California figure painters.  So the people were psychologically mixed and you began to paint black subject matter, which is the most (unclear) thing in the world.  I mean being able to paint and painting doesn't mean you say painting is the consciousness of painting, like jazz is the consciousness of music that I realized is that sometimes is that, that, that suddenly is that perhaps in one painting was the subject matter black, or maybe, maybe another.  I painted a painting of my father [Sam Gilliam, Sr.].  But then I also started to paint abstract subject matter.
Story_ID: 618497
Speaker 1: This is what I know.  Or this is what I feel.  Don't, don't talk to me about color. Because it's that people who know Jack Lawrence [Jacob Lawrence]. Jack Lawrence might be one of the best artists you've seen. But his art is fine art. It's not, I mean, it's not manipulated black in that sense. No matter what he does, even with black people, it's that it is, his art is stronger, you know. It's as good as any football player you'd meet. And the sense is that, we always say slavery but we never look at the work that slaves did, particularly in terms of woodwork or furniture or quilts, we didn't do those--
Speaker 2: Okay, hold on one second.
Speaker 1: Quilts were not milieu (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, we're not--
Story_ID: 618498
Speaker 1: Okay, well I was just asking you about the M.F.A. [at the University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky] and then what your subject matter was and what you were trying to do with--as a painter--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --when you're working on your master's.  Now, don't you have to do a dissertation or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or a body of work that you turn in?
Speaker 2: The teacher--
Speaker 1: A project?
Speaker 2: The teacher suggested, first of all, is that in doing my M.F.A. he suggested that I--he was going to return to Munich [Germany] in one year.  He said that I should come back with him and if I studied I'd study in one of the German Kunsthalle, which you study--you develop through a trade as well as you develop aesthetic ideas, which is what they still do.
Speaker 1: Now, now, what's your professor's name?
Speaker 2: Crodel, Karl Crodel [sic. Charles Crodel].
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell Crodel?
Speaker 2: C-R-O-D-E-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, go ahead.  I'm sorry.  Just wanted to get that.
Speaker 2: So since I didn't go he--and I was prepared to sit at the university for the last year, he came back.  And that he gave me at least the, the program that I would have had if I'd gone to Germany.  And that was at least taking a problem in structure, studying structure in art throughout--over the years, and dealing with the Sistine Chapel [Apostolic Palace, Vatican City], the figure Jonah, and it wasn't--it's not this content of pain or everything until you get to the Holocaust, and that was studying Kirchner [Ernst Ludwig Kirchner], an artist who committed suicide, studying Karl Hofer, person who was the drummer, and you know, learning the tools of art.  And then finally at the end is that I would paint two paintings and but they had to show volume.  Volume had to be the, the subject, not, not--or the content, not the content had to be something else.  The main thing is I would study--I would start with Matisse [Henri Matisse], who was my--the height of contemporary art.  Which I did.  And anything that you deal with in art, you never find out the reason or the meaning of it, so to speak, maybe until twenty years later.  That's when your abundant experiences on the other side sort of come in.  And I don't--and aren't until you go to Padua [Italy] and see the very painting that you took, you know, studied from, that you drew from.  But it's--it was interesting content, and it was much different than what I would have gotten from the university.  And it's been an index for most things I really want to do.  And of course it's that it really was an index to understanding abstract art and wanting to, to do that.  And recently in Hungary, I guess it was 19--I think it was 1985--I met three German professors and one was--two said they were the teacher of Kiefer [Anselm Kiefer].  And Kiefer's just the German marvelous person these days.  And an older person asked if he knew Crodel, and he said he did.  But I saw this kind--this--we talked a long time.  You see the method that is used to, to build their students.  But--and I was kind of glad that I had been dealt with that way, I mean put into--put into history rather than sociology or political history.
Story_ID: 618499
Speaker 1: I'm trying to find out--now, who, who were your heroes as artists when you first started doing art?  Or did you have any?  Did you really pay attention to who the artists were?  I know you mentioned you met the cartoonist [Melvin Tapley] on the train--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from Chicago Defender.
Speaker 2: My hero was really Picasso [Pablo Picasso].
Speaker 1: Okay, now when did you become aware of him?
Speaker 2: Picasso, in 1956 in galleries in Yokohama [Japan].
Speaker 1: Okay, this is after you already had a B.A. in art [from the University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky] and you were in your--
Speaker 2: No, I--yes, it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So okay.  But did you have any heroes prior to that time?  I mean before you went to college?  Art heroes?
Speaker 2: None of them were black.
Speaker 1: No, I didn't ask that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh.
Speaker 1: I just asked if you had any, if you had any at all.
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I, I, I knew about Michelangelo.  I knew about Rodin [Auguste Rodin].  But actually, most--you know, most cartoonists--Ernie Bushmiller [sic.], who drew Tarzan, most, most of the cartoonists have techniques that are based on the old masters, so that I wanted to do Prince Valiant, Jane Martin, Sheena, these people were actually like the Renaissance artists so that you'd learn how to draw with them, fill in with what is called a (unclear) pen, and things like this.  So that the process, the--etchings, like etchings and things like this--the process--
Speaker 1: The Tarzan artist is Burne Hogarth.  Is that the one you was talking--
Speaker 2: No, Ernie Bushmiller.
Speaker 1: I thought--
Speaker 2: The early one.
Speaker 1: --he did Nancy, Ernie Bushmiller.
Speaker 2: No, but he also--I, you know, it's hard to see that Bushmiller did the Sunday, the Sunday Prince Valiant and the early Tarzan.  They're the exact same.
Speaker 1: I know he did Nancy later (laughter).  Wasn't that him?  Was that Ernie Bushmiller?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that is--yeah.  That is, you're right.  Maybe I'm wrong about the--but the Tarzan and the--
Speaker 1: Hogarth, I think Hogarth was the Tarzan, Burne Hogarth.
Speaker 2: Well, they're the same.  Remember, the kind of fine--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: --drawings and lines and things like that.  Well, that was, that was--there was also someone who drew--Rip Kirby.  And that I had all the equipment, I mean, and, and that's what I, I did.  But what I was really doing in a sense was not--I was just practicing drawing.  I--that if I become cartoonist it's that I'll have to learn a hell of a lot more in the middle, how to draw big strips, photography, how to--what they call the cartoon actually is not the finished work, but it's the beginning, it's the sketch and all that.  And then someone else--
Speaker 1: Inks it in and--
Speaker 2: Inks it in, yeah.  But that's--I kept up with those sort of fine comic styles, Flash Gordon.  In fact, there were probably most of these were under the same studio.  I mean--and in the early years you saw how the artist actually changed.  Well, that's--that was as--and then in drawing, I mean once you got to college, you would get a C in design and you've never had a C in your life.  And but later on you understood it is that he was set to fail, not to actually pass or to push.  I--my early painting teacher at the university became president of Maryland Art Institute [Maryland Institute College of Art, Baltimore, Maryland] and I went to teach for him.  And with a lot of, lot of pressure from teachers and things like this, because they said they didn't want an abstract artist on the faculty.  They--but it wasn't that.  But later on things got better.
Story_ID: 618500
Speaker 1: Now, you became aware of Picasso [Pablo Picasso] in 1956.  Now, do you--now, I'm asking this question because I wonder.  Were you one of the first black abstract artists in the country in those days?  Because I can't think of anybody else really.
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I think Norman Lewis was close to being first, Hale Woodruff also was abstract near the end.  You know, I think Archibald Motley is as strong in terms of abstract concepts as, as anybody, because he studied there in the Art Institute of Chicago [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  [HistoryMaker] Richard Hunt.  And then there are a lot--Sam Middleton--there are a lot of black abstract artists who we have not recorded perhaps, even sculptors and things like this that studied in various places in earlier schools.  But they, there's no record of them because they didn't succeed in terms of the world.  One of the things is that one of the younger groups, there's [HistoryMaker] William T. Williams who was aided, they got--he was picked up by several artists.  But there, there are--there're always artists that we don't know about.  Joe Overstreet--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Al Loving.  Al Loving who just died (background noise). Excuse me, can I?
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: I think one day you're going to say artist, there's no such thing as this separation.  And if we continue to go back to figurative art, we go--we go back.  We go back.  We don't realize that Joshua Johnson was probably the first black artist in this country, and if you look at his work his work is perhaps much like (Unclear) who they call the beginning of modern art.  So that it's not--it's, it's, it's really not about figures and things like this.  In fact, the worst thing we can do is make a figure, if you're black.
Speaker 1: And how so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because you don't keep up.  You don't keep up with anything.  That's like saying--if you know the game Peggy, which is the kids playing softball, you say, "Do you play Peggy?"  And Peggy, as Barry Bonds--Barry Bonds can hit a home run, you know?  That's what you want to do.  You want the technique and the fundamental, not the issue.
Story_ID: 618501
Speaker 1: And the way we're going also is more Marxist than it is art.  And I fear it.  I tell you.  Because now, with computers they found that computers essentially is not the issue, it's gameology.  And therefore, you have the content of making something work, of producing the thinking and all of that.  So of course now, you can see I'm ready for that question because all--everybody--I've been in the shadow of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and that's the fight that they want, that they've wanted to have, is that there's only--it's only black art, it's only figurative art.  No.
Speaker 2: I mean that's a discussion you've had with the professors in Howard, or students?
Speaker 1: Forever.  Forever.  Except that, Dr. Porter [James A. Porter] and I were very good friends, and that was because at his--at Harvard [sic.], his classmate was my chairman back in Louisville [Kentucky].  But we can discuss that in a, in a way.  I think the issue, the issue is, is that, is that what is the art of the moment?  And it's not, it's not what is--what is the art that shows my face.  That when you say my face, maybe that's what the end of what it is.  But what the art is, is the extensive end, you know, it goes a long way.  And that I know this.  When I taught junior high school and I looked at the curriculum and it was written, it had for my school it was, man with a heavy load, man digging a ditch, man driving a bus.  It wasn't man being president.  But I realized this.  I says, "Well, I'm not going to teach that."  I was going to teach color.  I almost got fired.  And the same thing happened here in Washington [D.C.].  Is that every time someone come into my classroom is that I would teach structure and fundamental, and then I found out is that the book I was using was written by Viktor Lowenfeld who was in charge of St. Elizabeth [St. Elizabeths Hospital, Washington, D.C.].  He was actually doing the same thing to us that Hitler [Adolf Hitler] would have done, making you think only in certain concepts for yourself.  And that this--you see the cycles is that when I taught high school, junior high school back in say fifty--'58 [1958], no not '58 [1958]--yeah, '58 [1958]--and even though you've had a black revolution, another group of kids are cycling themselves into hip hop and they think that it has to be face.  And you never know how you're being held in the same place, you know, because you aren't free.  What I would want to study is what the kids are studying in Europe, what the kids are studying in India.  I want to study in terms of who the people that are coming to America now and how they're winning and I want to study that, or I want to study automotive engineering, you know, to make some cars.  But I don't want to study faces.
Story_ID: 618502
Speaker 1: So you don't think that--so, are you saying that you are--you don't like representational art at all, no matter who it is that's being represented?
Speaker 2: Only I like Bearden [Romare Bearden], because he's smart enough.  I don't think that most representational artists today--I don't know, I don't like it no matter who it is.  I like Andy Warhol's representation, because it's more--it's more purposeful and it's the same as--he's doing exactly what Baudelaire [Charles Baudelaire] would have done.  He's making a path, you know, I can't say for homosexuals, but maybe he is.  Andy Warhol knew more about making artists--making artists function, you know, this is a machinery as a tool, than anyone.  I mean and also it's that he didn't hesitate, and his associates didn't hesitate, to put blacks in higher places.  So that that work, the work of Lichtenstein [Roy Lichtenstein], those faces, are a lot like the Japanese Kabuki artists.  They could read these books and see these it's that they are, they are different.  I think they're as much Western art as they are Eastern art.  So you have to look at the right pages.  And oh, I liked lots of figurative artists.  I like Raphael, Rembrandt, I like the greatest--
Speaker 1: But you don't like any black artists that do figurative art?
Speaker 2: I don't know about that.  Why are you asking that?
Speaker 1: Well, because you said you didn't like them, that's why.  So I'm trying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't--
Speaker 1: --to figure out--
Speaker 2: It's not--
Speaker 1: --if it's just the figurative art--
Speaker 2: You have to look at the art.
Speaker 1: --or the black art--I'm trying to figure out if it's--
Speaker 2: There aren't--there aren't--I like Charles White [Charles Wilbert White].  There aren't that many great black artists who do figurative art.  There are a lot of people that copy.  There aren't a lot of people who invent.  Name one.
Speaker 1: No, I'm asking the questions.
Speaker 2: Why don't you name me one, and ask me do I like him.  I like Hale Woodruff.  And I like, I like this person--
Speaker 1: Tanner is one.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Henry Ossawa Tanner.
Speaker 2: I have trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have trouble.  What I like about Tanner is not his figures.  I like his animals.  I like the paintings that he did when he went to Europe.  I like his impressionist period and things like this.  The other is that--the others--do I like the banjo player ['The Banjo Lesson,' Henry Ossawa Tanner]?  I'm not, I'm not so certain.
Story_ID: 618503
Speaker 1: Because art is art.  Now, if I know that Durer retrained Titian--
Speaker 2: Talking about Albert Durer [Albrecht Durer]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He showed Titian some tricks, he showed Rembrandt some tricks.  Who do you think I'm going to like?
Speaker 2: You'd probably think Durer--
Speaker 1: Willie Mays (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: No, it's--the art, the art that you like, the art that you like is obviously the art that the winner--if I tell you that Raphael is a combination of Michelangelo and Leonardo [Leonardo da Vinci], then I'd better run to Leonardo and like him.  And if I taught kids, that's what I would teach.  I couldn't teach color.  Now, what is like--what is liked in black more so are the folk artists.  This museum here has a work by--called 'The Thrones--Thrones of Heaven' ['The Throne of the Third Heaven of the Nations' Millennium General Assembly,' James Hampton].  I think that's the name.  I mean every time you see that it is more beautiful than ever, and that man never spent a day in art school.  And that--or some of the folk artists have that sort of extension that they feel is a feeling.  It didn't come from slavery, it came through their roots, came through their environment like everyone else.  But that I like.  But you know, you're going to get--you have to get beyond faces and likes, because it's surpassable.  The thing that people are talking about now is that how are the faces made?  By volume.  That is, you know, something underneath, the underpinning.  How is a painting made?  Titian said, "By ninety layers.  Then show me the second."  Now, that's how I learned to paint.  And that when we now are operating in terms of faces and we're wasting art in terms of making it black, we aren't getting anywhere.  When actually you could see that the generation of Norman Lewis, Bearden [Romare Bearden], and others, god, White, Charles White [Charles Wilbert White], is tremendous.  It's tremendous.  You can't--you can't, can't touch them.  Augusta Savage.  You can't touch them.  So I don't find the art world repeating Leonardo.  He didn't give me anything to run with.  Didn't give me anything to compete with.  And I think that, that this idiom of making it black, you know, making it that, it's politics.  Therefore, we need to make more presidents, more presidential candidates, more senatorial candidates, we need more lawyers.  That's going to solve that problem.
Story_ID: 618504
Speaker 1: What is your understanding of what black art is supposed to be?  What, what would you--how would you define it or what are they trying to impose when they say black art?
Speaker 2: Well, you mean my experience?  Well, with [HistoryMaker] Jeff Donaldson at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and things like this, it was supposed to be our unique group that maintained exactly as you're saying, Jeff's first painting was both African art--you're supposed to create African art, create the presence of African art.  I doubt that.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that black art has something to do with the retracing of African art or something or--?
Speaker 2: No, it creates at least a longing for African--in fact, most artists who actually pretend to be black artists do open a book on African art and find something that even they don't understand.  I don't think that--I don't think that we need a black art period.  I think you--I think you, you don't need a--you need a Infiniti or you need a electric car, and you need to know how to make an electric car (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're saying that we don't need a--are you saying that we don't need black music or--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't say that.
Speaker 1: --black--
Speaker 2: Because, because I'm an artist.  I think that--I think that we need, we need music from black people, we need art from black people.  But I don't think that--
Speaker 1: But if somebody says--
Speaker 2: I don't think it has to have a name.
Speaker 1: If somebody framed certain idioms, music as black music you would say there's no such thing as that, or you shouldn't do that--
Speaker 2: Oh, I wouldn't say that.  I wouldn't say that.  I would--but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We shouldn't be striving for that--
Speaker 2: --now let's see.  Sam Cooke was killed.  Otis Redding, his plane crashed into--Marvin Gaye was murdered.  I mean there are circumstances around how this person exists and who he is that I wouldn't wish on anybody, no matter how great they sung.  And that's the same thing that I wish here.
Speaker 1: Now, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've taught for twenty-five years.
Speaker 1: --on the same token--
Speaker 2: I've taught for twenty-five years.
Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler's the county commissioner in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: No, no, but he's won.  But he's not a musician.
Speaker 1: He's a singer. Just like Sam Cooke (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's not a singer any longer, because he couldn't operate.  There was no business.
Speaker 1: He still sings.
Speaker 2: No, he--on television that one time.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Well, but he's not--county commissioner of Chicago.  What the hell is that?  How good is that?  Is Harold Washington still there?  No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Everybody's going to die, right?
Speaker 2: I think that--hm?
Speaker 1: Everybody's going to die, aren't they?
Speaker 2: Not the way we are.  Not the, not the forced concentration camps we live in, not with free mortgages, not, not, not that we deal with, nah.
Story_ID: 618505
Speaker 1: You have society trying to teach a skill like art by making it black.  Joseph Stalin did the same thing to the Russian artists.  Everybody that wants to put someone in a box does just that.  But then you don't say, "Here's billions of dollars to pay for what you're going to do once you get out."  There's billions of dollars for you to compete against the Chinese who are actually building as artists too in Beijing [China].  You don't say, "I'm going to put this on my wall, even though it cost forty million [dollars]."  No.  You're--you--all you're saying is that behave.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you're saying that, that [HistoryMaker] Jeff Donaldson maybe and other black artists--I suppose you're talking about the Black Arts Movement, the artists.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when--
Speaker 2: Is that who you're talking about?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You're saying that they're behaving in a way that totalitarian rulers of Russia and China behave and--or Hitler [Adolf Hitler]--in dictating what artists do?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And even worse.
Speaker 2: And they have that kind of control and power?
Speaker 1: Oh, they do.  They do.  They do, because we give it to them.  Because you're spending more time asking me about black art than you're doing about anything else.
Speaker 2: Well, that's what you were talking about.
Speaker 1: No.  No, I never mentioned black art.  You're the one that brought it up.
Speaker 2: Well, I think that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.
Speaker 2: --when we review the--
Speaker 1: You're the one that started in on black faces.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  I'm, I'm the one--
Speaker 1: And I didn't want to get up and walk out on you.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see--
Speaker 1: Because I think that you're low.  Because no, why?
Speaker 2: You raised the question, I didn't.
Speaker 1: No, no.  I never used the word black art.  I don't.  But you asked me about black faces in college [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky], or brown faces, or some kind of color.
Speaker 2: Well, I asked you like what you were painting in college?  Were you painting still life?  Were you painting landscapes?  Remember that?  Were you painting representational art?  Because I know that your career has been built on being an abstract artist basically.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in college--
Speaker 2: So that's why I was asking you what you were doing.
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  Nobody does that stuff.  In colleges that you, your major subject is art history.  You get a chance to see that the main thing you should be doing in college is looking around and seeing what other people are doing and that--or, or with friends.  You try--
Speaker 2: Well, people do paint in college.  I've been to college and we do paint in college.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but what, what importance is what I painted in college.  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they judge you.  Your painting courses based--
Speaker 1: No, no, you can't get to first place so fast--
Speaker 2: --on what you paint.
Speaker 1: Nah, not in my college.
Speaker 2: Well, if you're in a painting course that's what they do.
Speaker 1: In my college is that if you make an A in things like this it's that you paint generally what you paint.  In fact, actually in college it's that I worked, I worked for my professor who was interested in Japanese art.  And it opened my eyes so that I started to paint paintings that I realized that it was much like the California figure school [Bay Area Figurative Movement].  And even Oliveira [Nathan Oliveira], which had to do with more material.  You see, I don't see--I don't see--god, landscape painting went out, went out of business in--before 1900.  La Cezanne [Paul Cezanne] was the last good landscape painter.  I mean, this is America.  Don't you realize that?  This is America.  And good artists don't, don't obey nobody.
Story_ID: 618506
Speaker 1: Okay, so after you got your M.F.A. you taught school for a while and then--
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: --then what happened?
Speaker 2: I taught school in Louisville [Kentucky] and then I got married [to HistoryMaker Dorothy B. Gilliam].  And then I taught school here in Washington [D.C.] for five years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You teach at a high school level or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, were you painting all along too or--
Speaker 2: Painting good too.  Not painting figures.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when did you get your first--when was your first big show?  It may have been in college [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky], I don't know, but which--when was your big show?  Your first big show?
Speaker 2: My first show at a gallery in Washington was probably--my first--my first big show was in 1963.  That was a year after I moved to Washington.
Speaker 1: (Pause) Well, when you--how did you--how'd you get it?  I mean--or how'd you get your show together?  Did you--was it something you worked our yourself or did you have a help, a mentor something to--
Speaker 2: The, the good thing about 1963 to 1968 or so is that we said the art world was down.  It's that you sort of worked in a community, that the things that were happening in Washington, there are things that had happened in Washington before, say '63 [1963], with the Latino artists, artists that called themselves the Washington Color School, and also say black artists, that sort of met in town, is that the director for the Pan American Union decided to--wanted to do a show of--because he wanted to merge the Latino artists with other groups so that we could see what was coming out in all of these areas so that he had filled his other persons, personages and then someone says, "Well, let's get Sam [HistoryMaker Sam Gilliam]."  So we did a show at the, at the, at the Pan American Union [Pan American Union Building, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the reception to your work?
Speaker 2: Oh, great.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Great.  I think that--the interesting thing is that when I moved to Washington I gained a studio, I was downtown about 17th [Street] and Q [Street].  There was a man around the corner at a place called (Unclear), who was a friend of Imamu Baraka [Amiri Baraka], was a poet, Gaston Neal. Just going to (Unclear), going to studio, things like this, and you talked to people, they would say, "Oh, you're an artist?  What do you do," et cetera, "Do you go to New York [New York]?"  And I would say no.  And they would say, "You'd better go to New York." So we'd all go to New York together and we'd see what was going on for the pace, go to various galleries, Castelli's [Leo Castelli Gallery, New York, New York], and all those galleries.  And we'd see at least the work.  Then you discuss the work.  And often even at openings I'd see Dr. Porter [James A. Porter] at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  The only one or a woman--what's her name?  Black woman who painted dots or so.  I would see her, or even Ken Young [Kenneth Young] or Jack Dempsey [sic. Richard Dempsey] were some of the artists that were actually there.  And in New York at that--you'd see the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York]--you'd see that advance that your work was leading to in Louisville, so you began to take these steps.  And it's just being in an atmosphere where things were good, was as good as I said being in Paris [France].
Story_ID: 618507
Speaker 1: In that it doesn't--and in '63 [1963], '63 [1963] oh--about '65 [1965] or so, '67 [1967]--'65 [1965], Gaston Neal moved over here and opened a new school of African American thought.  I think [HistoryMaker] Jeff Donaldson came to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  And they started talking about black art and started getting the other group together.  And that by that time I was more established doing what I wanted to do.  And even if I hadn't have been, I wouldn't have followed them.  I went back to Chicago [Illinois].  I was in Chicago for some reason and I taught--my wife [Gilliam's ex-wife, HistoryMaker Dorothy B. Gilliam] had worked for Ebony, so I went to lunch with people in Ebony and they mentioned with people at Ebony and they mentioned Jeff.  And I said, "Jeff, he's in Washington [D.C.]."  They said, "You know why Jeff's in Washington?  He was afraid to face [HistoryMaker] Richard Hunt." So that means, face Richard Hunt was a very professional artist.  There was a woman too in Chicago.  But people had drifted.  Jeff had also tried to form a group of all of the artists or all of the would be artists and that they would--he would be their representative.  They would pay him a percentage of anything that they did, and that they were going to (unclear) gain through him and his organization.  I didn't need that.  So I think that literally is that by '67 [1967] I had a show at the--that was '67 [1967]--I had a show at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York].  No, it was actually '69 [1969] that I had the show at the Studio Museum in Harlem.  And then in '82 [1982] I had a show at the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York].  Now, a reporter asked someone at the Studio Museum who now lives in Atlanta [Georgia] but who was connected with Jeff Donaldson, and they said, "Would you give him a show?"  And this guy says, "No, I can't--I wouldn't show him up here.  I wouldn't show him in Harlem [New York, New York]."  Well, I'd already shown in Harlem.  And I said, "I wonder what he thinks, but why would I want to show at the Museum of Modern Art, and then go up in Harlem to AfriCOBRAs [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists]?  Huh?"  So I think it's not--all black people you don't get along with, you know?  All black people aren't right.
Story_ID: 618508
Speaker 1: Tell me about your philosophy of art and what you're trying to do with your, your work and what, you know, what mediums do you use and, and what are you trying to achieve with, with what you're doing?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I--I don't have a philosophy.  I do know that, that, that--let's talk about the mediums first.  I use--I use acrylic.  I use acrylic and acrylic mediums, which is to say that I use gel medium, acrysol.  Acrysol's a concrete hardener.  I, I, I use painting as an idea, not as a subject.  By that, I mean that I use an idea of painting immediately and then after.  I mean I find out what I'm actually going to do next by what I've done now.  I keep it very, very open.  I think that it's like the first Miles Davis record I had, 'Sketches of Spain,' is that I know the icon and I have the icon.  The icon is painting.  And that I make it, I make it freely, and then I make it again as another issue after I've done it.  And which makes a very pleasant time now, because I'm not showing, I'm just painting.  But one of the things that's essential is that what, what happened in college [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky] that was very stimulating was that working on paper.  And since then is that I've--I think the idea first formed on paper, not as a sketch, but as a finish, become a finished painting.  The one thing in paper is that you don't have to gesso paper.  Paper has a hard surface and isn't absorbent, so therefore you would say the paint stays up.  It doesn't take a very long time to dry.  So it's just a matter of using that surface to go to another surface, and that surface can be either a glazed surface or it can be an opaque surface.  So this becomes a painting.  And I think that in looking at painting I see this.  I mean I see how in Bearden [Romare Bearden], it is paintings with the lady in the door.  I see an open surface of paper has the door as a frame, the woman in the door and things like this.  It makes the painting.  The painting is sort of, it moves and it's transitional.  I don't think that--I collect African sculpture.  I notice how the sculptures are actually put together.  It's not a single carving from the tree.  It's very interesting that some of the carvings from the Sepik and the coast of Australia are single carved things.  But our carving is made and made to work and it probably comes from the law of wax process, or some process that comes from material of casting.  So actually is that I think more about how something is made, you know, and that, that making.
Story_ID: 618509
Speaker 1: Now, we work on birch boards and after the painting is put together, painted, it's composed actually by cutting it apart by sort of collaging, let's say.  Then the collage is put on a strainer.  And that one thing that's really good about making something--and this is something even I remember from my father [Sam Gilliam, Sr.] working with wood--is there's some things you know and there's some things you have to see.  But even though something is flat or something is a certain way, you can eyeball it and see it.  Or you can--you become involved with it by where you stand, how you move.  Your body determines that.  That's something that's interesting that I painted a lot on the floor.  I walked around the paintings I've painted.  And that when I'm ready to make it upright--I finish it on the floor, when I make it upright, those ones are the best ones because then you say they're a whole artist's involvement works.  They're works which pay as much attention to the mixture, the glazing, and things like this.  I used to paint the hell out of figurative paintings.  And I knew that literally it's that every time that--you say do I like Tanner [Henry Ossawa Tanner].  No, I don't like anything with a skin on it.  I mean I don't like my chicken with the skin on it.  When I would take the paintings that were more open and I'd notice that Monet [Claude Monet] paints structures and then the final paintings are on top.  Matisse [Henri Matisse], that same way.  The way that in 1840 paintings start to open up after (Unclear) Turner.  That's where modern painting begun, and this is what I follow.  And even in 1967 when Monet's 'Water Lilies' had not been seen because of the war and they were put on view, I went, you know?  Or I'll go someplace else.  I was in St. Petersburg [Russia] and I saw Picasso [Pablo Picasso], Matisses.  I went to see those.  I saw the Aaron Douglases because they are the most beautiful paintings, and most surprising paintings perhaps that have been painted and have a directness that I can't see why that more like artists in Nashville [Tennessee] didn't follow.  I know why.  Because the social attitude around didn't like those.  Those weren't pretty enough.  Those weren't faces.  So they let those sleep until someone has just brought them out.
Story_ID: 618510
Speaker 1: So that the thing is that mostly I remember painting in an alley down here in 1968, the day that--or the time that King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.  And that I think that the first painting I made I named 'April 4th' [Sam Gilliam].  But one thing that I realize is walking through that alley among all those garage shops, I used to see how those people actually struggled just to fix cars and things like this, the chances they take.  And that the chances that you want to take in life are precise chances.  If it's a stroke that you're putting against a tree to knock it down, that's what you want to do.  You don't have time to talk about someone else's subject, you know?  You have to concentrate on what you're doing and what the purpose is.  So that's what I do.  And that's the art.  I mean that, that is, that is totally the art.  Sometimes, sometimes the real things that you want to do may take twenty years, thirty years, long time.  And that you, you just play back and forth.  But I think the one thing that is more important is having a place where I can sit, you know, and think about what I want to do next or what it is.  I also have a lot of associates.  These are my buddies who live very close to me, architects and things like this.  It is surprising how smart they are, you know?  But what we don't talk about is that why did you get to here or why did you get to there.  Of course there's those kind of circumstances that you have to think about.  I've shown--I've shown--proudest thing--I've shown in, in Paris [France] for forty years.  I got to know Beauford Delaney.  I got to know a number of artists that showed in Paris.  I showed a lot with French artists in this sense so that--or even with artists from the Dominican Republican--Republic.  And when you go in and out you see them so that you see at least the, the sacrifice that's made to art and what it really means.  And you see the way that they change.  Many of the French artists are now doing conceptual art.  And because the museum is being built for them by, by (Unclear), they've been off--out of the limelight for a long time.  I mean really things haven't gone so well and that's because that people don't appreciate who they are and that there's been a lot of tension in a sense between them. In the meantime, is that I've had a chance to teach at a French university and that it's interesting to see their facilities.   But one of the reasons why that they haven't made it is that the limelight became based on socialism or the Russian town for art, (Unclear) de Paris, grew more.  Their freedom was actually stole, you know?  So that you see is that if, if you begin to part something, an idea next to my studio and things like this and I can't fill it, I don't like it, you know?  Because artists, artists don't grow from any artists, or from any art.  I know that one of the things that was great about being an abstract artist here was that a lot of those artists, white artists grew from jazz.  They grew from the blues.  When we went to see the March on Washington 1963, a buddy, a friend who was white called me, said, "You better take me with you tomorrow morning," he says, "because I know Reverend King is going to say a lot of things that I need."  So that in a sense is that in trouble you only need, you know, one sense or one message or one sort of feeling.  So that's where, where I'm coming from.
Story_ID: 618511
Speaker 1: So today you're, you're full time as a painter.  Are you teaching now too as well (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And is there any particular work or group of work that you consider your, your, your best work, or do you have that kind of--
Speaker 2: I just had a retrospective, and that was the show of work from 1968 to the other--these kind of things.  The draped paintings, which actually got me started in '69 [1969].  Yeah, that's--these, these are the ones that, let's say, I created, things that are, are, it's my idea.  And that although I don't do those all the time it's that I continue to draw upon them.  I've--I went to Eatonville, Florida, which is where the Zora Neale Hurston town is, and I did a show there.  They invite artists to their shows.  I took these pieces.  And it was interesting.  They're drape paintings.  And there's an idea in, in art as in jazz is that you play an end, and that you close that off so you can play something else.  And we, we began to talk about this as sort of an end, which means you stop it.  You don't do it again.  And you go back to something or you go into something else.  But it really is that--also one of the things that is true in art, young artists actually paint the best.  I mean let's say they--yeah, they paint the best.  They entertain ideas that are different.  Because they realize that they have to make it, or they want to make it.  And they do things.  They pay attention to a lot of things and include that within their work.  And that at the same time when you're young and you make things is that you also test.  You test yourself. You test how competitive you can be and that even in any art gallery you get in is that no one's going to take it unless they filled it, you're going to draw a crowd, pay your bills, and things like this.  So that you--it's interesting to keep those ideas and not to forget them by going back to them, back and forth.  They like a push up a hill.  So these paintings actually have been made seventy-five feet, one thousand feet.  I mean just any sort of yard.   And so that now I'm getting ready for a slide talk in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I've looked at these and that--and I wonder why sometimes is that I don't spend more time looking at what I've done, rather than going on.  Well, that's also another trick, is that you don't care where you've been; you really (laughter), you really want to concentrate on where you're going, so.
Story_ID: 618512
Speaker 1: In that regard, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Make that the world.  You see, as a teacher, I've known that you can't--you just can't be concerned with the left hand and not be concerned with the right hand too.  Because actually they are the same and that--so that my hope is to actually--is to get as many kids out of art as I can.  I think art slows you down.  There are a lot of--I'd like to exchange a lot of the kids who are into art for kids who are into science.  I think that not to necessarily stack up black kids, kids without chances and things in a subject that they can't go anyplace with, but to exchange it in a sense, to--and to make science programs better and that way you'd make art programs better.  To make reading programs better and you'd make art programs better, and therefore you'd have more facility.  But here, if I had to deal with black kids alone, the one thing I want would be to put more into history, more into art history--
Story_ID: 618513
Speaker 1: You were talking about history before we--yeah, yeah, can you pick up there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, I, I think that if you take your average history book I went back and looked at my sixth grade history book.  I saw it in West Virginia.  And that Africa was left out, Haiti was left out, the Dominican Republic was left out.  In fact, anything about who and what you were was left out.  But even today if you would take a history book you may be included, but what, what is in there?  So that literally is that something, history is something that you have to work on yourself.  I mean you have to, you have to read.  You have to know that Aristotle's role was to discover all of the, the known world that he knew until Socrates stopped him and paid more attention to Aristotle, because Aristotle was a man of the future, you know, he was the rove of his day.  And that you have to know that with these two possibilities you have to bring them together and you have to broaden history.  And a lot of times you broaden history by your own experiences.  And--but I think also for a lot of the other subjects we have.  I have another pet peeve.  Geography.  My studio went back to the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky] for a whole year to do a seminar with the geographers, because I felt that the geography program was more advanced than the art program was.  They spent time in the Amazon.  I mean they would spend time in the Amazon, they'd come back and understand it.  And we got involved in taking my class to Parkland [Louisville, Kentucky] and doing--looking at you've seen the Amazon, now look at Parkland, and talk about Parkland.  And it was strange how they were more delighted in the West End than they said they had in growing up other parts of Louisville [Kentucky] here.  They had more fun there.  You know, they saw more substance, you know.  And they saw more beauty too, I mean, then here.  And that would be something to say (laughter) or let it be known.  And that so that I think that also we did an exhibit.  Those kids that were in geography were so not better, but they were so, so eager to do art, you know.  They had a push.  And the art kids of course have other problems of worrying that they couldn't get into Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or they couldn't get into something.  You know, they couldn't get the push they wanted from that place.  So mixing.  Mixing is, is number one.  And that that's all.  I mean it's just that and I think that the memory, that the memory that's in a history student or in a geography student is much stronger.  Ph.D.s are much stronger than people who go to school just to get a master's [degree].  And that absorbing the past, but also the whole past.  Know American history if you're going to know black history.  Know British history.  Know that the British named Africa, Africa.  Why.  You know.  You know, do those things.  And you see that perhaps the problem of growth and development sometimes is, is actually the same.  It's not who, what name someone's called or what subjugation someone created, and things like this.  If you look around it's that they were taught to do that, you know, and you, you weren't.  So you have to deal with things mutually.
Story_ID: 618514
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything that you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't teach.
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: I think that, I think that I knew my sixth grade--I knew my elementary school principal up until she died at ninety years old.  Our real joke was that I had a science lesson that I said the concept of the Laplacian theory of, of how the earth was formed.  And she stopped me and said, "God created the universe," (laughter).  And we laugh at that.  And so that but I wouldn't teach.  No, I wouldn't. Because that the factors I taught actually in the neighborhood that Muhammad Ali's father [Cassius Clay, Sr.] had a bar.  There was no way that you could get anything out of those kids that was in the future because of their environment, you know?  You weren't willing to change and that the concepts that you had just weren't going to work.  And oh, I think I entertained them.  I mean I think that I was athletics coordinator.  I think I made muscles.   But I, when I meet them later in life is that kids say, "Oh, I tried to be an artist, but I couldn't be.  I tried to do this."  But no, I wouldn't teach.  I think that I'd rather do something else.  I'd rather get another--get a head start on the kind of problems that we're having now, you know, I'd get, I'd get something else done.  I used to do a lot of committee works.  I used to serve on museum board of trustees.  I was going to be the elected artist to the Corcoran's board [Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.].  I'd get that now because I think that those things are essential.  I work with the National Gallery [National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.].  I mean I think that what you do and go around, those other things are important.  I don't even know if I believe in teaching art.  That's hard to say.
Speaker 1: I mean, did you benefit from art instruction yourself do you think, or?
Speaker 2: I did in college [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky].  I didn't--you know we have a we have a funny society.  And it sounds exactly like the Indian society when Siddhartha [Siddhartha Gautama] was employed to change forms and things like this.  We still believe in role models.  That's not, I mean, that's not the issue.  Do you really learn anything?  And really do you get what you need.  There's a story in the paper of a kid who came from I think Southeast [Washington, D.C.], the worst neighborhood.  Went to Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island].  His teacher, his chemistry teacher in high school suggested that he needed to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  The story ends, I don't think that he went to Harvard because he's back in the neighborhood, you know, doing things.  And that whatever it is that we think we have that we do, we need to do more, you know?  So it's pretty hard to come up with solutions, say that you should do something.  But I figured it out.  I shouldn't teach (laughter).
Story_ID: 618515
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in life again, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, the first thing, are my three kids [Stephanie Gilliam, Melissa Gilliam and Leah Gilliam] who are girls.  And how, how much fun it is to talk with them about what they do or and, and to remember that how we literally did it, you know, in a sense.  And that of course their mother [HistoryMaker Dorothy B. Gilliam] helped a lot.  And still does.  But in a sense is that since we separated maybe twenty years ago it's been, I don't know what she did.  She doesn't know what I did.  So at least the fact that they've made it is that they're--we're both very secure.  And it's taught me a lot.  I mean it teaches you a lot when you have your subject right there in front of you.  And when you can travel the world and you can come back home, that's the most that's the thing that you're proudest of.  My daughter wanted to be an architect and her mother didn't.  And she told me that she--no, her mother told her not to tell me, but she should go into business.  So she went to Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] and she was in business.  But she and she--but eventually when I did find out I said, "Well, you're going to architecture school tomorrow morning."  And we jumped in the car and went to Catholic University [The Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.] and that now what a, what a stroke.  Because when her mother saw her graduate from architecture school she says, "I think that's the smartest kid I've seen."  And so I mean even though that struggle, it's nice to push, to see that each individual have.  And I think that being a role model isn't enough because I know what I was up against.  I still know what I'm up against.  I know how hard you have to work and how much other people have to help you, you know, work it out.  And I wish more that we had well--everybody says--that old time religion.  I wish we had the kind of folk or the kind of community that existed before, before we grew up.  And what a community.  Or that there was cooperation where you did, where you did build, or where you did roll a house down the street, you know, and you know, you did what was necessary and this is what they saw.  They saw a real effort, not the language.  And but yet it's in some ways is the, it's the best thing that America has.  I mean I know a lot of white kids that wish that they could go to a black homecoming.  They say 70 percent of the white kids are listening to hip hop.  But that's, that's an issue.  You know, it's not--maybe it isn't, isn't enough. Of all the kids I've taught probably I've seen three that have come back and one I'm surely proud of because he's in New York [New York].  Young lady got a Ph.D. and a young man's a photographer.  He's just came back and, you know, talking.  But it's, it's in a sense is that (pause) who knows.  I mean if, even if you create dreams it's probably more important than what possibly could have happened.  And that's, that's enough.
Story_ID: 618516
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we need to ask you that we haven't touched on that--before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yeah.  I, I think that one of the real ways that black artists started to succeed was when women came into prominence.  You know, they needed--they felt a similarity to the struggle I think back in, back in the '70s [1970s].  Women art dealers became present in New York [New York].  They took artists.  Lowery Sims [Lowery Stokes Sims] was at the Metropolitan [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] and she became more prominent.  It's one of the Mary Smith Campbell [sic. HistoryMaker Mary Schmidt Campbell] went to NYU [New York University, New York, New York].  And that I remember when Lowery Sims received an award at the banquet of the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] I sat at a table that was filled with her coworkers, and all of them were white.  And it's like this kind of cohesion where they felt when she made it, they made it, and they were supporting her.  And now Lowery is director of a museum after she spent time putting the Studio Museum together.  And it's interesting that a group, a group of people with similar ambition does a lot, and the more diverse it is, the more energy it actually has.  And it's been that so that many of us have actually been just as devoted to actually helping the women artists, the women into galleries here in Washington [D.C.].  And it doesn't mean that excludes helping young black people or some of those women also bringing in black lawyers and various things to the art world, so that you have something that has caused the art world to work.  And that's since 1965.  And someone said that other day is that, that I had this young black woman that was showing in, in Germany now.  And we used to only talk about art, but now we talk about getting a house, she'll talk about that and things like this.  And that's as energizing as it really can be.  And so that I think that multiple emphasis helps a lot.
Speaker 1: Well, my last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I'd probably like to be remembered exactly as, as I, I still have that dream.
Story_ID: 618517
Speaker 1: (Unclear) this is a--from a show in New York [New York].  In a lot of the shows that were good shows I do things for my three kids [Stephanie Gilliam, Melissa Gilliam and Leah Gilliam].  And I know that I think this first panel is called 'The Dream' [ph.], and it's, it's a canvas painting over a shaped frame, and it's raked, the paint, all of the paint is raked, and the metal is also raked with a, with a, a rug rake.  And the rake, the raking on the left is sort of a lot of colors placed down and just raked and then the whole thing is a symbol.  And the same is true of this one.
Speaker 2: And the one on the far left was really considered the more--is considered the more successful one.  It's called 'The Generation Below Them' [Sam Gilliam], and that's from--that's from a theme of Kenya.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And it's made principally the same as the other two.  And the whole idea of the rings and things like this, working with metal, came from sculpture and commissions.  And I put the idea of painting and the sculpture together.  I won't, I won't, I won't talk about Jeff [HistoryMaker Jeff Donaldson] (laughter).  But in the sense is that it was never necessary to make an image figurative as long as it was black is that people responded to it as being that.  And they're always in the work, a black series.  And--
Speaker 1: Talk about this one.
Speaker 2: This was one of the pieces in a show about a month and a half ago in Eatonsville, Florida [sic. Eatonville, Florida].  Eatonsville is the place where the Zora Neale Hurston Museum [Zora Neale Hurston National Museum of Fine Arts] is.  And I did a show there, but I was mostly curious of actually being there because for twenty years this museum and concept has existed in honor of Zora Neale.  And the--this was shown in a garage.  I mean it was previously a garage.  A very low ceiling.  And the garage itself had been made into a, a gallery.  And I think it had been--the office was a candy shop when I--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This work was shown at the Corcoran [Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.] during my retrospective 2006.  And it's in the rotunda and it's a room where--that I've used before I think in 1983.  And we made the pieces.  In fact, one of the pieces is on the wall just turned another way.  And this is the--this is made out of painted nylon.
Speaker 1: This, this is another work that's made I think it's made on silk instead.  And that it's composed here.  And what was interesting was when I got to Eatonsville a woman said, "I can sew that," and that she wanted me to commission her to make some of these pieces, which I still have in mind since I am going back.  But the, the work, the works are made flat and whatever form they take when you hang them according to gravity and then you tack it in, is the work.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This one?
Speaker 1: This is a piece that was made for The Mint Museum in Charlotte, North Carolina.  It's, it's in a house, it's in a space that's much like a greenhouse.  And it hangs in this configuration here.  They plan to build a new museum and we will hang it again.  That's the thing is that each of these works can be configured and reconfigured depending upon the possibilities for installing them.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: You say this is me? (Laughter) Yeah.  This is a shot that was taken in the studio.  The fun thing is that as you work you put you have different things up.  And of course is that the message at home is, and sometimes is on my pillow, get a haircut.  And this (laughter) this is one of those times that I should have gotten a haircut.  You can tell that it's that this is summer because I had a sweater on.  And that sweater's on because the air conditioning is on and it's very cold in here.  But I don't know anyone that likes to look at their own picture.  One thing though is that there over the years there have been a number of photographers who have volunteered to take photographs for me.  And this is a young lady--from Carol Harrison who, who over the years has taken lots of pictures.
