Story_ID: 7476
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers. My videographer is Paul Bieschke.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for me?
Speaker 2: My name is Kenneth Gamble, K-E-N-N-E-T-H G-A-M-B-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay. Could you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is August 11th, 1943. Place of birth is Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And can you give us your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is composer, songwriter and composer.
[Note: the date of this interview is September 7th, 2002].
Story_ID: 7477
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?  I probably have to say is my mother's special meal. That's my favorite dinner, not a favorite food.  My favorite food is a combination of things and--think it consists of maybe like baked chicken and some rice and gravy and maybe some steamed cabbage. That's my mother's favorite meal and that's my favorite meal, my favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I would say my favorite color is green.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite time of the year is in the autumn.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite vacation destination is probably Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I can't really think of having a favorite saying or phrase.  Right at this time, I don't think I have one.
Story_ID: 7478
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your background.  Could you give us the names of your parents and spell them for us please?
Speaker 2: Well my mother's name is Ruby Gamble, R-U-B-Y G-A-M-B-L-E.  My father--I really don't have any association or know anything about my father, so my mother Ruby Gamble is from Alabama, Montgomery, Alabama. It's--it's pretty much all that I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In terms of your father, you never really knew who he was?
Speaker 2: Never met my father. Never knew him, like many other people in my neighborhood where I grew up in, many other young African American males.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother's from Montgomery, Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yeah. My mother's from Montgomery, Alabama and--I think that they--I'm not really sure. I think it was another place, a smaller town in Alabama that they originally came from and I think they migrated to Montgomery, Alabama--her and her sisters and her father and her mother.
Speaker 1: When she born?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was born in 1915. She's presently I think eighty-six years old and--she seems to be doing pretty good.
Story_ID: 7479
Speaker 1: Did she [Gamble's mother Ruby Gamble] have any stories about or did any stories come down through her or your grandparents about what your ancestors were doing back during the 19th century during slavery or Reconstruction, or any of that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's not much detail in reference to--my grandfather or my grandmother.  It seems that from what I can pick up from those--that era, is that I know that they were--my grandfather, the name Gamble comes from--he was born of the--I guess from the--like a slave. There was a Gamble, some kind of cotton mill down in that area [Alabama]. So I guess that's like maybe a name that was given to his father, Gamble, from the slave situation and--my--my grandmother, from what I know of these people, and I know a lot about them, but she pretty much came from a family that had a strong Indian background. And--so that's how you get the name Gamble in this whole equation. And--because my grandmother's--her name was Ward. So it's the Gambles and the Wards from the grandmother and grandfather side. And then--I don't know many people on my grandfather's side on the Gamble side.  I don't know many of those people. And on my grandmother's side, I think that's more of an active group of people. They have family reunions and--.
Speaker 1: On the Wards?
Speaker 2: On the Ward side, they have active group of people than on the Gamble side, my grandfather's side.
Speaker 1: Are you related to any of the many famous Wards?
Speaker 2: The Ward singers?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Donnie Turner Ward, Val Gray Ward, Francis Ward?  There's a bunch of them.
Speaker 2: It's possible--it's possible and--you know I really don't know that much about the Wards or the Gambles or that kind of family--family bonding. It just happened in the last ten--maybe ten or fifteen years that family reunions started to even become something that African American people would advocate and really pushing to became--like we wrote a song about family reunions..
Speaker 1: The song ['Family Reunion', sung by the O'Jays] helped the movement.
Speaker 2: Well that's what we were trying to do, you know, trying to get families to come together and--so that was in 19--what year was that--'75 [1975], '76 [1976], somewhere around there [sic, 1975].
Speaker 1: But I--suppose you realize that Sunday afternoons, black people all over the United States, riding around in their car, listening to that Sunday dusty set--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Listening to 'Family Reunion'.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: It was every Sunday.
Speaker 2: Every Sunday. And every holiday, every Thanksgiving, Christmas, Easter--so it's something that's like a hole in your--in your history. A hole in your mind, an emptiness there because you can't really trace back all of your ancestral connections. And that--as I told you, I go back maybe one--maybe two generations. I mean that's not a lot.
Speaker 1: Does it really bother you that you can't go back any further?
Speaker 2: Well, no, because it's a reality, you know. It doesn't really bother me at all.  It's just--you know, it just--it makes you curious. You know, it makes me curious, but--the beautiful thing about the human mind is that it's very creative. And so--you know you can--
Speaker 1: And we're rolling again.
Speaker 2: So you know, like I said, it leaves an emptiness and--so the human mind is creative.  So you make up for it. You make up for it in futuristic thinking more so than trying to connect the dots to the past because you pretty much know why you can't connect the dots, because it was intended the way the society was evolved for African people not to be able to trace themselves and their ancestorial roots. That was intended. And I think the intention--I think they did a real good job because they left many a people--a whole nation of people, a whole race of people without a lot of knowledge of themselves and their origins in which I think was a crime of humanity.
Speaker 1: What is--others have like talked now what that does--to mean--I think Dr. Maulana Karenga who said that you're less human--you're perceived as less human the less history you have.  When people introduce themselves to others, they talk about who they are based on their history. It's like--.
Speaker 2: Well that might be in cases where--where the history is available.  If information is available to you and you don't have access to it or you don't take advantage of it, then that makes you one who is not really--has the initiative for learning about your past. But if there is no history available to you at all, and you are able to survive in spite of it, and be creative and be a part of the society in spite of that, I think it makes you stronger because of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What I meant was that the perception that people have is that they don't conceive you quite as important if they don't think you have any history. That being a problem in our community that should be rectified by you know, the kinds of projects we're doing now and other projects--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --which explore who we are.
Speaker 2: Which I think is great what you're doing, you know, to at least talk to people and find out what their views are because it would be--you know, I--you know, you put bits and pieces together, you know, as you get older because the first thing you have to have is a hunger as a young person for knowledge of your ancestry, and you develop a taste for your origins and a respect for them and traditions and whatever. And so without a community not having that accessible to them on purpose though, I think that it has created a unique human, a unique individual that I think in the future--I think that it might have intended to be something to be detrimental.  But I think that it's going to turn out to be and the way that it's turning out today, that it's going to help the African people in a very special way to achieve the goals that they are looking for because of that wrong that was done to them.  And to us--I'm not saying to them, I'm saying to us, okay--they will be able to benefit from it.  Like when we were talking earlier about turning poison into medicine.
Story_ID: 7480
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Ruby Gamble] talk about her childhood much and struggle what she had to go through?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother talked a little bit about her childhood and I think that during the time that she was growing up, I think that there was lot of fear amongst African people, and especially in African females.  Her father was very strict.  He was a Baptist preacher. So pretty much the old story that you hear a lot about you know. My father was a preacher, and he had four or five daughters, a couple of sons. A highly spiritual life my mother had as a youth, tremendous respect for God and sacred things.  I can remember how her fears of the world and the white world and white people as don't get involved, leave them alone.
Speaker 1: What were those views based on?
Speaker 2: Based on her experiences down south in Alabama, growing up in the early 1900s where people were being lynched and people were being tarred and feathered and that pretty much was the way--from what I take it, that pretty much was the way of all people from that era was how do you stay out of the way of this violent man who's hanging people and burning people for no reason at all?
Speaker 1: Now did she talk about any specific people that she knew that received that kind of treatment?
Speaker 2: Not--well just overall, she used to speak a little bit about, you know, about the water fountains and the--just the separation between white people.  Because Montgomery, Alabama was pretty much one of the focal points in the whole Civil Rights [Movement].
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the kickoff.
Speaker 2: That was the kickoff. Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and--so it was--you could imagine what life was like in Montgomery, Alabama in like the 1920s and the 1930s.  I mean look what they are today, you know, and look what they were in the '60s [1960s].  So you know what they were in the 1920s and 1930s as a young girl, you know growing up and--in a highly segregated environment, an environment that pretty much was what we talked about earlier, that did not teach African people anything about their origins or their ancestry or their history. And--and schools were pretty much segregated and underfunded and unprepared, so education wise, there was a lack of formal education.  And just well enough to get along.
Speaker 1: Was your mother able to get some education at--
Speaker 2: Well my mother--
Speaker 1: How much was she able to get?
Speaker 2: My mother pretty much is educated to the point where I believe that she--she's a very good reader, number one. I think she helped educate herself. It's not that there were any institutions or anything of that nature that she had gone to, but she's a very good reader and she has a very good penmanship. She writes very well, and I think her comprehension is very good, and I think that she reads what she wants to read-- she basically reads books about spiritual matters. That's basically what she's interested in, is how the Bible interprets life and how prophetic visions are being fulfilled and--and that's good for her, you know, if that's what she wants, you know. She was a very hard worker. My mother did not have the type of education where she could do too much. In fact, during those days, you know--I'm only speaking of when I was a young kid--my mother, she was a domestic worker. So she worked and scrubbed people's houses and she really became a great--she could iron very well.  My mother was an excellent--and so she became pretty much in demand because of her ability to iron which was in those days probably a very worthy skill. Ironing shirts and clothing and whatever, you know. So me and my brothers [Charles and Carl Gamble], we had--our clothes was always pressed and very clean all the time, you know.  So, from an educational standpoint, I think that--I don't think that there was no encouragement in those days for her, the general African people to get an education. Not even from their families.
Story_ID: 7481
Speaker 1: Did she [Gamble's mother, Ruby Gamble] talk about how she met your father or what happened with your father?
Speaker 2: Well you know, as we talked briefly about you know, her contact with my father--what I decided to do--it seemed like it was a sore spot to her and as gentle a person that she is, she's a very gentle person, that really did not pursue to put her through any kind of pain or pressure to relive those circumstances based on what conclusion would come from it.
Speaker 1: Did she meet him here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah. She met my father here in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: How did she wind up living in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Well I think my mother wound up living in Philadelphia from one of my aunts.  My aunt--I think Estelle.  My mother and her sister, my aunt Estelle was sister to my grandmother Ward. She was on the Ward family side. She lived here in Philadelphia. She had a home here, she had a couple of businesses, and--my mother and my aunt Willie, she--the both of them came here--they came to Philadelphia with her, to live with her. And that's how she got to Philadelphia.
Story_ID: 7482
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have and what's the family like and where do you fit in?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm the middle. I've got a brother that's older than me. His name is Charles Gamble, and I have a younger brother, his name is Carl.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so it's just three brothers.
Speaker 2: Three of us.
Story_ID: 7483
Speaker 1: Can you think back to the neighborhood you grew up in, you know, tell us what it was.  I think it's the very neighborhood we're in, right?
Speaker 2: Well yeah. I was pretty much you know brought up in this neighborhood here in South Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], around the area of 15th [Street] and Christian [Street]. And this neighborhood--during that time--was heavily populated neighborhood with--I'd say it was 99 percent African American people that lived in this neighborhood.  An awful lot of children, especially male children. We all grew up together.  There were hundreds of us, you know, that lived in this whole particular area here.  And many of the families in this area were basically like my family, that they were single family household heads--females.  There were a couple fathers in the neighborhood who were pretty much father to every--all of us in the whole community. They were pretty much--like Uncle Harry or you know Mr. Crawford or--that's two I can remember. There wasn't many men in the neighborhood except maybe in the barbershop or something of that nature, but this neighborhood was full of children.  It was--it was a neighborhood that basically all of the businesses were owned by either people of a Jewish--Jews were basically had most of the stores. They were the merchants, or either they were Italians.  Jews or Italians in this neighborhood that had all of the stores that sold all of the goods, food.  Most of the clothing stores were owned by people of the Jews or Italians. And the African American community basically was a community that was not involved and that was back then, and--that's the early '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s].  And--they're pretty much is like if you read the book of W. E. B. DuBois, 'The Philadelphia Negro'.  You pretty much can--you pretty much could see that even 100 years ago, that the conditions was the same.  That there were a lot of social problems. There were a lot of substance abuse problems.  There were a lot of family problems where families were broken up. All this stuff stems from the conditions that our people came out of and that is the legacy of slavery. Education levels were very low.  That too is the legacy of slavery. All of these things are the legacy of slavery. That what slavery produced is a community that--that basically was not conscious of its power to participate in human affairs.
Speaker 1: What are some of your vivid memories?  Do you have any memories of some of the sights and sounds and smells growing up in this neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well I think that the sights and sounds of this neighborhood was--excitement was in this neighborhood.  A lot of excitement. And the challenges of a young African American male in this neighborhood when we were growing up was one of the first, you must know how to defend yourself.  How do you defend yourself against predators, because the neighborhoods were full of predators where African people were basically predators on one another. Gangs.
Story_ID: 7484
Speaker 1: What were some of the gangs in this neighborhood [South Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Hill Philadelphia, South Philly--a lot of them had--each corner was a gang. 15th [Street] and Montrose [Street], 16th [Street] and Clymer [Street], 20th [Street] and Pemberton [Street], 20th and Kater [Street]. Each corner had--'cause each block had a group of people living in it, so they would claim that corner to be their corner.  And so there were gangs were already in South Philadelphia and Philadelphia period during that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. They didn't go by certain nicknames?
Speaker 2: No, usually by corner street numbers.
Speaker 1: Street corners?
Speaker 2: Yeah, street corners.  And then--in the early '50s [1950], it became almost ridiculous that you could not even really walk around because people would say, "What are you doing on my corner," and you know, just predators on one another.  And the expectations of a community was not--not one that education or anything--these were not the goals or focus of the community. It was basically, you know, how to be as slick as you could be, being a number writer or drinking wine or whatever the case might be.  And so in the '50s [1950s] in South Philadelphia, there was a brother, his name was Preston.  His name is Bilal now. He--he came up with an idea--we were all in a summer camp where there were a lot of people from a lot of different corners at this summer camp. And that's the year that the United Nations [Headquarters] in New York was established [1952].  And pretty much what happened in South Philadelphia. And all of the corners of the gangs on the west side of Broad Street all the way up to about 22nd Street from South Street all the way over to maybe Point Breeze Avenue--this area was called the United Nations. So they all joined together. Stopped a lot of the fights and there was a way to mediate disputes and differences and I will tell you that it was much, much better after that particular time.
Story_ID: 7485
Speaker 1: We were talking about the gangs in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and some of the mayhem that they caused--there's been--people talk about this idea--there's a--Sonny Carson was raised in Philadelphia made a movie about the situation and people discussed it.  How did you get around--you know, were you a member of a gang?  Did you have to be a member of a gang to survive?
Speaker 2: Well I knew everybody, you know, and we all considered ourselves being from a corner or whatever the case may be and having, you know, our so called crowd or gang, because we all lived in the same neighborhood so it was sort of like a protective group.  You had what you would call the old heads which was the older guys and then the young guys which would might be me and, and then later on you become a old head and then you've got young guys, and by going to school, you got to meet people from all over South Philly and like I said a moment ago, when the concept and the idea came up about the United Nations of--of all of the gangs and corners here in South Philadelphia, especially on the west side of Broad Street--because the whole concept shows you how--how real life affects community life. Like the world community affected the South Philadelphia group to imitate the United Nations. And they imitated it so much so that Broad Street which is the dividing line between east and west was considered to be the iron curtain. And everything on the east side of Broad Street was called by the people on the west side was called 'Russia'. So it was like a miniature world situation here that was being dramatized because the world was in so much confusion. And when you see nations fighting one another and people fighting each other for whatever reason they fight and destroy one another, it filters down into the communities, at that very level where young people gathering gangs without supervision, without focus and leadership and without education and whatever, sometimes it can become very violent.  You take that same energy which could have been done once you look back at it.  You could take that same energy and do something positive with a group and not call it a gang, but a group of young men or young women, and give them some kind of direction and focus in life. It would be something that would be an asset to society. But the city and this country chose not to do that.  In fact, the police and--they agitated the gangs.  They agitated them and created all kinds of you know--here in Philadelphia, the police would pick you up and take you into--take you into another gang's territory and have you walk home from there.  I mean, you've seen that on TV or movies or--
Speaker 1: It happens in Chicago [Illinois] all the time.
Speaker 2: So that's the kind of attitude and whatever it is that's going on in this day here.
Story_ID: 7486
Speaker 1: What kind of a young man were you? What did you like to do as a little boy and then a young man in the neighborhood? What kind of things did you get into and what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Well you know as a young man, as I remember you know--pretty much, we did what our mother [Ruby Gamble] told us to do and of course I was born--I was raised as a Jehovah's Witness. We were--my mother joined the Kingdom Hall [of Jehovah's, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] here in South Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so that kept us pretty busy because there were Bible studies, there were ministry schools. There were all kinds of activities in Kingdom Hall. And so we had pretty much a structured spiritual environment to operate in.  The--I was like everybody else.  I mean I think I was basically just a fair student pretty much.  I mean I wasn't really, you know, that great of a student, you know.  I think that early on in my life from kindergarten or first grade, or whatever, I showed--you know I see now that you know my mother--I used to write poems as to--
Speaker 1: Now that's unusual.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: For a young man and--you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Those days, even now to write poems.
Speaker 2: I saw a young man at a charter school, he came into--we had a barbeque today here with the families in the first week of school. And so he brought over a book to me, him and his teacher came to me and wanted me to see--he's writing a novel. This guy is in the fourth grade.  He's got chapters--he had about seven chapters. He had about eight pages of dialogue and story and whatever, and I said--I said, "I'm going to work with you," because he's just like me when I was young, you know.  He's got an imaginative mind, and it's not--he says he's got about five other stories that he's writing. So when--you know, one of the things that we're doing too with our charter schools and so forth whenever, is try to identify talent in people. And I think when I was young that my--I gravitated towards music. I always was singing, dancing--I mean, television was just coming out, so we didn't really have a television, so television was--television was a luxury during that time.  I think we had one person in our community that had a television and everybody from the community would be over that person's house--Billy Clark's house and we would be watching television.  The kind of television where you've got green--they put a thing over it and you've got green on the bottom, you have like a red in the middle, and blue on the top. That's how you get color television.
Speaker 1: It was plastic---clear plastic?
Speaker 2: I remember that.
Speaker 1: Plastic cover. And also too, they were televisions that you could rent.  You put a quarter in there or whatever it was, dime or a nickel, and you could see television for an hour or two, whatever the case might be.
Story_ID: 7487
Speaker 1: This community [South Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was no different than any other community, and we were young, African American kids walking around (pause) really trying to figure out--trying to figure out what was going on.  We had a lot of energy, lot of ideas, and when you look back, you actually really see the whole thing.  You see exactly what was trying to take place, is that here you have a community of people who eventually--the community got to be so--so violent, that most people moved out.  They moved to like West Philadelphia, and that became the migration for the black community to move to West Philly because it was better in West Philly.
Speaker 2: So was West Philly populated by white people?
Speaker 1: This was an all-white neighborhood, West Philadelphia. And first my aunt moved to West Philadelphia. Then another friend of ours, they moved to West Philly, so then hey, of course you know--it's a matter of time until you move from one place to the next.  And you move from one situation because hey listen, the neighborhood had so many gangs and just--the drugs started to come in and alcohol and whatever. And by not having a community that's organized, and structure in a community, you can't fight those kinds of things off.  You're not supposed to allow that to come in your neighborhood.
Story_ID: 7488
Speaker 1: I wanted to backtrack a little bit and ask you about your poems. What kind of poems did you write?
Speaker 2: Just poems to my mother [Ruby Gamble], you know like Valentine's Day, you know.  Like in kindergarten, you know--if it's Valentine's Day--I think the one that I saw that my mother had was a Valentine's Day card. And it was simple, but you know--I can remember my kindergarten teacher, Ms. Sherman, who was a wonderful person.  I remember her commenting to me about it. And then my mother and everybody said "Wow, how did he do this?  How did he write a poem?" You know, maybe ten lines, but not just like you know, "Happy Valentine's Day", you know.  No, this had something attached to that, you know.  So what would a very, very young person that's in kindergarten to write some kind of poetry like that?  So--you know, that's--that was the direction that I was moving into, sitting on the corners with the guys in the neighborhood, always trying to write songs. I wrote songs then for a group--we had a group, Pat Gordon. He grew up around the corner from me on Montrose Street.  Billy Clark, his brother Bobby, and John Tabron.  All of us. We used to stand on the corner, twelve or one o'clock at night, singing all of the hit songs, Frankie Lymon and Louie Lymon and all that stuff you know.  People would be telling us to shut up you know, get off the corner, whatever.  As you get older, you know, you start to follow that kind of thought.
Story_ID: 7489
Speaker 1: You said were an average student in school you said.
Speaker 2: Fair.
Speaker 1: Fair?
Speaker 2: Just fair, yeah, just fair.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A little better than average maybe?
Speaker 2: Well not--well average, then.
Speaker 1: Fair would be below or above average?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, I think I was just basically average.  Because I can't remember myself being one who was really motivated in school.  I mean I just did enough pretty much to get out, you know.  Even--in elementary school, I guess you just do what you have to, but towards the end, I pretty much didn't--'cause my mind was focused on music when I was in junior high and high school and I constantly--especially when the older I got, I was looking for outlets for music.
Story_ID: 7490
Speaker 1: Did you have any mentors in that regard, people that encouraged you to get involved in music or people that were already in music?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I'll tell you. Well the mentors during that time, I had basically most of the people that I knew that knew I was interested in singing and being involved in entertainment were trying to discourage me.  My family members. They said "You don't want to do that", but they discourage you to do that and I said "What should I do then?"  They didn't have no--"Get a job, get a job."  "Get a job for who and do what", you know what I'm saying?  So you know--I--a guy, I'll tell you a guy who really was encouraging to me was a guy named Herb Johnson.  Herb Johnson was a local singer and--he had a record called 'Have You Heard' and 'I'm Guilty'.  Herb Johnson was a guy who taught me how to even play the guitar. That was a major, major step forward for me because when I learned how to play the guitar, then I was able to play and write my songs.
Speaker 1: So how old were you when you learned how to do that?
Speaker 2: Then?  Herb Johnson--we were talking about maybe sixteen or seventeen, somewhere around there. I was just coming out of high school.
Speaker 1: Did you take music in high school?
Speaker 2: No. They didn't have any music--no, they had a music clas,s but--even my music teacher, Wendell Pritchett who was our music teacher at that time, I used to ask him you know and different people did they have any music courses at schools. It's not like today, today they have performing arts schools. They have one around the corner here which I think would have been excellent during that time. And if there would have been one person in my family who would have--I was always playing the piano.  My Aunt Bebe, she had a piano and I was always playing the piano, you know. She told me "Oh, get off the piano".  But they didn't know though.  People didn't know. The black community does not really know what to do because you don't know unless somebody teach you how to deal with issues. If you see somebody playing the piano all the time on their own every day, then what you need do is take that person and try to find them some piano lessons because they're gravitating to that instrument. That's not an ordinary thing for a kid to go over and just bang on a piano all day long for hours and hours trying to feel out how this instrument goes. It's a science to that instrument and if somebody could teach you how to play it, it would be much better.  Yeah, I mentioned Herb Johnson, when taught me how to play the guitar, he didn't know that much about the guitar himself.  But he taught me what he knew and what he knew was about four or maybe six chords. These were basic chords, these chords, you could sing any song to these chords. And you could write any song to them. So they were basic turnaround chords. And I eventually taught myself how to play the piano, pretty much those same kind of chords. So as far as school and during that time, music lessons--I suppose that there were people in our community, the African community, who were taking music lessons and dance lessons and so forth, and whatever. But I don't think it was that many. I don't think it was that many people getting that type of--having access to that kind of information.
Story_ID: 7491
Speaker 1: How did your real serious involvement with music actually begin--I mean, were you actually--I know you sang on the corner and were trying--you learned how to play the guitar, chords on the guitar, did you actually start to perform anywhere or, get with any friends and form a group?
Speaker 2: Well we did have a group like Pat Gordon and all of us and we used to go to the penny arcades. I don't know if you remember the penny arcades.  In the penny arcade, they had a booth there where you can actually make a record.  So we wrote a song, recorded our record and--took that record from the penny arcade, we took it to a radio station. We walked all the way to the radio station. Of course they couldn't play that record on the radio, because it was not the kind of quality record to go, but at least we found out where the radio station was.  I met the disc jockey there, whose name was Georgie Woods who was probably one of the most popular people in this city [Phliadelphia, Pennsylvania] at that particular time.  So I was like sixteen, fifteen or sixteen years old and--so that sparked your interest to let you know that there is a radio station, they play records and so we were rejected a little bit, but then after--then when we moved to West Philadelphia, then I was able to--to meet a lot of--a lot more people. And I started to travel more because while living here in South Philly, I didn't travel much. Basically stayed in South Philly, never went to Center City [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] much, which was only six or seven blocks away and there were people who lived in the city who lived maybe ten, fifteen blocks from Center City who's never even been in Center City for black people.  That goes for most cities--black people don't really travel too much out of their own neighborhood, you know. So--I suppose when I moved to West Philly, I started to travel a little more and that brought me back into town. And it made me more curious about the music industry and how to get a record--how to participate in the music industry and--I think once you get in that crowd, once you start to deal with the music business crowd, then you pick up information.  You say "Well now, how do you write a song?  How do you get a song published? How do you make a record? Who makes records?  I mean who is everybody", and then you start to find people and--so I met Tommy [Thom] Bell.  He and I started writing together and--and we went into Center City and it was unbelievable that it was called the Shubert Building [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]  then.  It's called the Marion Theater [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] now, which is really only about four blocks away from here. Maybe five blocks, and that's where all the record companies were.  Right in that one building. It was like New York.  New York had a place called the Brill Building, okay?  This building was called the Shubert Building and had all the publishers and it had the record companies, the production companies and so forth, whatever was in there, and--it was just a matter of time, just a matter of time to--to figure out how to--how to penetrate that business and get in.
Speaker 1: So you were still in high school when you were trying to figure out how to--
Speaker 2: Still in high school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the group?
Speaker 2: Well, it was called--well, the first group with Pat Gordon that we had in South Philly, it was called the Wardells.  Don't ask me where that name comes from, because I don't know, but it turned out to be the Wardells. And then--the group we had, Tommy Bell and myself, we had--we were a duet, so we called ourselves Kenny and Tommy.  Like Don and Juan, remember the guys that made 'What's Your Name'? So we were Kenny and Tommy like Don and Juan. So we made a record. We made a record and it was released and it did--it did okay. I mean it got on the radio, you know, but it wasn't a big hit.  Just here in Philadelphia.  Yeah, just a local, local--
Speaker 1: I heard of that.  Now that happens in Chicago [Illinois], there's certain songs that people my age now remember that are produced on 45s when they were kids, and they never get out of Chicago.
Speaker 2: Nobody else heard of them.
Speaker 1: Detroit [Michigan] it's the same thing.
Speaker 2: Same thing in Philadelphia.  You know they make hometown favorites or whatever the case may be. And then--after that, later on I went solo. I made a record by myself.  I wouldn't--when there's a solo when Tommy--he said he had to work and you know, we just drifted apart a little bit and we still were friends and we still worked together, but--so I signed with Columbia Records and--at the age of about eighteen or nineteen because me and Tommy--we made a record while we was still in high school.  So Kenny and Tommy, so--the best part of that era and all of that was when we had the Romeos, Kenny Gamble and The Romeos. That was the best group that we had, the Romeos.  Man, that was the band, Tommy and myself and [Leon] Huff and Roland Chambers, Carl Chambers and Winnie Wilford, and they even had--at one point, we had Stevie [Steve Caldwell] from the Orlons. The guy who used to sing at the Orlons?  He used to be in our band.  He played the bass. So we had a good band.
Speaker 1: Didn't the Orlons do a cut called 'Meet Me On South Street'?
Speaker 2: 'Meet Me On South Street', yeah. In fact, that was pretty much you know--Cameo-Parkway Records was like the big company during the early '60s [1960s] with Dick Clark and ['American] Bandstand', and you know, we tried our best to penetrate Cameo-Parkway and be a part of that, but that basically was off limits and we really could not get to first base with those guys. Every now and then we'd sneak in the building and they'd run us out of the building, and the funny part about it is that we finally wound up and we bought that building thirty two years ago.  We've been there for thirty two years. Same building.
Story_ID: 7492
Speaker 1: What was the deal with Dick Clark? Dick Clark was an American icon, I guess he was still on some level, the host of 'American Bandstand'. Everybody saw him on black and white TV every Saturday.
Speaker 2: Every day.
Speaker 1: Yeah, every day.
Speaker 2: I used to watch 'Bandstand' every day.
Speaker 1: That's right. It did come on every day at one point.
Speaker 2: Every day right after school. Two thirty, three o'clock, somewhere in that neighborhood.  Two hours, three hours or whatever the case, how long it was on.  I'd watch it in hopes that somebody like Jackie Wilson who would be on there, like Little Anthony and the Imperials would be on there, or Frankie Lymon or somebody black would be on Bandstand to sing.
Speaker 1: The Orlons--
Speaker 2: Anybody, so you'd be able to see them, you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Ruby and the Romantics.
Speaker 2: All of those great groups.  The Platters and--you had 'em all, you had 'em all on there. And so that was inspiring to see those-that was MTV [Music Television Network] before MTV, you know, Dick Clark, yeah. And so Dick Clark--even at one point you know there were times when you would try to go out and be a part of 'American Bandstand'. They wouldn't let any black people in on 'American Bandstand'.  Very seldom would you see a black person on 'Bandstand'.
Speaker 1: You're talking about the kids that were dancing in the studio?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) The kids that were dancing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The only time you would see a black face on 'Bandstand' is where there was a new dance that came out. And they would let the black kids on to teach that dance to the white kids. Then after they learned that dance, you wouldn't see any black people anymore. So they had their own black shows.  So you know America's segregated, and a foolish, immature conduct that was going on in America and still is pretty much from the segregation and whatever. That was immature for 'Bandstand' to promote Pat Boone and not play Little Richard.  You know, that didn't make sense.  I mean that wasn't right, you know.  It wasn't right for those artists to take the black artists' songs and exploit them only because they had charge and control of the media, you know. So--all of these were lessons and impressions that were--in my mind were lasting impressions for me, and they were not to be taken lightly.
Story_ID: 7493
Speaker 1: There are a lot of white performers from around here [South Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Frankie Avalon.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Bobby Rydell
Speaker 2: Bobby Rydell. Oh, they were great though. Bobby Rydell, Frankie Avalon.
Speaker 1: (simultanouesly) The Four Seasons.
Speaker 2: The Four Seasons I think were from New York. You have the Dovells, Len Barry, who's very talented. You had Fabian--who else was it?
Speaker 1: Was he from around here too?
Speaker 2: Fabian? Yeah, all from South Philly. All these guys were from South Philly.  Who else was it?
Speaker 1: Were the Ronettes from--
Speaker 2: The Ronettes were from New York.  You had the Orlons, you had Chubby Checker, you had Dee Dee Sharp, you had--it was tremendous amount of talent in Philadelphia at that time, you know. Lee Andrews and the Hearts, you know, so.  So the city was full of music.  I mean music was everywhere and--I was very encouraged--just didn't understand a lot of the things happening because everything seemed to be so race-based, color wise, you know.
Story_ID: 7494
Speaker 1: It just seemed to be so complicated because of--couldn't find the truth from anybody, from these publishers, you couldn't find the truth from them, you couldn't find the truth.  I mean what is this record business?  I couldn't find the truth about it.  So it took a lot just to find out the truth about the record business.
Story_ID: 7495
Speaker 1: By the time you graduated from high school in 1961, what were you--were you determined to pursue a music career?
Speaker 2: Well you know, in 1961 when I came out of high school, all I kept hearing from my family was you've got to get a job. You've got to go to work. You've got to find a job. Well I was trying to figure out what am I going to do?  I really didn't--school didn't really prepare you to do anything, not really, you know. And--so my--every chance I would get, I would--I'd be someplace where people where either singing or writing music or pursuing something that had to do with the entertainment business.
Speaker 1: How did you eventually figure out how to get in the business?
Speaker 2: Well I finally figured out how to get into business by working with a few people who were supposedly producers and songwriters. And by working with those producers, because we had written songs that they wanted to utilize, and they published our songs and we couldn't find really the truth in any of these people because you'd ask, you'd say "Well, what is the publishing business?" And their response to me was "Well, you don't need to know about publishing.  Don't worry about that. We'll take care of publishing for you." And then I would ask them, I'd say "Well what does a producer do?"  "Don't worry about being a producer because we're the producers and we're taking you."  I said "Well, can I come to the studio?  I want to come to the studio and make sure my song is being done right." So they invited me to the studio. And as an observer, I asked a--this gentleman's name was Jerry Ross, at this particular time. That was the guy who actually gave me and Tommy [Thom] Bell our break. I said "Is this what a producer does, what he was doing?"  I said "We can do that."  I knew that I could do that, because he didn't write the song, we wrote the song. A producer was basically a coordinator--a person who booked the studio, find the artist, managed the whole situation.  And had the last word on how the song sounds.  Because I knew eventually we would be able to do that. We'll be able to produce records and to--if we could get an opportunity to do so.  So--you know you--there's so many things that happened.  I'll tell you the things that sticks out in my mind.  That band, Kenny Gamble and the Romeos, that was--that was a major plus, because we had a strong, strong musical entity that (pause)--that knew how to play music and had a wonderful sound--the youth.  We were young, you know. All the guys were young. They're just learning how to play instruments, basically all self-taught.  And experimenting with these instruments.  We came up with a good unit.  Our unit was really tight and we were able to make money on the weekends. So I was actually able to make a few dollars on the weekend.
Story_ID: 7496
Speaker 1: Eventually what I did was, knowing that--knowing that I needed to really get a job and to secure myself because the industry--there's nothing promised in the music industry.  I went to school for medical technology. Went to a school here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] called the Franklin School of Science & Arts [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I took medical technology and that was to enable me to actually get a job and research. And it wasn't really that complicated.  I mean I went to, to the school for maybe about a year and a half. They taught me most of the functions and research and how endocrine--it was endocrinology basically that I was studying, and--I mean I really surprised myself to be honest with you, you know, that I was pretty good in learning how to deal with the body and plus I was real interested at that time. I was interested because in learning about the body in anatomy and pathology and all these things, something sparked in my head about how magnificent the body is. And how in the world could anybody put something like this together? So from my spiritual training as a kid, it's like something came together in that school when I was going because it reinforced the spiritual aspects of my life because it made me appreciate--made me appreciate God more.  And how magnificent the whole creation is and how delicate it is and how much--how much man really doesn't know.  Really doesn't know a lot and really doesn't have a lot of control. And that gave me those kinds of thoughts when I was going to school that you know, you're talking about the adrenal, you're talking about the spleen, you're talking about the lungs, you're talking about the spine, you're talking about kidneys.  You know--an unbelievable machine.  All these things function in all these different systems in the body.  They're functioning, and all functioning harmonious together.  And if one of them goes out, you've got a problem.  Chemical balance changes, the whole function of your body changes.  All these systems--your nervous system.  If something happens to your nervous system, you've got a problem. Your muscles start to--you have problems, you have circulation problems, everything starts happening. So that kind of gave me another perspective.
Speaker 2: Did you see the body as a manifold for other kinds of organization?
Speaker 1: I saw the body as the structure of the body and just the composition of it, and the mystery of it. The mystery of the body and the tissues and blood and the creation of all of these things was so profound--and that they were hidden from man's knowledge.  It gave me a different kind of perspective on life.  And my appreciation for like I said a moment ago, for the creator of this life. So as being a person who was creative in nature with music and--I always started to--thought about that experience in school about--about the body and life itself and how important life is and--you know, how sensitive it is and made me think of what are we doing here? These kinds of thoughts started to come into my mind.  I mean, can't--can't be to write a song, music, this is too big.  It's too big.  It's way out of perspective of the natural material mind.  This is much, much more than that.  So that started me on the path to a spiritual journey that--that actually strengthened my spirit to the point where I was able to pretty much take charge of my own destiny, because my spirit was leading me and that's what I felt anyway, my spirit was leading me.  I was getting in contact with it. So that it would give me more strength, because the body is so weak. The body is so weak, yet it's real strong, but it's weak, you know.  One little drop of poison can take you out of here.
Story_ID: 7497
Speaker 1: So you're continuing to write songs while you were in--
Speaker 2: Yeah I'm writing--. This was influencing my creativity.
Speaker 1: Did you ever work as a medical technician?
Speaker 2: Yes I did. I worked as an assistant, a medical technician at Jefferson Medical College [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I worked there for like seven and a half years, from like 19--maybe--'63 [1963]--maybe '62 [1962], '63 [1963], towards the--towards the beginning of '63 [1963] to maybe-- to maybe--not seven years, maybe six years.  Like 1968.
Speaker 1: I remember in my teenage years, you know, there were songs that you know--the tunes of the Delfonics starting to emerge. I guess the mid '60s [1960s], like '66, [1966]--'65 [1965] to '66?
Speaker 2: Well all this was going on at the same time. I was working, I had a job.  Tommy [Thom] Bell, he had a job.  He was working in a fish market.  Tommy Bell--(pause)--I used to see Tommy every morning, you know.  He would go to work, I'd stop by his job and 52nd [Street] and Market [Street], catch the el and go downtown. Tommy, he used to--he'd be--when I'd come home from work, he was in there working, cutting fish and [Leon] Huff was working in [New] Jersey in Cooper [University] Hospital [Camden, New Jersey]. So everybody--you know, the music industry was something that was slow, because it really did not pay. You had to have a job. I mean, you go home, your mother's telling you hey, you have to have a job.  Plus I wanted to help my mother [Ruby Gamble].  I wanted to help her so she didn't have to work so hard, you know, and I did, because everything that I pretty much made, I gave to my mother.  Because I really didn't need anything. I was still staying with my mother at that particular time.  And I had just basically needed car fare to get to and from places I was going.
Speaker 1: Now this is really news to people that they grew up in the '60s.  Thom Bell, and Gamble and Huff with the--have ordinary jobs.  Thom Bell cutting fish, with--you know, when you think of the elegant sound, the strings, and you know, here he's cutting fish, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah. He was the best--Tommy Bell was probably one of the best guys in that fish market.  I used to call him the big fisherman.  He was tremendous, Tommy Bell was.  He was a hard worker, and-very, very talented. Very talented and--you know, one thing led to another. And the funny part about all of this, it was like a fusion of things happening, so as you start to sit here and think about it, you start to say how in the world did you do all those things at one time, you know? And then during that particular time, you know--in addition to that, I was still learning the record industry and I had an opportunity to open up a record shop on Broad [Street] and South [Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. That was during the same time, I opened up a record shop.
Speaker 1: Were you working, running a record shop, and producing records?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Had a job--that's correct.  That's correct.  I had a record--
Speaker 1: Did you actually--okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: I had a record shop, right.  On Broad and South.  It was a small record shop to begin with.  On my job at--in Jefferson, after a few years I figured it out. It's basically the same experiments all over again. That's all you do.  I mean you know, you--it's the same experiments.  They're like government programs where they experiment on rats and--it was cancer research. And--so what I would do is--there was a gentleman, his name was Elijah.  He worked up on the--I forget what floor he was on.  Maybe the tenth floor or something like that. And I'd get him to help me out. And I'd pay him out of my salary, as long as the work was being done, you know. My supervisors, the guys who were my--as long as I was there on the day where we would sacrifice the animals and the days where we had to do the reports and so forth, and they were--I didn't have any problems.  They was very, very, became--in fact, they were my biggest supporters in my music, all the people at the hospital.  When I used to go perform at a club or something, everyone from Jefferson would be there, you know.  They all knew what I was trying to do and what I wanted to do, and they were very supportive of me. A young lady who was my boss, I think it was Kaye Williams, she was--she was tremendous, and helped me get to--she was very lenient. Sometimes she was a little hard on me, but she was very lenient and Dr. Rupp and all of the rest of the people there, so--you know. So it was interesting. That was an interesting time.
Story_ID: 7498
Speaker 1: The other thing that happened is when I opened up the record shop then that enabled me to learn the retail business and it was like a coincidence, opening up a record shop because my godmother Loretta she had--she had--she opened up--because she bought the club called Peps [Show Bar, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and in buying Peps, when she had the lease, there was a little store there, and she called me, you know. She said "There's a record shop, and do you want to open up a record shop?" I said "Yeah, I'll open it up."  I didn't know anything about a record shop or anything. All I knew is that I knew the records that were selling, and so I got a guy to fix it up a little bit for me.  Opened it up, and started selling records. Then I learned the retail business because now, you have to start--I had to find out where you buy the records from.  And so that became a whole another lesson within itself, to go to the One Stops to buy records. Because there were record shops who were selling records--like the Record Museum--for forty nine cents.  I go to the One Stop, I'm paying fifty cents to get a record.  I'm paying fifty cents to buy it. And they're selling it for forty nine cents. Two for sixty nine.
Speaker 2: How are they able to do that?  What's the answer to this riddle?
Speaker 1: I asked a friend of mine who--his name was Broadway Eddie. He got record shops in Camden [New Jersey] and whatever. So we became real friendly.  And Broadway Eddie and I--I asked Eddie, I said "Broadway, how much you paying for your records?"  He said "I'm paying like twenty nine cents."  I said "I'm paying fifty two, fifty three cents, you know."  I asked some of the other black record store owners, King James and a couple other guys. They're all paying fifty--fifty something cents for their records.  What I did was I said "Bro, will you buy my records for me for here on in.  I'll give you my list, buy them for me." They got so mad at Broadway for letting me know that you could buy 'em cheaper.  But how could I be competitive if I'm buying records for fifty cents? I had to sell my records for eighty nine cents. Now why would somebody even your next door neighbors--and we were neighbors.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I got a record shop and I'm selling Marvin Gaye for eighty nine cents and you can go three blocks away and buy it for forty nine.
Speaker 2: And get two for sixty nine.
Speaker 1: And you get the Temptations with it for sixty nine cents.  Hey--Kenny I like you but I'm going down to the Record Museum.
Speaker 2: They used to always say and they say now you deal with black business, they charge you too much money and all that kind of things.
Speaker 1: What it was--.
Speaker 2: (unclear) back of this--.
Speaker 1: What is is that it's that old black and white mess again. In business. It goes all the way back to like--it just reinforced what I thought about when I was growing up in South Philly that the Jews and Italians had all the stores, the grocery stores. The Jews had all of the clothing stores.  Very few blacks that I can remember.  I can't even remember maybe one, Campanella, who when I was growing up had a little candy store, that sold candy and potato chips and things like that.  But that's basically the same sickness that goes through this whole society, and I think that that is part of the immaturity of America. I think America has a lot to deal with in that sense where anytime Sid Williams, who was the One Stop and you had Raymond Rosen who was the other One Stops and David Rosen, and--the bottom line is that how do you get to the truth of the matter?  How do you get to the truth about publishing? How do you get to the truth about being a producer?  How do you get to the truth about how do you get into the business and really be a partner with somebody and work with them?  How do you get the truth about the retail business?  How do you buy an album for a fair price instead of robbing you, you understand?  Trying to make it almost impossible for you to be successful. So what has happened I believe that because of these things, I think that the African American community has survived them all and it has made us better for it, and that it has created a unique human in the world. And I think the future is going to be beautiful for the African people here in America.
Story_ID: 7499
Speaker 1: Talk about your first hits, you know.  I mean how did they keep--what was your first big hit that you think you had and what--
Speaker 2: Well the first big hit was--I'll tell you. Well the first--the biggest thing that happened in the music was the first time we even made a record. To get a record made was just a--just to be in the studio to get a record made, and the excitement of it is--you can't describe it. You can't describe the excitement that comes from something of that nature.
Speaker 1: What was the first one?
Speaker 2: Well, the first one was--you know, like the record store, we were making with Tommy [Thom Bell], you know, Kenny and Tommy, those records--there was a time when there was a dance out called the fish. Do you remember the fish dance?  Anyway, me and Herb Johnson who played the guitar for me, I went to audition and we wrote a song called 'The Fisherman', you know, the dance about the fish and we--they was going to put it out, but they didn't never put it out, you know. So I had a copy of the record.  I used to play it all night, all day long, all the time, you know, driving my people crazy--and then--you know, then you have the records with the Intruders like 'Together', ['(We'll Be)] United', that started to really happen--.
Speaker 1: That was a big hit.
Speaker 2: Those were starting--.
Speaker 1: Out in Motown [Detroit, Michigan], that was a big hit.
Speaker 2: See, in the Midwest, it did pretty good in the Midwest, and the story with that era there, is the person who really took us underneath his wings was a guy named Benny Krass.  He had a clothing store, Krass built a clothing store [Krass Bros. Clothing, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  In fact, Benny Krass, me and my brothers [Charles and Carl Gamble] and my mother [Ruby Gamble]--I had been going getting my clothes at Benny Krass's since I was a little kid. He was on South Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I met Benny Krass one day, I went down there to get some clothing. We went down there to get some clothes for the Romeos, and for our band.  We told him we had a band. So Benny Krass said "Well I sing, and I make records, you know. What would you guys charge me to make a record with me?"  So I followed through on that.  I went back and met with him and listened to him and--he had a real strong desire to sing and he didn't sound that bad, you know what I mean?  He was a little old, you know what I mean, but this was like a fantasy of his I guess, you know?  So what I did was I took Roland [Chambers] and I took a couple of guys and we went over to his--he lived in a big apartment building on the [Benjamin Franklin] Parkway [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and he had like a rehearsal room downstairs. So we went down in the rehearsal room, we rehearsed the songs for him.  I said "Well Benny, you know--here's what we'll do. I said we'll cut you. I said I'll get you a record cut", I said, "But then I want you to do something for me."  I said I wanted him to invest some money into us recording, the Intruders and another group called the Swans, they were called, a girls group. And he did it.  Gave us about seven or eight hundred dollars, all right? And so Benny Krass became my partner.  I said "Benny, We'll make you our partner." We cut the Swans and then the relationships I had made at the radio stations, I went to the radio station and a friend of mine who's name was Jimmy Bishop, who was now the program director of WDAS [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  He said "Well, why don't you get distribution?"  He called a friend of his in New York, and he said "Sell this record to this Bell Records."  We almost tripled our money you know, off of maybe like a six hundred dollar investment.  We got about thirty five, thirty seven hundred dollars or somewhere in that neighborhood, which was tremendous, because now we had thirty seven hundred dollars, we could get the record out of this and we're fishing, we're trying to figure out how to get into the business, and--so Benny Krass was a tremendous help. We started Gamble Records, we started a label called Gamble Records. The first record we put out for the Intruders was called--the label was called Excel Records, which somebody had that name already registered, so we decided to call it Gamble Records, I guess it was during the time it was Gordy Records and Gamble and Motown [Records] or whatever. So we're trying to be like Motown first of all. That was my inspiration--is Motown.  So to get your first big record, 'Cowboys to Girls', it was like--it was incredible. Because it was a series of events that led up to it. It was like you know, you get ['(We'll Be)] United' which was a pretty big hit, and 'Together' and then Tommy [Thom] Bell had the Delphonics, and he had a couple of hits with them.  You know, local, regional hits. Then all of a sudden--boom.  'Cowboys to Girls', 'La-La (Means I Love You)' and the 'Expressway to Your Heart' all three of them hit at the same time.
Speaker 1: 'Expressway to Your Heart' played on the Top 40 stations.
Speaker 2: Because they were a white group [the Soul Survivors].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was beautiful.  A lot of people didn't even know they were white in the beginning, but this was a white group.
Speaker 1: That's right, it mixed me up.  I couldn't--I knew the sound--.
Speaker 2: It was one of 'em.
Speaker 1: I thought they were--they had to be white to be on the Top 40, but they were sound was black.
Speaker 2: It was a black funky sound up underneath 'em. They were a white group. The other thing that happened was with the Intruders and the Delfonics, we had to fight to get those records played on Top 40 radio. And they were the biggest, most popular records in the white community. They were number one in all of the white record stores. They were the number one selling records in all the white record stores and those radio stations, because of the black and white mess with racism, they wouldn't play those records until we almost--had to threaten them almost.  And then all of a sudden they played these songs.  Now, these songs are the number one oldies for these stations. So this--I think this--this hatred that existed with some people and I think that really held humanity back from reaching its goal.  It can't really get to where it needs to go until it can shed all of that mess, you know. And--envy and jealousy. Stuff that they can't even control. You can't control those things, you know. Whether you're white or black or short or tall or whatever the case might have been.  I mean who can control that stuff, you know?  It's--I think the creative community is a gifted community because they really--bands together on excellence in helping one another and I think that I learned a lot from the creative community. So that number one record was like--it was unbelievable. 'Cowboys to Girls'.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And 'Expressway to Your Heart'. And 'La-La (Means I Love You)', that was--was a big lesson in that.  Another lesson of how hard it is to--to accomplish your goals in this country especially when you're black.  Got to fight twice as hard.
Story_ID: 7500
Speaker 1: Let's talk about how technology helped get the urban sound out there.  You talked about it off camera.
Speaker 2: The technology helped us because as I mentioned earlier, how hard it was to get our records played on the white stations and why was it so important to get it to play on the white stations, not because you had wanted white people to play your records, but the white stations happened to be stronger wattage, 50,000 watts, many of them non-directional, covered a lot more territory.  You could sell a lot more records.  You could reach a lot more people on the white radio stations here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and most cities across America, the black radio stations were pretty much at the upper end of the dial. They pretty much were low frequency, low wattage, and in the evenings, many of them were even daytime stations where they went off the air, maybe six or seven o'clock, so you had limited access. What happened in the mid-'60s is when FM radio came into play here in Philadelphia and around the whole country, that it really helped the whole industry. Because now, you had FM frequencies, which in Philadelphia and many stations here in--that were switching over to black music stations were switching to FM radio. They were like 50,000 watts. Some of them were a hundred thousand watts that could reach far distances. And in addition to them being able to reach far distances, maybe a hundred mile radius, it was stereo. So the sound of music changed, and we were right on the cutting edge of the change of the sound of music from mono to stereo.
Speaker 1: And also, just to interject here.  I think it's important, when talking about your music.  You were on the cutting edge of an elegant type of a sound.  The Philadelphia Sound was an elegant sound.  Did you all--how did you--did you have discussions about what kind of sound you wanted, what kind of music you wanted to put on here?
Speaker 2: Well I think we always discussed our music and it was basically a combination of all the influences that we had been affected by, which was the Motown [Records] sound which was an elegant sound and was basically mono. They were cutting it mono during that time because stereo didn't exist as it did--as much anyway. You know, people like Burt Bacharach and the Drifters and Dionne Warwick, these were the people that influenced us, you know. And so our experimentation with strings, our experimentation with the jazz instruments like the vibes and a full orchestra. We had a whole orchestra, the MFSB Orchestra which was--which a tremendous group of musicians that had wonderful capabilities, and we had a great group of arrangers, people who arranged our music to the point where it was almost symphonic.  Much of the music was symphonic because of the arrangements and many of the musicians, especially the string players were retired violin cello players from the Philadelphia Orchestra. So we had the best musicians that there were. And then we had the funky rhythm with the Romeos which were Roland [Chambers], [Leon] Huff and Tommy [Thom] Bell and Earl Young and Norman Harris, Ronnie Baker, Lennie Pakula, Larry Washington. We had a funky, funky rhythm section that classical, gospel sound, all jazz--mixed all up together. And then it was perfect for stereo because the separation then came now with music you know, where you have strings coming out this way, you have a saxophone over here, you have the drums and--you know. So the music was being expressed in a different way in stereo.
Story_ID: 7501
Speaker 1: How fast did things move after you first hit?
Speaker 2: Well things moved pretty fast after the--well it seemed to move pretty fast anyway after that. It took us [Kenny Gamble and Leon Huff] a long time to get where we were going, I guess a few years, you know.  I guess you can really say the beginning of everything was like when you were in high school, singing.  You know, that's the beginning of everything. But from 1967, '68 [1968], '69 [1969], they were real productive years because we recorded not only the Intruders, Delphonics, the Soul Survivors. We also produced Jerry Butler, with 'Only The Strong Survive'. We produced Wilson Pickett like around 1969, 1970 with 'Don't Let The Green Grass Fool You'. In the early '70s [1970s] we did Joe Simon. We did Dusty Springfield. So it was just one hit after another.  One hit after another and it was--I really--when people ask me, I say it was a miracle because there is no way to explain how it happened or--it just happened. Circumstances--it was a mixture of some of the finest performers, some of the greatest musicians, great engineers with studios--I mean it was a great team put together. And Gamble & Huff, we happened to be the ones who really motivated the whole fest of the Philly Sound. We pushed it. We promoted it and we--we wanted it to be the sound of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], the Philly sound. We wanted it to be that.
Speaker 1: How did you meet Huff and how did you all
Speaker 2: I met Huff--.
Speaker 1: --you know, what helped you decide that you were such a good collaboration, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I met Huff about 1961, down at the Shubert Building [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when Tommy [Thom Bell] and I were going down there.  I met Huff one day in there about 1961, 1962, and we were on the elevator together and we were talking about you know, how we wanted to write songs, what did he do? I said "What are you doing here, you know?"  He said "I'm writing songs on the fourth floor."  I said "Well I'm up on the sixth floor.  I'm trying to make a record."  I said "Let's get together sometime." So we got together one weekend, one Saturday at his house over in [New] Jersey. We must have wrote six songs together one afternoon.  Good songs.
Speaker 1: Any songs produced later on?
Speaker 2: Oh, we had a couple of them that were done with the Sapphires.  I don't know if you remember the Sapphires, a song called 'Who Do You Love?'  I wrote that along with Jerry Ross and so I think that--that was--that was a match that was just made in heaven, because it was just--every time we saw each other, we'd get together again. We'd write--let's write.  And every time we would sit down to write, we would just--it was just so fluent. It was just--five, six, ten songs, ideas. We had a lot of fun doing it.  The thing of it--and the beautiful part of it was is that it was a joy to work together.  And it still is. We still work together now, you know, a little older, you know, but we're not writing ten songs a day no more, but we used to write every day. Every day we would write songs, you know. And talk about songs and talk about the strategy of how to be competitive in such a competitive business where everybody is trying to get that number one record you know. So it's not an easy business.
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts on that those days? Did you--did you come up with like a major strategy, we're going to make songs, we're going to write songs, have these kind of themes, or this kind of sound to compete with let's say, the Memphis [Tennessee] sound, what's going on with Detroit [Michigan] or--
Speaker 2: Well we were really trying to be original in our approach to the music.  we wanted our songs--we always spoke of our songs in the context of classics.  Let's write songs that will be around forever. And thank God we did write quite a few that look like they're going to be around for a long, long time.  And that took strong criticism on our own works because we would be very, very critical about our work and I guess the sincerity that we had in writing those songs, that it just the great songs that we wrote, they came quick. They would be written in--some of them may be twenty minutes, they'd be done.
Speaker 1: What are some of the ones you consider your great ones?
Speaker 2: Great ones like 'Love Train', 'Family Reunion', I'm just talking about the ones I know, the ones that come off the top of my head that came quick.  'If You Don't Know Me By Now', 'Love I Lost', it took us a little longer to write that one, because we had started that song off from the beginning as a slow song. It sort of threw us off. But then it's too long, it seems like it's too long. It's dragging. Then Huff changed the tempo on it and it really fell right in place, you know. Even with Jerry Butler we wrote some wonderful songs. I learned so much from Jerry Butler. He was a great, great collaborator with me and Huff, you know. The songs we wrote for Jerry Butler like 'Moody Woman', 'Only The Strong Survive', 'Brand New Me', 'Never Gonna Give You Up', they were great, great songs to work. And Jerry Butler was--he was a great artist to work with because he was a favorite anyway from the Uptown Theater [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] all those years, and just to think that we were working with him was really a privilege. So--those songs. They came quick. They came quick and the beautiful part of it is that that we had a system that we had put together on how we wrote songs that--that we would catch everything.  Because we'd have a piano--say for example there would be a piano, and that piano would have a tape recorder on top of it. So we'd keep that tape running all the time. 'Cause you never know what we would come up with. We might just be playing around with something and then boom, we'd say "Hey man, that's good." But you'd have to go back on that tape, and we'd have to learn it ourselves because it's just flowing through you.  It's not something that we were actually doing ourselves, it's the spirit of the thing. The creativity is just flowing through you. So--it was fun.  It was fun and it was meaningful.
Story_ID: 7502
Speaker 1: Meaningful is like the key is key to this, in a lot of ways.  You even wrote a song called 'There's A Message In The Music' [sic, 'Message in Our Music'] (unclear).
Speaker 2: 'There's A Message In The Music' [sic, 'Message in Our Music']. That was pretty much getting toward the '70s, the middle of the '70s [1970s] when all the things seemed like they were coming together.  Everything started really to get a little brighter, you know.  Everything was taking form and the music itself was really the vehicle to express yourself, express my feelings, [Leon] Huff's feelings and the feelings of thousands of other people that we had talked to and people.  Just from what we saw--off the media and then the life itself, how life was so--so challenging and that it's up to you.  It's up to us to take control over it, to make life the way you want it to be. So the song, "The Message in the Music' [sic, 'Message in Our Music'] was that song was like--the key line in that song to me was, "Understand why you dance. We got a message in the music". So you'd be dancing and having fun, but listen to what we're saying.  "Open your ears and listen here", you know. "We're going to talk about all the things that's going down," in our neighborhoods, in our community and so forth and whatever. And the lyric in there said "We're going to try to make you see that things are not like they're supposed to be, because we've got a message in our music". And so what made me understand that the people understood was the immediate sales that we used to get on our music. This was immediate, as soon as these records would come out. They would sell millions and millions of records.
Speaker 1: There was definitely a connection--you connected.
Speaker 2: We connected with the people.
Speaker 1: With the aspirations of the millions, you know.
Speaker 2: Of not only black, but white. Everybody. This was all around the whole world.  But mainly our target was the African American community. That's what I talk--that's where our experience came from. And we were talking about our experiences as African people and and then when you really saw it, because if you ever went to a concert, a live concert and when these songs would be performed, you'd have 25,000 people singing every word in those songs. And I said it's getting across.  Just like the rappers today, or in the case might be, you know, that the kids know every word.  That's the same thing they did with our music.
Speaker 1: Several years ago, I guess about ten years ago, Public Enemy, produced a cut about the slave trade ['Can't Truss It'].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I remember 'Ship Ahoy' from 1973.
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973], yeah, '74 [1974]--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The O'Jays--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --somewhere around there, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) --yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, 'Ship Ahoy'--.
Speaker 1: And you all were the first ones to talk about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, 'Ship Ahoy' was an album, and, and unlike in the '60s [1960s] where most of the business was really 45s, the era that we came in with, with stereo and FM radio, it encouraged albums.  So what we were able to do and what we decided to do was create concept albums, concept albums that included like the song, 'Ship Ahoy', which was a song about the, the Middle Passage, about the African slave trade and how the, this ship was coming from Africa and the relationship between the slaves and the master.  And the sound effects that were in there with the whips cracking and the, and people dying and so forth and whatever, to make our people conscious, to make our people aware of part of our ancestry because--.
Speaker 1: And that's the first time that had been done outside of the black theater, you know--.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --outside the black theater experience.
Speaker 2: Well, really, that song in reality was like a theatrical piece.  And the O'Jays performed it a couple of times on the stage, and they got standing ovations because the African people here in America, like myself, we were--I would like to know more about my ancestry if it was available, and if you could get the truth about it, you understand.  But we have made up our own story as African people.  We have, we have made something out of nothing here in America, because that's what this country has given us--pretty much nothing to work with.  And we've made something out of it.  And so as we learned bits and pieces about the history and the things that went down, that song, 'Ship Ahoy' pretty much was the bits and pieces that I had, I had learned about.  Me and [Leon] Huff were talking about it.  I said, "Let's write a song about, about slavery."  And that whole album had pretty much--the album cover was, was, was about slave ships and so forth.  So I had a story to it, and that's what we were trying to do.  Like the message in the music, this was the message.  The message was, was--well, really, we answered that.  But love was the message because that was another song that we wrote with MFSB, love was--we were trying to tell a story with our music.  It was a body of work that we were doing.  We're not just writing songs.  We were actually painting a picture.  We were actually creating a body of work that would be connected to each other.  As far as the message songs go, they were all connected with each other.  And then, and then the love songs, they were as good as any other love songs that you can imagine.  I mean we had some great love songs that, that, you know, romantic songs.  I mean we had some great romantic songs, you know, Tommy [Thom Bell] wrote 'People Make the World Go Around'--I mean Linda [Creed]--that's, that's a great message song because it's people that make things happen.  And, 'Betcha by Golly, Wow', you know, 'Close the Door', Teddy Pendergrass, 'The Love I Lost', Lou Rawls, 'You'll Never Find Another Love Like Mine', the O'Jays, you know, so many great songs, you know.
Speaker 1: 'Hooks in Me'.
Speaker 2: 'Hooks in Me', 'You're My Sunshine', and, and that, it goes, it goes on and on and on because, you know, it wasn't just Gamble and Huff.  You know, the best thing that I think that, that we were able to do was, not just to write and produce so many records, but also to help and develop other songwriters and producers, you know, because when you look at [Gene] McFadden and [John] Whitehead who are tremendous talents, tremendous talents.  You look at Bunny Sigler, unbelievable talent, Tommy Bell, Linda Creed, unbelievable team, Sherman Marshall, who wrote for Teddy Pendergrass, 'The Whole Town's Laughing at Me' and 'It Don't Hurt Now' and he wrote, 'Then Came You' for Dionne Warwick and the Spinners, and you get Dexter Wansell who was a tremendous musician and, and arranger.  And, and so many more, Cynthia Biggs, Vinny Barrett who wrote, 'Love Won't Let Me Wait', and Bobby Eli and Norman Isaac.  I mean so, it was a, it was a group of people who were inspired, and the music and what we tried to do is, during all of our meetings--'cause we would have meetings where all of us would be in the meetings.  And we would talk about what we wanted to say in the music.  My suggestion to them all would be "Let's talk about the truth.  Let's talk about peace, let's talk about brotherhood.  Let's talk about unity.  Let's talk about what people desire for", and this is what people long for in the world, is peace.  Peace, that's it.  Let's make the best out of the world, the best in the human being, in my view, is when the human being is at peace with himself, and peace with everyone else.
Story_ID: 7503
Speaker 1: We [Kenny Gamble and Leon Huff] have a number one record right now.
Speaker 2: Oh, really, okay.
Speaker 1: With Nelly, the song is called 'The Dilemma', okay.  They sampled one of our songs, that we did with Patti LaBelle.  It's called 'I Love, Need and Want You'.  So we've got a number one record today, and that song is like thirty years old.  So it, it's like, the rappers are like recycling the songs and taking little pieces from the old and it's like a fusion--I, I love what the rappers are doing.  I, I love their music.  I love their, their whole technique, the, the new technology is just, it's just amazing.  I'm, I'm anticipating that next step.  Where does it go from here?  You know, where, where does music and entertainment go from here.  It almost seems like--I don't know, I guess they, they got something out there, that it'll go someplace.
Speaker 2: Do you have any idea where you'd like to see it go from here?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I think we had our run.  We had a good--we made a good contribution.  I'd just like for it just to be free, truthfully, I mean, you know, the rappers are, you know, people criticize the rappers a lot, you know, but that's what the world is.  The world produced--that's what the world is, with the rappers telling the people about what the world really is.  This world here is--and these young brothers and sisters are very, very articulate people.  And I think that the message that they're sending out there is something that needs to be--it needs to be taken heed to, that when you see the rappers and, you know, they complained about rock and roll.  You know, they complained about rhythm and blues.  They complained about everything, Elvis Presley, and you know, so now they're complaining about rap music only because it's like seeing yourself in the face.  You know, and you don't like what you see.
Speaker 2: Well, some of it, to tell the truth, is that you see--yeah you see things in the face--it's not necessarily you sometimes.  It's just seeing--.
Speaker 1: But it's society though.  It's what the world--
Speaker 2: It's symptomatic of a lot of things that--.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, it's, it's the world, it's the world that produces the world.
Speaker 2: Like killer bees.
Speaker 1: That's those little motorcycles these guys ride around.
Speaker 2: So it's, like the materialism, with the diamonds and the Bentleys and this, that and the other, that's where the world is coming from.  That's where people come from.  They do anything for money.  We wrote a song called, 'For the Love of Money', which was similar, but a little more musical and, and a little more, a little more laid back.  'For the Love of Money' because we saw that people will do anything for money, you know, and that's what that song says.  You know, that song says, hey, for the love of money, people will--a woman will sell her body, people will steal from their mother.
Story_ID: 7504
Speaker 1: You've taken some of the messages from your music and really applied them to some of the practical realities of life in this neighborhood [South Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you've started a development company [Universal Companies, Inc.].  I know there was a big development a couple of years ago where you were developing the Royal Theater on South Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]
Speaker 2: Well, if you notice, you know, most of the liner notes on all the albums, I used to write all the liner notes just about, and I used to speak about a universal community of truth and a universal message and all this and whatever.  So around 1978, we wrote a song called 'Let's Clean Up the Ghetto'.  And it became, it became a major hit, especially overseas.  It was a giant hit over in Amsterdam [Netherlands] and Europe and places like that, but it became a hit here in the [United] States.  And it became a program where we used to go out into the communities and organize classes and clean-up drives and so forth and whatever, Clean Up the Ghetto Week.  It was--and so we did it for a few years, and, and we continued it.  But in '78 [1978], what I did was, I started buying some of these properties in, in my old community which was devastated, a lot of vacant properties and vacant lots and so forth and whatever.  And that's all over the country, that's the way it is in the black community.  You got so much devastation.  So I started buying these properties, and over about a ten year period, I had accumulated maybe about, about 120 of them, right in this particular area.  And now, the big question was, was what are you gonna do with all of these raggedy houses, you know, now that you've got all of these places, what are you gonna do with them?  So I--buying them, and, you know, I had an idea of what I wanted to do with them, but how to do it and all of the, the complicated, complications that go along with developing these houses, I hadn't really thought it all--all of it through.  But that's how it is when, when you're on an adventure and you're on a mission.  So I thought about it and, and then I said "If we're really gonna do something to change the community, you got to live in the community."  So I was ready for it.  I was ready because my, my soul was telling me that, hey, listen, you know, life is beautiful, and, and is it best to be connected with, with the force of change than to let this life just slip by on some frivolous things that, that only have its place in this dimension.  This dimension is too short.  This--life is, is long, long, long lasting, and this dimension is very, very short.  So I decided to move, me and my family moved back into the community.  And it was very devastated.  But it was a statement, number one, because I had worked with so many politicians.  I had worked with so many community groups.  And what I found out is that nothing was really happening for the community, and so now I decided to, to make that move and, and do it myself, and see if I could help out to establish something that would be a little more to my liking instead of working with other people.
Story_ID: 7505
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Well my hopes and concerns for the black community is to is to be able to fill that, that emptiness.  To be able to fill the emptiness with what was taken out of the African American community, which is this slavery, this legacy of slavery that left the African American community without education and a desire for education, and knowing the importance of education, that left the African American community in such social shambles because during this particular time of their growth and development in the country, the African people, that they were not allowed--that it was against the law for them to be married, against the law for our people to be educated to read and write.  Well my hopes and aspirations is that we create communities that stress education and make education our number one priority. I pray that our community is one where we make a priority the bond of marriage and family, and generations to come.  If education and family and economic participation and development is observed, we'll be able to be very competitive.  Not only in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], not only in America, but in the world, the stage of the world. And the other thing is is as I note, is that our community nationwide must understand through that education that it is the process of America that must be held on to. It's the process of America that we must save.  That process is the rules and regulations that America is standing on. The Constitution, the Declaration of Independence, the Bill of Rights.  The flexibility of these laws--being able to add to them. To be able to take away from them. You've got to protect those documents. And because that--those are the documents that have given us this tremendous resurgence of a people from a hundred years ago or a hundred fifty years ago. So only through those laws and through those rules and regulations that we as African American people, as descendants of the slaves have been able to accomplish and do the things that good doing in America today.  So I would hope in the future that we become more--more aware of our rights as citizens, because these are universal rights, the freedom of religion, the freedom of speech, freedom to carry arms, freedom of assembly. These are universal laws.
Speaker 1: Rights are always been for the last--since the [U.S.] Civil War, you know, they had certain rights on paper, but they really haven't been ours until we took them, did something about them.
Speaker 2: Well, I think that you have to really take advantage of opportunity.  You can't wait for someone to give you anything.  Just like--I was saying earlier about economics.  I mean it doesn't make sense that our community--especially here in Philadelphia--we don't own any of the stores in our community.  So what we're doing here, Universal, Universal Company [Inc.] is that we're dealing with those issues. Those hundred and twenty properties were the beginning of a community development corporation that is involved in education, we have charter schools. We are now education management organization where we have managing schools for the school district of Philadelphia.  We have about 2200 students in our system now.  We have a training center where we have close to maybe a thousand clients.  We have relationships with Verizon [Communications]. We have relationships with the hospitality industry. And so what we're doing here at Universal is providing leadership to a community that really does not have much leadership. And also we have become an information center at Universal. We are able to take information to a community that doesn't get much information.  Just like when we were starting out in the music business. Who would tell me the truth, who is going to tell the people the truth?  Who is going to tell our community, the black community the truth about housing--that it's better if you can own your own home?  And that there are programs out here that you can own your own home just as cheap as paying six or seven hundred dollars, five hundred dollars a month.  Rent to somebody?  You could be buying your own home and you have equity and who's going to explain all of these things to our people--because if we don't educate our own people--you have to educate. Black people have to educate black people.  We have to be--not saying that you can't have other ethnic groups working here, but we have to be in charge of the results.
Story_ID: 7506
Speaker 1: Where does your inspiration come from?  I mean doing all the good things that you're doing and the lyrics you've written, I just wonder like who or what, you know, inspired you?  What people, what books, what events inspired you to--,
Speaker 2: Well, let me start with people. The people who inspired me first of all.  I had to go all the way back to when I was at the Kingdom Hall [of Jehovah's, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I thought that that was a great and nurturing environment to give me spiritual awareness.  And I think that the books that inspired me the most would have to be the Old Testament and the New Testament, and then in later years, I ran across the Koran which was definitely the strongest inspiration to me and still is today. I've read the (unclear)--I've read all of the books pretty much that as far as religion is concerned. The spiritual aspect of things, you know. I've read quite a few and studied quite a few of the spiritual trends of thoughts.  I think that Islam has has a pattern and a common sense to it that makes things work for me, and the practicality of Islam in human life, as being a human being, and I think that it speaks directly to the nature of the human being.  Now, those persons who influenced me is of course Elijah Muhammad, who was a tremendous voice for African American people here in America.  W. E. [B.] DuBois who was--I read his book 'The Philadelphia Negro' and that inspired me and led me to this neighborhood by the way that we're working in [South Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is that same neighborhood that he did that study in for The Philadelphia Negro book.  So it's got some historical ramifications to it.  Marcus Garvey. Those were the people that you didn't read anything about in school at all. You had to learn about all of this out of school. These are the people that inspired you to understand your blackness and understand who you are and where you are and where you should be going as a people, and what the world is really like instead of being in a neighborhood where you don't own none of the stores, you don't make anything, you don't own your house.  You don't own anything.  And that really is what it's all about. So these were people crying out of the wilderness, you know, Malcolm X, you know. And--just logic.  Just little things that unless somebody tell you, you won't know. And I think that it was profound on these men, [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], for example who gave their very life and put themselves in danger because of this hatred in this world because there was an effort in this country and in this world to keep the black man from learning.
Story_ID: 7507
Speaker 1: All the success you've had, were there temptations along the way that could have pulled you away from this kind of a mission?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I'm human like everybody else, you know, and I've made some good moves and some bad moves in life, you know.  I think the good moves just have to--they have to outweigh the bad moves, you know. And--so some things slow you up you know, because you make emotional decisions, but the older you get, the better you are at making good decisions.  The more informed you become about life and--things are not so new, you know. A lot of things aren't new.  Just--relationships can be a hindrance to you if you don't know how to deal with relationships.  So I myself like many other guys my age in, from the black community, I've had stumbling blocks that could have discouraged me. But I think that every one of them made me stronger.  It made me stronger because I knew then that--that what the reward for working for humanity was far greater than anything that you could get right now.  Because it's only temporary.  I'm working on my spirit. I'm working on my relationship with the giver of life.  I'm working for that. So that connection means more to me than anything. This is what--when you listen to Malcolm X and you listen to Elijah Muhammad, and you listen to--who was really a great influence on me was [Sweet] Daddy Grace, you know.  Who used to have a church right around the corner from me. That was my inspiration for my music. The band and the house of prayer was unbelievable. I experienced Daddy Grace. A lot of people will never know those days, because this was a dynamic human being in the black community. Father Divine was right down the street from me. These were dynamic human beings.  All these things had an effect on my character and my psyche and also many of the Muslims here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] who were--who were in my opinion you know, were proud. Proud black people who wanted to do for themselves, who were tired of begging people for jobs, tired of including themselves into places that--that wasn't really welcoming black people there.  Have your own. Compete with other groups and it's fair. There's nothing wrong with it. There's nothing wrong with loving yourself as a people.  There's nothing wrong with with black people being in power and making decisions. It's better.  It's better for everybody if African people in decisions-making making decisions for everybody because we'll be more just.  We'll be more just, because we've been through so much. So that's what inspires me. And what inspires me is that the opportunity for African people to come to a point where they will be able to--to experience life in a more qualitative way.  You know, my children, children's children, your children, my man over there, his children.  I mean-'cause it doesn't matter. And like I said before, who cares about black and white?  Michael Jackson said it don't matter if you're black and white because who cares?  Who can correct it in the first place?  What choice--concentrate on the stuff that we have control of.  Nobody controls that. So if anything pushes you down the road, of something you can't control, then that's a demon that's making you go through this exercise knowing that you have no control of it.  And if you get wrapped up in it like race because you're black and this person's white or this person is a Dutch and this person's a Welsh or this person here is Irish and this one's a British. And so who cares? Well this guy's an Eskimo and this guy's a Russian, and this guy's a Chinese and a Japanese. And you gonna--ethnic wars and religious and all this--we all come from the same tree. Concentrate on the things that we can control. And so that's what I believe this effort is that we're doing here at Universal Companies [Inc.]. That's the message that we're trying to get out.  Love one another.  Love is more powerful than hate, and in addition to that, what Islam teaches us is that--get the most out of this world and please your creator so that you'll make paradise too. That's the best you can get.  Get the both--get the best out of both. Get the best out of this world and get paradise too. And to make paradise, what does that mean?  OR to go to heaven or whatever those phrases are.  What does that mean? That means that you have control of your behavior.  That you qualify to go to the next dimension in a different way. And what does controlling your behavior mean?  That there are rules and regulations to this life. And they're in every--all of these messengers or profits, they're all the same.  They're nothing but men make Muhammad. He was man. That's what Islam did for me. And what inspired me. Islam inspired me because I'd always thought of the spiritual aspects and who was Moses? Who was all of these people?  Who was Zoroaster?  I mean all--Buddhas, and all these different people, you got all these different people, who are they?  Islam teaches you that--what I always thought about Jesus you know. He's only a man, you know. He's only a man, an inspired man.  By the giver of life who inspired him to give you a message.  They all had the same message--and so there's a line of these inspired people. And so they became examples for you and me to reach our higher selves, our higher goals. And that's what I'm trying to do.  I'm trying to follow those examples.
Story_ID: 7508
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Ruby Gamble] get a chance to see you become successful?
Speaker 2: She's still living.
Speaker 1: She's still living?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  My mother's eighty-six, yeah.
Speaker 1: So she's seen the whole thing?
Speaker 2: She's seen the whole thing.  Oh yeah, she's beautiful. And you know, I can remember my mother telling me many years ago when Wilson Goode was going to run for mayor [of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. That was before that, Charlie Bowser who was the first guy. And I had not really been thinking about politics at all.  I had never been--I mean, I never even thought about it.  And--and somebody, a friend of mine living in Wynnefield [Pennsylvania], and my next door neighbor, he was a judge, Eddie Cox.  He said "Kenny, are you involved in politics?"  I said "No."  I said "Just trying to write my songs and he said there's a guy around the corner who's running for mayor, Charlie Bowser.  He said he wants to talk to you."  Well--I said "I'll talk to him", you know. So I went and talked to him. And like a light went off in my head.  I said "Wow, we could do a lot if this guy was the mayor.  We could help the black community. We could help people because he would be focused in on the needs of the community." So I got involved in politics and I could remember my mother--I told her, I said you know, "I'm going to help this guy out, Charlie Bowser, this black guy.  He's going to be the mayor."  She said "No black man can be the mayor of Philadelphia."  But that's because of her background in Alabama, that whole--you know what I mean, she wasn't really thinking. She didn't know, you know, and she really didn't me to get involved. She didn't want me to go through all of that because you know, she really felt that politics was not really a place for me to be, so she was trying to discourage me a little bit. But I found out and I learned a lot from that experience that you could put a black man--you could put any man in politics. Black man, Irish man, Polish man, Dutch--we don't care who he is, as long as the issues affect what you want.  It doesn't matter what color the man is. What matters is what the issues are. Today we have John Street as the mayor, so--you can do it.
Story_ID: 7509
Speaker 1: You're still young and you're relatively--.
Speaker 2: I'm fifty nine.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you still have things that you want to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I'm pretty much doing what I want to do. Me and my partner [Leon] Huff, we talk all the time about you know, writing some more songs and I'm hopeful that we will one day write something for--there's a couple of good artists out here today, and if we had a chance, we might be able to write something for them that would inspire us to write, you know.
Story_ID: 7510
Speaker 1: As you look back on the body of what you created so far, what do you see as you can think about?  Do you see yourself as having a legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, people say that.  You know, they say we're in the Songwriters Hall of Fame and that's pretty good. We [Kenny Gamble and Leon Huff] started out as two guys who wanted to get one hit record, and they just put us in the Songwriters Hall of Fame where all the great songwriters with Cole Porter and [George] Gershwin and all these guys--that's pretty good, you know for two guys who started out, and we're really proud of that. And so we've done a lot more than we ever dreamed that we would do, you know. So I think that--I think you just do things because you can do them, you know? You shouldn't do them because you're trying to leave a legacy or anything like that.  I wouldn't do things because of that.  I would--I do things because they make me feel good.  Like the music used to make me feel good, what I'm doing now with Universal Companies [Inc.], that makes me feel good, and I know that if we can inspire one person to continue to do this for the next generation. It might take a hundred years for for even this work that we're doing here, as small as it is, because it's a major, major issue that we're dealing with, with the growth and development of the African American people.  And you're talking about all kinds of psychological social problems and situations that are going to be a--they're not going to be easy to deal with.  But I think at some point, it's going to all start to help and it's gonna--it's gonna happen.
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: The message in the music.  If they remember that Gamble and Huff, Philly International [Philadelphia International Records], Universal Companies, there was message in the music and the message was about life. About the beautiful gift of life and how to respect it in every way for the magnificence that it represents is so complicated, but yet so simple. And that we had an opportunity to share in on it.  The odds of us, me and you and the rest of us, being present in this dimension were tremendous odds. And to be thankful that we have an opportunity to share in on this dimension and to give it the best that we can. That's what I'd like people to remember about Philly International, Gamble and Huff, the music--that it was quality and it was the best that we could do with the life that we had, and that we tried to do something really positive, and tried to do something that would--and that we were prayerful and humble and that--and that they can do it too.  That anybody can do it, and that you should do it.  You should do it because it's the best thing to do with your life is to serve humanity. That's the best thing you can do. That's what I'd like to see.
