Story_ID: 599029
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Lawrence Edward Gossett, I'm known as [HistoryMaker] Larry Gossett and Gossett is spelled, G-O-S-S-E-T-T.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how is Lawrence--is it spelled L-A-W (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E.
Speaker 1: Some people--
Speaker 2: That's my birth name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, some people spell it L-A-U--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: They do.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: I was born on February 21st, 1945, in the great city of Seattle, Washington.
Speaker 1: All right, and sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a politician and elected official.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And currently I'm serving my fifth term as a member of the Metropolitan King County Council. Which is the legislative branch of government in Martin Luther King, Jr. County [King County].
Speaker 1: Washington, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay. Sir, what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is October 25th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my office, we're on the twelfth floor of the King County Courthouse [Seattle, Washington], in the office space that houses all the nine members of the King County Council.
Speaker 1: All right, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And we're in my office.
Story_ID: 599030
Speaker 1: So before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that management always has me ask--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: They're kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First question is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: I would say that it is pork chops.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, I would say that it is purple.
Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: A favorite time of the year is the Christmas holiday season.
Speaker 1: And favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination is Santa Barbara, California without a doubt.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I am proud to serve you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I appreciate having an opportunity of serving other people.
Story_ID: 599031
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Nelmon Gossett] side, but we're gonna start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's full name is Johnnie [Johnnie Carter Kelley], J-O-H-N-N-I-E, Evelyn, E-V-E-L-Y-N, Carter was her maiden name, C-A-R-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born on July 12th, 1924.
Speaker 1: And where?
Speaker 2: She was born in Nigton, Texas.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell Nigton?
Speaker 2: Nigton is spelled, N-I-G-T-O-N, it's a black township in East Texas.
Speaker 1: Nigton, Texas.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind that name, it sounds--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) suspiciously like trying to say something else.
Speaker 2: It is, if you look at the encyclopedia, the original name of it was Nigger Town. And they, the, the residents over the years, and my mother was never able to give me a specific explanation of how it came to be Nigton, but it's, it turned, from Nigger Town to Nigton.
Speaker 1: Now is there a, a story associated with that--given that name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just know it's all--I, I think it's more than I probably know, but my mom's, because her, her mother [Minnie Mark Carter] and father [Clarence Carter] were born in the same, you know in Nigton also. And I think she can only go back about two generations. Somehow after slavery ended, her grandfather [Jefferson Carter] and others got a piece of land that they used to work for some plantation owner. And somehow they got ownership and more, more and more black families, I think at its height maybe fifty families and six hundred people lived there by the 19--early 1920s. And she said beginning in 1940, during the war [World War II, WWII], it got pretty, pretty small, more, most people had moved out by then. But at its height it had six hundred people, two or three black churches, a post office, a little post office. Not much, it was rural, people worked, eight to ten other families including hers owned the land. And other blacks worked as sharecroppers or workers on the land. So very rural community where she was born.
Speaker 1: What's it near, what part of Texas is it in?
Speaker 2: It's near (laughter) Lufkin [Texas] and its 110 miles southeast of Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now there--
Speaker 2: And, and about twenty miles east [sic.] of Tyler, Texas.
Speaker 1: Now it's--there are other towns in, I've heard of that same region that black towns, one, one is Pelham [Texas] and there was another one I heard of--
Speaker 2: Oh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) from another person I interviewed [HistoryMaker Maxine Duster].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it's a all-black town?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all-black township.
Speaker 1: Okay, township.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay. It's interesting to find out if, if the pe- the people named it, it doesn't seem like the pe- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I don't--
Speaker 1: --peop- people would've named it that themselves--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--yeah, but I don't, I don't rule that out, I don't know how it got named that, I just know that they came to call it Nigton.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) N-I-G-T-O-N, but when we looked at it, my wife [Rhonda Oden Gossett] and I looked up in the encyclopedia, it actually mentioned Nigger Town in its roots.
Story_ID: 599032
Speaker 1: What do you know about the ancestors on your mother's [Johnnie Carter Kelley] side, how far back can you trace them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can just go back a couple of generations, her father was Clarence Carter, and he was born around 1886. And her grandfather was John Carter [sic. Jefferson Carter], he was born a slave in 1860, her mother was Minnie Marks [sic. Minnie Mark Carter], M-A-R-K-S [sic.], and she was born in 1996 [sic. 1896]. So there's about a ten year, ten or eight year differential in mother's and father's age.
Speaker 1: Eighteen ninety-six [1896], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, her mother was also born in Nigton [Texas], her father too, and I know that her mother's father, whose first name escapes me. He was a Marks [sic. John Mark], but he worked for the Carters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he worked for John Carter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there were, you know they were African Americans with some Mexican blood in them though, because they said some Mexicans came through there and married and settled, a few Mexicans. (Cough) And of course my mother shared stories that they had white blood in them from extending back to slavery when the, you know the master had his way.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that they tell about the town, and what the town's relationship was to the surrounding community or, the surrounding white people that lived there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was--yeah, my mother said that, that it was isolated, they're kind of isolated, there were many, many days, many, many weeks that would go by when they would not see that many white people at all. Maybe somebody bringing the mail through, and she--I--she said from the time that she was about nine years old, when she was kind of conscious. Before she was nine, she liked going into town, liked having an opportunity to go into Tyler, Texas and ride, you know the bus. And see and houses together and have paved streets, there were no paved streets in Nigton, when she came up in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s]. But when she was about nine or ten, she and her friend got--and sisters, got a little upset that they would have to sit in the back of the bus. And after that she didn't like going into there, 'cause she said, "No matter what, the bus driver would call us, girls and they would call my daddy, boy. And I couldn't understand why he, nobody in the community called my daddy--," who was a pastor, by the way, Clarence Carter was a C.M.E., Colored Methodist Episcopal [Christian Methodist Episcopal], pastor, and he would be called boy. And they'd have to stand up if white folks wanted to get on the bus. That, that, that bothered her, and then she said her grandmother [Sarah Randolph Carter], or her great-aunt, I'm not really sure which, who had been born a slave and was still alive in the '20s [1920s], used to, she was amazed that she would go throughout the community and she would take no mess from blacks or whites, you know. She told me a fascinating story about this woman whose name escapes me, but I probably can get it 'cause my mother is still alive. She would even go in the stores and get a few things she wanted and say you know, "Don't ask me for no money. I worked long enough for you people," you know and, and the whites didn't bother her 'cause she was an eccentric old woman. That's fascinating that they she was able to get away with stuff like that, but she, that she actually lived to be 100 years old, her great-aunt. But my mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, that's interesting that she, that she could--
Speaker 2: Yeah. See would--
Speaker 1: --I guess accumulate a certain amount of, I don't know what you call it--
Speaker 2: I don't know what it was, but she would talk to them and, what classically in the South would've called disrespectful, but other Negroes, other colored folk would've been hung for the way she would tell people to get out of her way, or, or tell them, "I'm not paying for this, are y'all crazy?" It was an interesting story that was, that's the only one that I kind of remember, and the humiliation of a distinguished man like her father, at being called boy bothered her. She always went to all-black schools so she never had opportunity to comment on or talk about what it, what it would, was, would've been like going to school with whites. 'Cause she never had that experience, never thought about it and not, at least not in her, in her day.
Story_ID: 599033
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Johnnie Carter Kelley] ever talk about what the school was called, that she attended (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Emmett Scott High School [Emmett J. Scott High School].
Speaker 1: Okay named after the--
Speaker 2: Class of nineteen forty--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --three [1943].
Speaker 1: Emmett Scott High School, named after Emmett Scott [Emmett Jay Scott] the secretary to Booker T. Washington, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's who, her, her school is named after.
Speaker 1: Right, okay so--
Speaker 2: And it, it was located in Tyler, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay. In Tyler (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause they were living in Tyler by the time she was in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes so--
Speaker 1: So, she grew up in both in Nigton [Texas] and Tyler?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and because he [Gossett's maternal grandfather, Clarence Carter] got to pastor a church by the time she was sixteen, seventeen in Tyler, Texas a C.M.M.--a C.M.E. [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal] church by then.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, now did your mother, did--she graduated from Emmett Scott--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you said.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and she--
Speaker 2: Forty-three [1943].
Speaker 1: Okay, what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother was, well she got married to Nelmon Gossett in 1944, I'd like to say, and (cough) he, he was a student at Tyler--excuse me at Texas College, which is like historically black college [HBCU] located in Tyler, it's still there. Run and started by the C.M.E. church and, you know he was a good student and a football player, and she also after high school went to Texas College.
Speaker 1: Okay so she was, she was a student at Texas College too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they met at Texas College.
Speaker 1: Now is Texas College, did it become something else or did it just close down completely?
Speaker 2: It's still in existence.
Speaker 1: As, as Texas College?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it had it's, it's one of those historically black colleges, had its challenges close to being closed because of indebtedness that kind of stuff. But it's still a historically black college, small, very small (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I, I apologize, I thought--but I never heard of it, I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Texas College.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In Tyler.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they met there, but neither one of them ever graduated and--
Speaker 1: Is there, is there a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, he worked, I mean he picked cotton in the summer, it was the only job that my dad said that he was able to get, but he did not like the extremely low pay. He said, "Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Gossett], I'd pick 150 cotton, white boy--and the white man called me a boy and only give me a $1.35 for 150 pounds. And if I ask a question about it, he'd tell me to shut up and just, I couldn't stand that overt oppression." So like most black families, they had relatives in the North that would write and talk about opportunities during World War II [WWII]. And my mother's sister lived in a place called, that they had never heard of Seattle, Washington, and she wrote and said that, there's, this company called Boeing Airplane Company [The Boeing Company] that's hiring Negroes. And you could make up to a dollar an hour, if you come up here and she told my dad and mother that her husband had gotten a job. And to my dad, a dollar an hour sounded very good giving working all day for a $1.35. So they were, they were pulled up through relatives telling them their economic opportunities up in, up in the North, up in Seattle, Washington. And they came up here in, in September of 1944.
Story_ID: 599034
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nelmon Gossett--
Speaker 1: How do you sp--
Speaker 2: N-E-L-M-O-N.
Speaker 1: Nelmon, okay, Gossett, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born December 23rd, 1923.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: In Colorado City, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, spelled like the state Colorado?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Colorado City, little town, still exists.
Speaker 1: Okay now, now what do you know about the ancestors on his side?
Speaker 2: His father was Houston Gossett, and his mother was Della Lawson, Della, D-E-L-L-A, Lawson, L-A-W-S-O-N [Della Lawson Gossett]. And they met in Jacksonville, Texas when they were teenagers. And Jacksonville was in, is over there near, near Tyler [Texas], it's only about fifty, sixty miles away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when, but after they got married, somehow he heard about opportunities for Negroes in West Texas--was where Colorado Ci- and moved there. And that's where my daddy and his brother and sister were born; he had one brother and one sister, Floyd Gossett and Annell Gossett.
Speaker 1: Okay, now any stories from your father's side of the family about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. They, my, his father traced his ancestry, according to my dad, back to the plantation of a Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S, Gossett [Thomas Gossett], who was white. And his ancestors in the 1840s and '50s [1850s] worked on his plantation and his grand- he was born in, my, my father's dad was named was Houston Gossett. And he was born in 1898.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so he would be the, Houston Gossett would've been the grandson of slaves or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, and, he, I remember stories that the plantation that he, so I, I, I'm, I have some proof that I am a descendent of slaves on both sides of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that these were slaves in Texas, East Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said that there are stories about, about plantation--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That you, that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, from his--
Speaker 1: That you have--
Speaker 2: Yeah from his, his from his, from my father's father and they were told to him about by his dad [Green Gossett] what it was like being a slave. That's why he always wanted to be an independent businessman; I don't ever remember when my grandfather didn't have his own little business. That's why he went to Colorado City to open up his own janitorial firm. And did work for whites but, but he had his own janitorial service.
Story_ID: 599035
Speaker 1: Can you tell us one of the--some of the stories from the slave experience that they shared, that were passed down?
Speaker 2: From Houston Gossett they humiliate--on the Gossett side, the humiliation of, of having your whole life controlled, his grandfather [Gossett's paternal great-grandfather, Green Gossett] and father would pass down to him, "Always trying to figure out son how to work for yourself, 'cause working for you know the white oppressor, the white man," I don't think they used word like oppressor, "is you know not gonna get it, 'cause that was all we--we didn't have any choice, so we had to do all our lives for, for--as slaves or for slave wages. And we don't you," Houston would tell his son, Nelmon [Nelmon Gossett], who is my dad, "you know, to help to do that. So you need to get an education and try to make it." Now my dad's father though, even though his daddy told him to get an education, he still only went to the six- sixth grade. But he was furiously independent and always figured out a way to you, know make some money. Mostly, I, I mean the whole time I knew him from '45 [1945] to '70s [1970s], he, he had his own janitorial service. First in Colorado City [Texas], and then later in Tucson, Arizona where he moved out of the South to live, and he died in Tucson, my grandfather, he never came up to Seattle [Washington], anywhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But all three of his children ended up, landed in Seattle, with the same migratory tales, my father was the first of his--of, of, of his three siblings to move to Seattle. He in turn wrote to his brother [Floyd Gossett] and sister [Annell Gossett] about Seattle and they later came here, and all of them are here by 1949. My mother's sister besides calling her, encouraged and brought another one of their, two other of her sisters up here. Who ended up settling and having children in Seattle, so that was four of my mother's seven brothers and sisters ended up in Seattle. And both of my dad's brother and sister ended up living in Seattle. And I think you know, I mean you get an opportunity to, to interview a lot of people, so I would imagine that our, our, our history of moving from the South to the North is not dissimilar from that of many other African Americans looking for some economic opportunity. And hopefully something that'll be a little better for their family than a horrific overt racism that they had to deal with in the '30s [1930s], '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: You're absolutely right.
Story_ID: 599036
Speaker 1: Now, your father [Nelmon Gossett], did he, was he employed immediately by Boeing [Boeing Airplane Company; The Boeing Company] when he came up?
Speaker 2: No, Todd shipyard [Todd Pacific Shipyards Corporation; Vigor Shipyards].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a ship scaler, cleaning out ships, but he did make about a dollar an hour, later he worked for Leckenby steel company [Leckenby Structural Steel Company, Seattle, Washington] during, during and right after the war [World War II, WWII], did, he was able to land a job.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so there are plenty of, there, there was work here--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Pretty good work--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay. So now, so, so your dad, where did he work the longest did he, what, what's the longest job he had or did he ever get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) United States Post Office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And by 1952, my father was lucky enough to be one of the first Negroes hired by the United States Post Office in Seattle [Washington]. And in 1952, he became a mailman and stayed as a mailman until he died in 1969, so seventeen years, working for the United States Post Office. And, and being a mailman in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] for a black man was a, you know decent working class job. He was able to take care of a growing family, he ended up having six kids, and I'm the oldest of six.
Story_ID: 599037
Speaker 1: Now is, did he, did your parents have a story about how they met any, any--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --story attached to it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother [Johnnie Carter Kelley] and father met, and I guess my daddy was a little player because he was a good football player. And, you know dated two, three or four women, but it is said that when he saw my mother he became uninterested, 'cause she's very beautiful as you'll see from the picture, in anybody else and, and, went after her you know. And she asked people about Nelmon [Nelmon Gossett] and you know they said he's very smart young man, and she said she said no first couple of times he asked her for a date. But she was interested and she finally said yes, and then as they say the rest is history. I think that he, she said that after they dated for six months, he asked her to marry her and took her all the way to Colorado City [Texas] to meet his mother [Della Lawson Gossett], which he had never, his mother said he had, had never done before, and that's kind of, so they met on a college campus [Texas College, Tyler, Texas].
Story_ID: 599038
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' per- personalities and their and their talents and their dispositions, who do you, think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably more after my mother [Johnnie Carter Kelley], 'cause her compassion and consideration for others, her desire to wanna feed the relatives and other people, you know was always there. And I became interested in helping other people at a very early age. I think in terms of basic values and relationship with others and enjoying being around a lot of people, more my mother than my father [Nelmon Gossett]. 'Cause he was more of a loner, he just wanted to work hard, and have an opportunity to take care of his family. But didn't like--would get jealous when my mother's sister would come over and go back to the room or go do something. He didn't like company even if they were relatives. Yeah, I would say more, more like my mom, and then my father, unfortunately for me, he died when I was about twenty-four, he died in '69 [1969].
Story_ID: 599039
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: An earliest childhood memory? (Pause) No, I, I, I don't really remember until I was--one day, the first day of kindergarten is the only day that is kind of vivid. Anything before that I have a very difficult time remembering, 'cause I know that my mother [Johnnie Carter Kelley] made me walk to, had me walk to school with Harrison Allen III [ph.], and told us to hold hands, I, I couldn't understand why I had to hold this cat's hand going to kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Is this some friend from the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: From the neighborhood, from the housing projects out here in West Seattle [Seattle, Washington], where we lived, and I lived in High Point housing projects when I was five years old. And I entered school at High Point elementary school [High Point School; West Seattle Elementary School, Seattle, Washington], which is in a low income housing projects.
Story_ID: 599040
Speaker 1: You grew up in the, the High Point hous- housing--
Speaker 2: Housing projects (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) projects. Here in Seattle?
Speaker 2: Yes, here in Seattle, Washington.
Speaker 1: What, what--did you, now did you live in the same neighborhood or did you all, did y'all make a transition from that neighborhood--
Speaker 2: We made a transition, I lived, I'm the oldest of six kids, I was born in 1945, and by 1955 when we moved out of the High Point housing projects, my mother [Johnnie Carter Kelley] and father [Nelmon Gossett] had six children. So all of us were born during the time that we resided in High Point, we did move back down to Texas for a little bit and then came right back here. But--
Speaker 1: So, so the whole family moved Tex- Texas at one point.
Speaker 2: During that period, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But then came back, I don't know, they said somebody promised my daddy a good job and they always wanted to try to go back home and it didn't bear out. And he, he was reminded about the, how (laughter) how steep racism is down there. He had kind of forgotten and quickly got his family back together and came back up here, but other than that, we lived in Seattle. And he got back into the housing projects when they, they moved back up here. So we had six kids, they had six kids, and then we moved in 1955 to the Central Area of Seattle. This is Seattle's historic black neighborhood; it was the only neighborhood outside of the housing projects where blacks were allowed to live in Seattle. Because Seattle you know was a institutionally racist city just like every other one in the North. And they designated that it would be all right for a Negro to live in Seattle, so that is where we were trapped to live in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To that, Central District they called it--
Speaker 2: Central District yeah, Central Area, Central District is what it still called. So in the 1950s and 1960s thousands of black people moving to Seattle moved into the Central Area. And so did we in '55 [1955], it was already, a lot of blacks already in the Central Area. When we moved in '55 [1955] by way of example my elementary school, High Point [High Point School; West Seattle Elementary School] was only about 15 percent black out in, in West Seattle [Seattle, Washington]. I went to Horace Mann elementary school [Horace Mann School] in the Central Area of Seattle, and when I walked into that, I was surprised it was already 95 percent African Americans, the student body of Horace Mann in 1955. The teachers are all-white, but the student body was overwhelmingly black. And I'd never--that was first experience I'd ever had going to a predominantly black school was when I moved to the Central Area of Seattle and went to Horace Mann elementary school. And my neighborhood was mostly black, we moved to 1803 East Alder Street which, about everybody on both sides of street were black in '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went to elementary school in Central Area, I went to what we called junior high, then we had junior high school, Washington Junior High [George Washington Junior High School; George Washington Middle School, Seattle, Washington]. And--
Speaker 1: Okay. And I wanna get, I'll, I'll get to high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: But, but I wanna go back a little bit--
Speaker 2: Okay, to elementary.
Speaker 1: --to the earlier days, but so is it true they call the Central District the, the Colored District?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: A black, black folks called it the C.D.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They called it the C.D., right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and whites call it the colored neighborhoods, and made it very difficult for blacks to live in any other neighborhood of Seattle during the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Now so when you're a little kid, basically you were in High- in High Point (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In High Point up until the time I was ten--
Speaker 1: Okay. And then--
Speaker 2: --eleven years old.
Speaker 1: And then, there's a brief period of time in Texas--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Then, then back to Seattle--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then to the, the C.D.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 599041
Speaker 1: So considering all these places, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights, the sights of growing up in the housing projects and then in the Central Area [Seattle, Washington] were kids playing, I did not have any deep consciousness of poverty. Even though you know you had to be poor to live in the projects. Most black families in the Central Area were poor and working class, so the sights and sounds were kids playing together. In High Point [Seattle, Washington], my friends were half black and half white, but and we played pretty well together as I recall. High Point [High Point School; West Seattle Elementary School, Seattle, Washington] I've already, elementary school was only 30 percent black. But I hung out with mostly black kids in the first, second, third and fourth grade. I joined; I, I became very interested and involved in athletics and sports, so I played for the High Point recreational basketball team [High Point Community Center, Seattle, Washington] when I was eight, nine, ten and eleven. I played for a championship elementary school basketball team at High Point when I was ten. And then I, when we moved to the Central Area, I started playing basketball for the Rotary Boys Club, which was right around the corner from my house. It later became known as the Central Area boys club, and then later the Central Boys and Girls Club [Rotary Boys and Girls Club of King County]. But athletics became a very important part of my life. And my mother [Johnnie Carter Kelley] still to this day reminds me that I was rarely ever home to help her with the young, my younger brothers and sisters, 'cause I was always out in the streets playing sports and from the time I was nine playing organized sports. 'Cause I played Little League 'til I was twelve and organized basketball and all the way through high school. So the sights and sounds was more around my, my family life at home with my younger brothers and sister. And a lot of being out in the neighborhood playing with other kids is what I recall.
Story_ID: 599042
Speaker 1: So you, you were interested in sports prime, primarily (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Did, did you, now did, was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: My dad [Nelmon Gossett] loved old blues and jazz, so I heard it a lot, but I don't recall it being a particularly--a part of my life until I was about fifteen and sixteen, and I started looking at and desiring beautiful creatures called women. And then I grew up in Motown era [Motown Records] when I was fifteen and sixteen, I was, it was 1960. And Motown was growing by leaps and bounds, so I ended up loving Motown music all the way through high school, but before that, I, I wasn't really into music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very much, just hear my dad playing it.
Speaker 1: Now was, did you like TV and movies and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Did I like TV?
Speaker 1: Yeah and--
Speaker 2: I liked TV, I was quite brainwashed by TV in retrospect 'caused I loved 'Hopalong Cassidy,' 'The Lone Ranger,' 'Daniel Boone,' I wanted a, you know one of those Daniel Boone sheepskin hats.
Speaker 1: Davy Crock- Crockett (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Davy Crockett (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The coon- the coonskin, you know coonskin (laughter).
Speaker 2: Coonskin, that's what I meant. I loved 'Davy Crockett,' later I loved 'Leave it to Beaver' and I got angry later on when I, I understood more clearly the true history of the Alamo [San Antonio, Texas]. That I used to think that those Mexicans that attack Davy Crockett and them at the Alamo was just horrible people. 'Cause I'd been taught that by looking at, you know those shows on 'Davy Crockett' and 'Daniel Boone' every week. And you know listening to the heroic feats that they had saving the Alamo. I did not know that they were working hard to protect and create a new slave state called Texas to join the union. I did not know that in, in 1825 [sic.] Mexico had ended slavery and they were trying to prevent part of their country from becoming a slave state, state attached to the United States of America. I should've been yelling for and supporting and design victory by the Mexican soldiers. I had been taught to hate as a little kid.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were taught to hate Santa Anna [Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna] when we--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought Santa Anna was quite evil, so those are, I looked at 'Amos and Andy' ['Amos 'n' Andy'] and like most whites that looked at them, I laughed. I said these Negroes are stupid, crazy, funny you know and Stepin Fetchit, yeah I looked at TV.
Speaker 1: Okay but the, the influence was (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Was negative.
Speaker 1: Was not in, in retrospect--
Speaker 2: Yeah, did not build any kind of revolutionary consciousness.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not in those days, not in my, my--days of my youth.
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't think it's changed a lot (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --since then, but did, did you go, attend mo- movies in Seattle [Washington], did they?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were, were there, was there any discrimination in the movies?
Speaker 2: No, we could sit anywhere we wanted to at movie theatres in Seattle. Yeah, I went to movies sometimes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not real frequently as I recall.
Story_ID: 599043
Speaker 1: Now was the Civil Rights Movement discussed very much in your household, I mean did they pay, your family pay particularly more attention to it than other families?
Speaker 2: No, my family did not pay any more attention to the Civil Rights Movement, particularly during the heydays of 1955 and 1963 when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was alive and leading the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC]. Except for one time, because now I like to tell people the one time that Martin Luther King visited Seattle [Washington], I was there, because my mother [Johnnie Carter Kelley] took me to the demonstration led by Martin Luther King in November of 1961, Martin Luther King was in Seattle two days in November of 1961. And it was to lead open hou- a demonstration for open housing. You remember I had already indicated to you by 19--in the 1950s and '60s [1960s] Seattle was a highly segregated community. They had covenants in most neighborhoods making it extremely difficult for anybody to sell or rent to a Negro in those neighborhoods. And Martin Luther King came out at the invitation of the Reverend Samuel B. McKinney [Samuel McKinney] who had been a classmate of his at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] in the 1940s. And he invited Martin to come to lead a, a demonstration, and I remember you know the city fathers, and everybody was upset. They didn't want Martin Luther King to come out here; they tried to stop him from speaking at the local high school, Garfield [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington], where most of the black students went. They made it difficult for him to rent any facility to have a rally, but despite all that, Martin led a demonstration that had ten thousand people, which was almost unheard of in Seattle at those early days of the Civil Rights Movement when he came in November. And the overwhelming majority of those that marched for open housing were white, here in Seattle. I mean our population in 1961 on- only about twenty-five thousand of the five hundred thousand people who lived in Seattle were African Americans at that time.
Speaker 1: So that's a tremendous turnout--
Speaker 2: Yeah it was ten thousand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of white people--
Speaker 2: People responded to Martin Luther King, Jr., and maybe a one and half thousand were blacks, and all the rest were progressive minded whites of good will.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but that's it, when I graduated from high school in 1963, I was not very conscious, conscientiousness about the Civil Rights Movement. I knew of Martin Luther King in 1963, because I had marched with him, I knew that he was leading a struggle to make things better for blacks. But I don't ever recall writing about it in high school, thinking critically about the Civil Rights Movement and to what extent it had to do with me during that period of time. I was interested when I got to high school at Garfield and then later Franklin [Franklin High School, Seattle, Washington], in playing basketball. And I wanted to start and I wanted to talk to the women both black and white (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 599044
Speaker 1: Well, you started grade school at Hor- Horace Mann elementary school [Horace Mann School]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Then I went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was in the C.D. [Central Area, Seattle, Washington] and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You started at High Point, right?
Speaker 2: Right, I started, yeah.
Speaker 1: What, what was the school at High Point?
Speaker 2: Fifth grade is when I moved.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in fifth grade.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school in High Point?
Speaker 2: High Point elementary school [High Point School; West Seattle Elementary School, Seattle, Washington].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I started school at High Point elementary school, went from kindergarten until the fifth grade, moved out--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when I was in the fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, now did you like school when you first--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --started going to school?
Speaker 2: I liked school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Did, I did all right, I got, at though, at that time, they gave us Hs, Ms and Ls, L was for low, M was for medium, and H was for high. And I remember getting mostly mediums and sometimes an H here or there. And I, I do remember though and I told her this in later life, doing much better the one year I had an African American teacher. Her name was Orie Green, and I had her in the fourth grade, and she kept telling me I can do as well as anybody else in the class. And somehow she made me believe that, and my grades went through a lot of Hs and Ms, rather than just all Ms.
Speaker 1: Now is there, is there a period of time when you, I--most African American children reach a junction when they discover they're black. They really don't think about it, do, do you remember when you came to that conclusion or do you recall--
Speaker 2: Only when I was in High Point, a white kid called me nigger one time, it bothered me but I don't, I never thought about it too much.
Speaker 1: Did you know what it was?
Speaker 2: I knew it was bad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because you know our parents and their relatives and, and other blacks that come over, would refer to each other as, as, as nigger.
Speaker 1: But it wasn't done out of affection or anything?
Speaker 2: Sometimes the context was, but not all the time, and that was about the only time I heard it. And only one ti- one time in elementary school now, did I ever have a white student--and it was in High Point--call me a nigger. 'Cause remember when I moved to the Central Area, most of my classmates were black like me.
Speaker 1: Un-huh, okay, so, so when you, in fifth grade you moved to--
Speaker 2: The Central Area, Central District.
Speaker 1: Horace Mann, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Horace Mann elementary school.
Speaker 1: Horace Mann, the father of American education there's one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in every--
Speaker 2: That's what it is.
Speaker 1: --city, Horace Mann elementary school--
Speaker 2: There's a Horace--yeah, that don't surprise me, there's schools all over the country named after him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I graduated from there in 1957.
Story_ID: 599045
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in, in those in el- elementary school?
Speaker 2: (Pause) P.E. [physical education].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I liked going out and playing sports, I don't really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you--
Speaker 2: --remember being in--
Speaker 1: --have a--
Speaker 2: I did all right, learned how to read and write and count, but I never remember being very enthused about the academic side of school life, the social and athletic.
Speaker 1: Did you have a major sports hero or heroes in those days?
Speaker 2: Of course, yeah, Jackie Robinson, Joe Louis and early '50s [1950s] Willie Mays, I didn't have any basketball heroes, although I played a lot of basketball, not in the early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: And you just didn't, you just didn't see in, it, it wasn't really accessible then, I guess?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't have any basketball heroes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My first basketball hero, hero that I can remember is, 1957, '58 [1958], the great Elgin Baylor was recruited by Seattle University [Seattle, Washington]. And led us, his first year to the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] and the second year to the only time a Seattle school has ever been in the Final Four [NCAA Final Four]. He and Seattle U in '58 [1958] ended up playing Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] for the national championship [NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament], and the star of that team, Elgin Baylor. He was a tremendous hero of mine, in; in the summer he would come to Garfield park [Garfield Playfield] right there in the Central Area [Seattle, Washington] and play basketball with the older guys. So Elgin Baylor was my first African American basketball folk hero, I would say.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember any other black players from Seattle [Washington] in those days?
Speaker 2: Thornton Humphry [sic. Thornton Humphries] because he later in--around '58 [1958] '59 [1959] started working as a coach at the Central Area Rotary Boys Club [Rotary Boys and Girls Club of King County]. And he was on the same team with Elgin Baylor, Thornton Humphry, 1960 I remember Sweet Charlie Brown [HistoryMaker Charles Brown] from Tacoma [Washington] who played for Seattle University and led them to some championships.
Speaker 1: And you know he was from Chicago [Illinois], played for the DuSable Panthers [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] and went to the state championship, there's a book written about it, 'The DuSable Panthers' ['The DuSable Panthers: The Greatest, Blackest, Saddest Team from the Meanest Street in Chicago,' Ira Berkow]. And we interviewed him for HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers].
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah. He had a long outside shot, and he could hit from--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Sweet Charlie Brown, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's in Chicago now.
Speaker 2: Oh, so those are people that I remember and I followed the storied athletic history of high school athletes at Garfield High School [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington]. Because in the late, mid to late '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], Garfield was the only high school in the State of Washington, notice I didn't say the City of Seattle. In the State of Washington where 50 percent of the students were African American, there is no other high school that had over 2 percent African American in 1960. And Garfield High School had 50 percent, so their football team would win or play in the city championship every year. Their basketball team still have the record for the most consecutive wins in the state tournament. They dominated sports in Seattle and Washington State, storied high school athletes came out of Garfield High School. And, and the Central Area all the kids in Central Area went to Garfield.
Speaker 1: Now who were some, who were some of the other, the other names from the Central Area that, that we know now that that played ball?
Speaker 2: That we know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know if you know--
Speaker 1: That became, yeah, or, or--
Speaker 2: Charlie Mitchell [Charles H. Mitchell], he, he was a star halfback for Garfield, he later became a Rose Bowl hero in the--the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington], in '59 [1959] and '60 [1960] by the way won the Rose Bowl--excuse me '60 [1960] and '61 [1961] won the Rose Bowl, and people like [HistoryMaker] Carver Gayton, Gayton is an old black family here in Seattle. And Charlie Mitchell, who both of whom went to Garfield, played for the Huskies [Washington Huskies]. But Charlie went on to play for the Denver Broncos in the later '60s [1960s]. Another guy, Randy Montgomery played for We- Weber State [Weber State College; Weber State University, Ogden, Utah] in the '60s [1960s] and Weber State in the '60s [1960s], and then played for the Denver Broncos and the Washington Redskins [sic. Chicago Bears], Levi Fisher was an All-State basketball player for Garfield. Bob Flowers [Robert J. Flowers], All-State player for Garfield, they went on to, both be stars at the University of Washington in basketball played but they didn't make the pros. Those are the names of some of the people back in the day that I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, because first when you mentioned Elgin Baylor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Elgin is, yeah he later--
Speaker 1: He was considered by many--
Speaker 2: --L.A. [Los Angeles Lakers].
Speaker 1: --the greatest basketball player--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, 'cause he was getting--
Speaker 1: --to play prior to Dr. J [Julius Erving] and--
Speaker 2: --fifty and sixty--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --points in, in the '50s [1950s], late '50s [1950s], yeah, yeah Elgin was something, but he was a, he wasn't raised in Seattle, he was originally from Washington, D.C., and somehow Seattle U recruited him.
Story_ID: 599046
Speaker 1: In high school you played basketball (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes--
Speaker 1: --in high school, right?
Speaker 2: --I played for Garfield [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington] in--
Speaker 1: For Garfield--
Speaker 2: --in sophomore--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then my family moved again when I was in eleventh grade to Beacon Hill [Seattle, Washington], and I played for Franklin High School in my junior and senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I got a picture of the Franklin squad over there.
Speaker 1: Now you were the starting point guard--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for Franklin?
Speaker 2: For Franklin in my senior year, 1962 and '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you consider yourself a leader in high school?
Speaker 2: No, I, I considered myself a sports star.
Speaker 1: Okay, you know point guard on a team is a--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: Pretty much--
Speaker 2: I know it, but I--
Speaker 1: --leads the team.
Speaker 2: I know, but I was not a leader on the campus, I would not talk in class, I, I didn't have very much confidence in my ability to speak. And Franklin was one of those schools that only 2 to 3 percent of the student body was black when I went there.
Speaker 1: So was most of the team white?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It just, see all the teams was black but two players, we had twenty-five black boys and twenty-five black girls in the whole high school. But fourteen of us black boys were on the basketball team, yeah back in the day. And we would be the only--we'd come in second in, in my junior and senior year, we came in second in the city in basketball, always behind Garfield our archrival. Because remember Garfield was the historic Central Area [Seattle, Washington] high school, so no, I didn't not see myself nor did my classmates, in my opinion, see me as any kind of leader while in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay so, were you involved in any high school activities, organizationally, like different clubs and things?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Spanish club, Key Club [Key Club International], none of that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: None of those things?
Speaker 2: No, just played sports.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how, how, now how were your grades and, and what, what course of study did you pursue?
Speaker 2: Well, because I, because in my mind, I wanted to go to college and play basketball, my grades actually got better in my junior and senior year than they had been before. So I ended up graduating from high school with a 2.7 [grade point average], I started getting some Bs and A's in my junior and senior year. And I graduated with a 2.7.
Story_ID: 599047
Speaker 1: Now did you get good counseling in high school?
Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't get good counseling, I was gonna go--I don't ever remember a counselor telling me that I could go to college. They did not; I don't think they thought that was realistic for me to be able to go to college. My father, Nelmon Gossett, when I said I wanted to go to junior college, because I thought that that provided the best opportunity for me to play basketball at the college level. He said, "Oh no, Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Gossett], I have in mind that you're gonna go to the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]. Because you have grades good enough to do so." And I said, "But Pops, I'd like to go to junior college." Then you know he gave me that look and in the '50s [1950s] when Pops, when fathers gave you that look you, you got quiet. So suffice it to say, within a month he had called the admissions director. And I woke up one morning, he said, "Come on boy you going with me to talk to the admissions director at the UDub," and he took me out there, the guy was really impressed that my dad had done this. And my only deficiency was that I had not taken geometry in high school, and he said, "We'll work that," and I got in, in the fall of '63 [1963] to the University of Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you gonna play ball there?
Speaker 2: Again, in my mind I thought I was good enough, but when I went in mid-October to turnout the coaches discouraged me, too small, can't, can't, you won't make it. So I, I didn't tryout.
Speaker 1: Now that's, so they really weren't famil- were they, they weren't familiar with your--
Speaker 2: The year I played for Franklin [Franklin High School, Seattle, Washington], yeah, they had my little resume, but I didn't make All-City or anything, and--I mean they wanted the star of Garfield's coach so bad that they hired Garfield's--I mean the star of Garfield [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington] so bad in '63 [1963] the year I got out of high school, that they hired the high school coach at Garfield. So that the star player, Levi Fisher would go to the UDub and that indeed did happen. They hired the coach and Levi followed him to the UDub and played for them.
Speaker 1: So in those days were you keenly aware of the politics of basketball in sports?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Unh-uh. No.
Speaker 1: Were you trying to ca- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wasn't--
Speaker 1: Were you tr- but I get you kind of started catching onto it I guess after--
Speaker 2: Later on, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Later on, later on.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's an interesting world.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's why as a politician I get the opportunity to talk to young students in junior high and high school. And, and they come at me like I'm different or special or you know, I said, "No, I was just like y'all when I was in high school. Same attitude about myself, same desires in terms of, I just was interested in sports and entertainment, and thought that those were only options for me. And if I can change su- any of y'all can and I did not get grades just enough to get by." Yeah, but that's what, that's when nothing political, nothing sophisticated, not in high school.
Story_ID: 599048
Speaker 1: So, you're at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and what, how many students are there do you think?
Speaker 2: Thirty, thirty thousand when I entered and forty-two black students, it's, if, if I thought Franklin [Franklin High School, Seattle, Washington] was bad, the University of Washington was outrageous in terms of the invisibility of the few black students that went to the University of Washington in '63 [1963]. And of the forty-two of us, five were on the basketball team and about ten were on the football team, the rest were women.
Speaker 1: That's really--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's very small, even when I was a junior in 1968 when we organized the Black Student Union, when we did our research, it was only sixty-eight black students in 1968 out of 32,500 when we organized the black students at the University of Washington. And of those sixty-eight black students only thirteen of us was willing to organize this progressive revolutionary student organization.
Speaker 1: Now how did you, where did you fit in immediately and where did the--
Speaker 2: Where did I--we were invisible, we Negro students of the University of Washington campus in the early days, I didn't fit in, I was just there.
Story_ID: 599049
Speaker 1: I was asking like where you all, you fit in, you know I guess, as well as the black students on, on the campus. I mean how did you, how did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were--I literally mean that we were invisible. I went to college at a time, '63 [1963] to '66 [1966], then I dropped out in '66 [1966] and then came back in '67 [1967], when there were very few black students, there was no black professors; there was no curriculum that dealt with anything remotely related to the black, Asian, Latino, Native American historical experiences in this country.
Speaker 1: Surely they must've mentioned--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --black people somewhere--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in the courses--
Speaker 2: I didn't have a course where black people were ever mentioned, even though this was '63 [1963] to '66 [1966]. Again that's why I didn't, I, I was not pushed or forced to think anything about civil rights or anything in the early years of my university. I was a Negro student trying to make it, but I was being prepared to be a skilled, you know white middle class operative you know. I would major in education--or teacher, but I had no, you know conscious sense of who I would be as a black student becoming a black teacher. I was just a University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] student going through the process of preparing myself to be a teacher. I would not have been culturally, you know in terms of vision and outlook, more of an outlook, any different than any white student that would have graduated from the school of education [University of Washington College of Education, Seattle, Washington] during that period of time.
Speaker 1: And they accepted you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's my--
Speaker 1: --as black actually.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was black, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 1: So, you're being taught all the things a white person had to know about being white in a, in the Seattle [Washington]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, America--
Speaker 2: Yeah, all over--
Speaker 1: Except you were black.
Speaker 2: Right, all the students at the University of Washington was at that time, and that's why later you know we, we--
Speaker 1: Now did the students--well I know eventually what you did, but in the beginning did you--did the students, black students find each other--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --they congregate together--
Speaker 2: --in the HUB, the student union building [Husky Union Building, Seattle, Washington], yes. I mean, I, that's the, that club, that's a classic thing that occurs, somewhere on the campus you'll find a little spot where the black students would meet. And twenty or thirty of us met at the same tables in the student union building in '63 [1963] to '66 [1966]. And we lunched together and talked and we loved to play whist, we loved to play whist back in those days. And that's where we would congregate, but we did not, in my recollection, talk about anything related to the Civil Rights Movement or black power or what is our destiny, or what is our role or anything like that. We were just trying to graduate from college, just like the white students, so we could get a decent job. But we knew we were different, that's why we hung out you know together. You know most the brothers, we had a lot of opportunities to go out with white girl or Asian girl, wherever we, you know and we would do that. There was a lot of interracial dating on the campus, to the consternation of some like the football coach, Jim Owens, at the University of Washington. Got upset with the black players when they went out with white girls, it caused some ruffling of feathers, shall we say.
Speaker 1: Can, can you remember a specific story of one that, that did that got in trouble or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Junior Coffey and Charlie Browning were stacked, meaning they were both outstanding running backs, but he put both of them at running back behind on the same left side, rather than one being on the other side. And the players believe, remember I didn't play football, but they said it was because he's upset about them going out with white girls. And then later in '69 [1969], by 1969 during the height of the black power era, when the University of Washington went down to play UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], the tension between black players and Coach Jim Owens was so great. That he kicked off four ha- black players and then all the other black players refused to go and play that game. They all stayed there, and it caused a big brouhaha on the campus.
Speaker 1: So then this is in what year?
Speaker 2: In '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was more talking at first though about what it was like in '63 [1963] to '66 [1966], my early years at the university.
Speaker 1: Okay, then, so then the boycott by the football team, is much later (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was '68 [1968], that's later.
Speaker 1: --down the line, that's after--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you all--
Speaker 2: Yeah, after--
Speaker 1: You all organized--
Speaker 2: Yeah, after we started the BSU [Black Student Union] and everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 599050
Speaker 1: But in those early days [at the University of Washington, Seattle, Washington], people sat together but they really didn't, they didn't talk about their political situation or anything (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh. No, we didn't.
Speaker 1: Now, now this is, it seems kind of odd in a way 'cause you just experienced the March on Washington--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that sum--
Speaker 2: Summer of '63 [1963]--
Speaker 1: It didn't, it didn't affect the black students?
Speaker 2: I graduated that year.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We did not talk about it, I, all I know is to share with you my experience--
Speaker 1: Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had, well Dr. King just been in town too, right?
Speaker 2: Two years before.
Speaker 1: Well, he came in '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: November of '61 [1961]--
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: When I was a junior.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It had been tw- two years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Dr. King was here in '61 [1961] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we knew who King was, but we were not at that time particularly motivated by him or any kind of black political movement.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, now what--
Speaker 2: We were classic in terms of Ralph Ellison's the 'Invisible Man,' we were invisible in terms of our own character definition, the--or purpose being any different than the white students.
Speaker 1: Well how did, so you saw yourselves as, did you wonder, did you even wonder why you weren't in, mentioned in the, in any of the courses or texts or anything like?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, pretty--I consider we were pretty brainwashed and we had nothing that we could've gone to that would cause us to question the nature and quality of the education we received as university students during that period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay, well were there any African students or West Indian students on the campus then?
Speaker 2: Few, five to seven, but there, I didn't see where they were any different than us, nobody was pushing us to lead, to develop any kind of revolutionary consciousness, or anything like that, not from '63 [1963] to '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay, from all that, so three years of really no, I mean no, now there, there're a lot of things going on in the country in those days. SNCC was in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Particularly in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: SNCC was in the news and everything.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 2: But I didn't have, I was taking Sociology 110 and we didn't talk about the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.
Speaker 1: Did, wa- was civil rights discussed at all in sociology?
Speaker 2: Not in classes I took, those are the only ones I can remember, no, nothing, nothing about the movements whirling throughout our country. I remember being there in the summer of '65 [1965], school wasn't in, in August of '65 [1965]. But that, but I was embarrassed because I was looking at the Watts riots [in Los Angeles, California] on TV and I said, "Oh my god, what's wrong with these Negroes?" I was still calling us Negroes, and, "Why are they tearing up their own neighborhoods?" I didn't understand. I was saying that, so if I was saying that, you can imagine what the white public in Seattle [Washington] and throughout the nation thought. They--none, none of us have any historical grounding to understand, like Langston Hughes said in one of his poems, what happens to you know a raisin when it dries up, it explodes.
Speaker 1: 'What Happens To A Dream Deferred?' [sic. 'Harlem'], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'What Happens To A Dream Deferred?,' we didn't have any understanding of that, we just thought the, you know the blacks was going crazy. I remember that, I read about it, but I didn't see myself in it, and I remember being embarrassed a little bit about the Watts riots.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What could cause this?
Speaker 1: So this is like summer of--
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-five, [1965], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 599051
Speaker 1: Well, what happened in, Malcolm X was killed in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: I thought--I remember seeing him on TV; I thought that Negro was crazy that was my mental state.
Speaker 1: Had the, I think the next--early '66 [1966] was the, the march to, the, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: --following of James Meredith when they--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, James Meredith--
Speaker 1: Black power was, was coined from--
Speaker 2: Yeah, not James Meredith, Stokely Carmichael's [Kwame Ture] the one that coined--
Speaker 1: Yeah, James Meredith had started a march and was shot down and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: They carried it on.
Speaker 1: --continued on and it, yeah.
Speaker 2: And SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] got involved by '66 [1966], SNCC was going through a lot of transformation from '64 [1964] to '66 [1966]. It had become all-black, they eased the white students out, because they said that as a, as a movement predominantly to liberate black people that we had to be in the leadership. And we needed to be the rank and file soldiers of this nonviolent coordinating committee and we have to lead the effort toward what Ricky Ricks [sic.], who was one the right hand lieutenants of Stokely Carmichael who was the national president of SNCC that year. And it was Ricky Ricks that actually said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Willie Ricks [Mukasa Dada], yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Willie Ricks, that said what we need is black power and Stokely right away, picked up on that, and from that day forward every speech he had he would integrate the, "What we want is black power," and it went across the length and breadth of this nation like wildfire, this concept of black power. Now that was the context in which there was awakening in Lawrence Edward Gossett [HistoryMaker Larry Gossett]; it was during that period of time.
Speaker 1: Well what, what hap- happened exactly, what did you, did you, did you read about it, and somebody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and--no.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: No, in the spring of 1966, during my junior year, I got concerned about the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War]; I noticed that a lot of my friends were being, even though they were in school, were being reclassified, and being drafted, remember they still had the draft, and I said, "Man, that can happen to me. I wanna finish school," so I started looking around for what could get one legally deferment. And I found it by joining the domestic and--the Peace Corps, excuse me, the Peace Corps, the international Peace Corps, or the domestic Peace Corps, which I had never heard of until I started exploring VISTA, Volunteers in Services to America [AmeriCorps VISTA]. They provided deferments so not be- not out, out of altruism, not out of wanting to do anything for the poor, but out of wanting to not have to get drafted to go to Vietnam, I put in an application on the campus at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] to join VISTA and I was accepted in April of 1966. And I had to start in June of '66 [1966], remember this is the same summer that Willie Ricks and Stokely Carmichael start popularizing the concept of black power. But I was sent from the Central Area of Seattle [Washington] to Toledo, Ohio in the summer of '66 [1966] to be trained as a VISTA volunteer. And it was there that I got exposed to books like 'The Other America' ['The Other America: Poverty in the United States'] by Michael Harrington and 'Rules for Radicals' ['Rules for Radicals: A Pragmatic Primer for Realistic Radicals'] by Saul Alinsky, I'd never seen any books (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now this is during VISTA training?
Speaker 2: Yeah, VISTA, yeah they, we had radical trainers at, at I think, I can't remember what university was in Toledo, maybe it's Toledo, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, University of Toledo [Toledo, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: --our instructors came from there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Or they worked at the, providing us training, sociologist there were brought in to work with us training. So we were taught how to organize poor folks, VISTA was serious about organizing poor folks back in those days, Brother Larry [Larry Crowe]. And I started getting, that's when I start awakening and then I started reading these books. Then when I saw Stokely on TV talking about black power it made a little sense.
Story_ID: 599052
Speaker 1: But what really changed me was in September I got my VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA] assignment for one year, and I was sent to Central Harlem [Harlem, New York, New York] to be with VISTA. That was the signature experience of my life; I would like to share with you. Because when I went to Harlem, although I was living in a predominantly black neighborhood in Seattle [Washington], but keep in mind on 18th Avenue, I don't know if you are, you all are gonna have an opportunity to travel around Seattle. But if you were to go to 18th Avenue between, on 18th--yeah on Alder [Street] between 18th and 19th [Avenue], on both sides on the streets at most a hundred people live in the ten houses on either side of the street. You dig what I'm saying? At most a hundred people you know, adults, some kids (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So they're packed in, they're probably tight, tightly packed--
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: Hundred people on the--
Speaker 1: That's nothing.
Speaker 2: Oh ten, oh ten--
Speaker 1: I'm getting ready to tell you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --what it was like in Harlem.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No, at the most seventy-five to a hundred people lived on my block.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see, okay.
Speaker 1: In Seattle, most of them were black. I was sent to Central Harlem to be a VISTA volunteer; I lived on, on a 117th [Street] between Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] and 7th [7th Avenue; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], now that's Malcolm X Avenue [sic.] and, and Lenox, okay? And the first thing we had to do was a survey of the number of people that lived in the block and we went door to door, about four VISTAs. We found that there were--9,200 people lived in that one block; one block, one hundred--to move on a block had nine thousand packed in tenements on top of each, about 98 percent, I think one Puerto Rican family we found living in that, on that block. We found that on that one block that there were thirteen hundred kids under the age of twelve that lived in that one block. I'd never seen and, and that most of them were poor, I'd never seen contradictions like this. And I said nobody should have to live in these conditions and the studio apartment I lived in, the only two companions I had in my studio were two rats the first night I was there. I never lived--I don't ever remember seeing any rats in my house in Seattle, and roaches. You know I had the, I was always trying to figure how to get rid of roaches when I was living in New York City [New York, New York]. So and then Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and black powerites were on the street corner of 125th where I went shopping for food and stuff and entertainment. I went to Apollo, of course I had heard of the great Apollo Theater [New York, New York] and heard Wilson Pickett and all of them perform. But in Harlem, I also got introduced to young brothers and sisters that worked for the agency I worked for, Harlem Youth incorporated [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited; Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York]. They were all, it seem to me that they were all black powerites; they all called themselves black nationalist. They all said that we're the children of Malcolm X, who keep in mind in June of '66 [1966], excuse me September of '66 [1966], Malcolm X had only been dead a year and a half, so his philosophy, his teachings, the members of the Organization of African American Union [sic. Organization of Afro American Unity], were all over Harlem, still. They introduced me to 'Malcolm X Speaks' ['Malcolm X Speaks: Selected Speeches and Statements,' Malcolm X], they introduced me to 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley]. They took me to the Michaux, Michaux, French Michaux bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York] on 125th Street.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The first black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) National world African bookstore--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I never heard--
Speaker 2: 125th.
Speaker 1: --of an all-black, how can, I, I was so naive I asked these cats they just laughed, but they brought me along with them. They developed me, they were patient with me, I said, "How can there be enough books on black people to fill up a bookstore?" I genuinely, given my history Larry [Larry Crowe], did not know that that was possible, and I was blown away when they took me there. And I started reading, I mean I could read well by then, and, and I never, I never heard of Marcus Garvey, this big old fat cat looks like he's in a uniform. But then I read that he built the biggest organization of black people in the history of the world [Universal Negro Improvement Association]. Two million blacks in 1925 were in this organization and they even had a chapter in a far outpost called Seattle, Washington in the, in the mid-1920s.
Story_ID: 599053
Speaker 1: And then, then I got introduced to brothers that were in Harlem [New York, New York] SNCC, Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, 'cause Stokely had begun to start chapters in northern cities in the summer of '66 [1966], so quickly within two months, I became this strong black power advocate. By four months I changed my name from [HistoryMaker] Larry Gossett to Oba Yoruba--
Speaker 2: How do you spell that now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wanna show you a picture over there I, I, the last six months I was in Harlem I'd never wore anything but dashikis. This was a radical reformation, transformation that I was going through; I changed my name from Larry Gossett to Oba Yoruba.
Speaker 2: Now how do you spell that A?
Speaker 1: Oba, O-B-A.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Yoruba, Y-O-R-U-B-A.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Means like king of the Yoruba people, Yoruba's lived in Nigeria.
Speaker 2: Oba Yoruba.
Speaker 1: Oba means king or leader, I start wearing dashikis; I got prescription shades and started wearing shades. I let my hair grow into a natural, starting in the fall of '66 [1966], I started going to meetings with the Organization of African American Unity [sic. Organization of Afro American Unity], the organization Malcolm X had started, my friends took me there, 'cause most of them had been lead- young members of it. And they told me about Malcolm and they told me that our, our only duty for being here must be to help black people liberate themselves. I started developing revolutionary type of thinking and philosophy; I became a black nationalist, black cultural nationalist. I started critically looking at racism, I never really used the term racism before and I, you know learned to appreciate what it meant. And what it was doing to my black people particularly in Harlem, and I said these are horrific contradictions, we gotta have liberation, we gotta have change. We gotta have power to control our own destinies, I started talking you know like that. I start critically looking at capitalism, I, I said this is crazy; capitalism does nothing but under develop, start with slavery, black people. And I started, by the time I left VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA], I was a strong and caring, very committed to democratic socialism you know, I felt that was the only philosophy that can liberate black people. So those were the changes that I went through before I returned to Seattle [Washington] after my year ended in September of 1967. And I returned to Seattle, found that Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], I didn't know it beforehand, had been there in Seattle. And there were a lot of my young brothers, young friends who had been awakened, and that there were about seventy-five people who were members of Seattle SNCC when I returned. It didn't even exist when I had left, so I think the second day, 'cause the first day I stayed at home with my mom [Johnnie Carter Kelley] and pop [Nelmon Gossett]. Second day, I was back in September of '67 [1967], I joined the Seattle chapter of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.
Story_ID: 599054
Speaker 1: Now, I just wanna go back to Harlem [New York, New York] for a minute and, now you were all were in the community organizing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I worked for Harlem Youth [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited; Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York]--
Speaker 1: Alinsky [Saul Alinsky] style--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --o- organizing--
Speaker 2: Organizing the poor.
Speaker 1: --door knocking and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, and that.
Speaker 2: Door knocking--
Speaker 1: Did you work on a problem in the neighborhood--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: To solve--
Speaker 2: I was supposed to work, VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA], I mean it's not, they said, at first I thought it was gonna be easy, organize the youth, twelve and under and set up recreation, tutorial educational assistance program for the youth. Remember my vision, my worldview was Seattle [Washington], and, and on my block in Seattle that would've been seven kids under twelve I'd work with. There were fifteen hundred, so we started, we worked with maybe fifty or seventy-five of these kids, but that was always that we going someway, get them out of the ghetto. Many of them had never seen downtown Manhattan [New York], we had volleyball games that we, we got enough money to put a volleyball net for two hours a day, three days a week. 'Cause we had to stop traffic on the blocks so the young people can play volleyball, we helped some of them to get in the drug treatment programs, 'cause heroin addiction was a bad problem at that time. I remember going to court with ten, eleven, twelve year olds on my block, a few of them, yeah we did those kinds of things. But my primary commitment was not the Harlem Youth incorporated, it was to investing myself into the black liberation struggle as a black power advocate. That's what became my total being during that year and my commitment was to dedicate my life to doing everything I could to improve the life condition of black people by any means necessary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As you know that was one of the most--
Speaker 1: Let me just--
Speaker 2: --common, it's you know, terms that Malcolm X used, that we need--
Speaker 1: I just wanted to, I guess explore in a way what, what was the supervision of VISTA in those years, I know we were talking before about how it was, well it was formed in '64 [1964] in response to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all the volunteers who went to Freedom--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --Sum- Summer [Freedom Summer].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The government said let's make some, some volunteers--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that we can control.
Speaker 2: It was part of OEO--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And funded through OEO, Office of Economic Opportunity, the federal antipoverty agency, yeah that's who funded it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, but they were trying to make a--
Speaker 2: But we had social workers--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --progressive minded social workers who ran these programs, and in Harlem Youth association, black social workers were the ones that supervised us, if you will, there, and--but some of them were also in the movement, not all of them, some of just them were just professional. They tried to do what they could with the limited resources that Harlem Youth incorporated had at that time. And some of them were revolutionary; some of them were the ones that, my supervisors took me to the Michaux bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York] to get exposed to black literature, black history. I read, I remember my first black history book I ever read was [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett's 'Before the Mayflower' ['Before the Mayflower: A History of Black America']. I didn't know black people got here before the Mayflower. Nothing in my high school or college education prepared me for what I read in that book.
Story_ID: 599055
Speaker 1: So, all right, so you come back to Seattle [Washington], you find things have changed, there's a chapter of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] here--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and there's a core group of Seattleites whom I'd been raised with, who had--now in the Black Power movement, I was excited. I thought I was, and then since I was their homeboy they really, they brought me right in. And I knew the streets of Seattle and, and everybody, I could've stayed in Harlem [New York, New York] and worked. I was actually offered a job to work at Har- Harlem Youth incorporated [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited; Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York], but I wanted to come back to my home community. So I became a SNCC organizer in the fall of '67 [1967] back in my home community (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now when, did VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA] have the benefits that--I know during the Clinton administration [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and before, previously different incarnations of VISTA would give you like, you would get so much money for school--
Speaker 2: It's still the same.
Speaker 1: And that sort of thing, did--
Speaker 2: Still the same.
Speaker 1: Did you get it then, did you get like--
Speaker 2: I got two hundred dollars, never forget, I got two hundred dollars a month to live off of in New York [New York], but then they, I got about somewhere between eight hundred and a thousand when I got out that they saved for you, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was about eight hundred, a thousand, it wasn't over a thousand dollars that I came home with.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--
Speaker 2: Stipend.
Speaker 1: I just wanted touch base with that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but my tuition back in those days was only a hundred dollars, so that was cool. I paid my fall tuition, so my daddy [Nelmon Gossett] didn't have to pay, my first year my daddy paid all my tuition and books, every quarter. But I lived at home and my tuition was just a hundred dollars.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you come back you're in your senior year, I guess or?
Speaker 2: Junior.
Speaker 1: Junior year--
Speaker 2: I still had, yeah--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I was not, I was already behind in credits, so junior, '67 [1967], '68 [1968] my junior year.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Go, go ahead, I'm just, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: That was my junior year, I came back, got very involved in the community, of course my daddy reminded me that I was gonna finish college. And I said okay, but I, he you know, he, he was respectful, at first he said, "You need to get a haircut boy." I said, "No daddy, this is part of me," and I wore dashikis and I tried to get my dad and mom [Johnnie Carter Kelley] and brothers and sisters to call me Oba [Oba Yoruba] but that did not click. And in a few months I was just back to being [HistoryMaker] Larry Gossett, 'cause I, I couldn't get anybody to call me Oba, but in New York, everybody called me Oba by the time I'd left and my friendship grew. So I returned to the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] and, and met four or five other brothers and sisters. One is whom was [HistoryMaker] Aaron Dixon, who were in--you know, entered, had joined SNCC and interested in the movement. Aar- Aaron was an Upward Bound student, Carl Miller was a cat that had been already in the [U.S.] Army, but somehow got into the University of Washington in the fall of '67 [1967]. E.J. Brisker had been in SNCC three years and there are pictures of all these guys that I'm gonna show you. And he, his mother had gotten a job teaching in Seattle, he had moved up here in the summer of '67 [1967] to be with his mother. But he had been in SNCC for three years in Mississippi, so he was very experienced, so these core group of activist, there were a couple of black kids that I'd been growing up with that had joined the Communist Party [Communist Party USA]. And they were active--Seattle chapter of the Communist Party, they were active, these were all the youths that I started associating with when I came back. And when we went back to school, we started, or got involved with something we called the Afro American students society, and dabbled in that a little bit. But on Thanksgiving weekend, 1967, we got invited to what was called the Black Youth Conference in Los Angles [California]. And that really set the tone again of, of my progressive or revolutionary development.
Speaker 1: Now this is nineteen sixty--?
Speaker 2: Thanksgiving weekend--
Speaker 1: Thanksgiving of '67 [1967] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We went to the West Coast Black Youth Conference [Western Regional Black Youth Conference].
Speaker 1: Black Youth Conference.
Speaker 2: It was a black power conference for black youth all up and down the West Coast. Naturally since it was in L.A., most of the people there were from Southern Cal [Southern California], but out of the Watts riots [in Los Angeles, California], had started an organization called US [The Organization Us], led by [HistoryMaker] Maulana Karenga. And US was a black cultural nationalist group that taught black history to hundreds of black kids all over L.A. You know you had, you heard of US?
Story_ID: 599056
Speaker 1: We had you at the Black Youth Conference in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], Thanksgiving weekend--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of 1967.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah this was an extremely inspirational conference for thirty-five young African American activists from Seattle [Washington] to attend. On our way down we picked up about four activists from Portland, Oregon and drove, we rented a Greyhound bus, and went to the conference. And but this is where we got to exposed to the US Organization [The Organization Us], a lot of black youth had come out of the, got revolutionized as a part of the outgrowth of the Watts riot [in Los Angeles, California]. This is where we got exposed to a group that had come down from Oakland, California in 1966. That organized what they call the Black Panther Party for Self Defense [Black Panther Party]. This is where we got exposed to black students who had come down from San Francisco State University [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] and had organized the year before, '66 [1966] and '7 [1967], what they call the Black Student Union. This where we got exposed, I'd never heard of [HistoryMaker] James Forman, the intellectual architect of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC], who was the keynote speaker that weekend, we got exposed to him. This was the Black Youth Conference where Har- [HistoryMaker] Harry Edwards, the organizer of the 1968 boycott of the Olympics [1968 Summer Olympics, Mexico City, Mexico], came down as a sociologist and advisor of the black athletes at San Jose State [San Jose State College; San Jose State University, San Jose, California], he was there. I mean it was just a, a monster of a, of a conference. It was at this conference that a commitment was made to try to organize a boycott of the '68 [1968] Olympia. Lew Alcindor, later Kareem Abdul-Jabbar was there, he committed not to play basketball. Allen who, Lucius Allen who was also on that team came to the Black Youth Conference, UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] was the number one team in the nation that year, if you might recall.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: They said they would not play and at that time only armatures played for the U.S. team. Harry Edwards brought [HistoryMaker] John Carlos and Tony Lee [sic.] from the San Jose track team.
Speaker 1: Tom- Tommie Smith, yeah.
Speaker 2: Tommie Smith, who both ran for San Jose State, and they made a commitment, at least they made a commitment then not to go, but in as things bore out they went and did the famous, in my opinion, the famous black power salute, when they won the four, came in first and second in the 400 yard dash. So it was at this conference we committed to go back to the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] and organize a Black Student Union. It was at this conference that we committed to come back to Seattle and organ- and organize black student unions in the high school and junior high. Because James Forman kept hammering into us that if you don't have a connection with the community, you'll get isolated on these college campuses. So you must organize young black students, young black youth in the community, so we did that, and we got invited to come and learn how to put a Black Student Union together at San Francisco State College. Which we did and, and we went to a big BSU Conference [National Black Student Union Conference] in March of '68 [1968] at San Francisco State. But this is where we got really, really motivated as young Seattle black powerites and young Seattle revolutionaries. And we went back and in, in January of 1968 we organized the first Black Student Union in the State of Washington on the campus of the UDub. Specifically it was January 6, 1968, so that is where the Black Student Union was born.
Story_ID: 599057
Speaker 1: How many of the black students on campus (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thirteen of sixty-eight--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --joined the Black Student Union, thirteen out of sixty-eight, and we announced in front of the student union building [Husky Union Building] that we were going to change the face of the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]. And make sure it had a black presence and that we were going to do it, again quoting Malcolm [Malcolm X], "By any means necessary." As I reflect back, white students going by thought we were, they had never heard black people, they never heard anybody talk the way we were talking. You know SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] was on campus but they, most white students had not heard a lot of revolutionary rhetoric until they heard the Black Student Union. And we started preaching a lot in front of--after that, 'cause we thought it was important not to be totally alienated from the white students out there. We wanted to tell them why we thought the way we did, and why we thought the university needed a change, and that we weren't going to change until this university changed. And they need to become part of the problem or part of the solution.
Speaker 1: Now what was the agenda for the organization? I mean what, what things did you wanna change what was--
Speaker 2: We wanted to recruit, we had a, our brilliant leader, E.J. Brisker, developed a five point program that we organized around from January to May. Because on May 20th we had, we organized the first sit-in at the University of Washington that led, you know to us taking over the president's, President Charles Odegaard's office.
Speaker 1: Now the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But anyway--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was gonna go back and tell you what I did--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: Recruitment of more black and other minority students, we wanted the university to recruit black, Asian, Native American, Latino and poor white students. I was proud because we were students who had some class consciousness too. And no other black student demands that I read about during that period, '68 [1968], '69 [1969], ever demanded that poor white also have an opportunity to higher education in public institutions. But we did, no other black student organization that I was aware of allowed Native American and Latinos in the organ- we did. We had let Native American women and Latino brothers in the BSU in 1968. 'Cause there wasn't enough of a mass for them to start at time, Brother Larry [Larry Crowe], their own organizations. So recruiting of more students. Second the establishment of blacks--these are not in retrospect, really revolutionary programs, but then they were seen as, oh man what is this, the creation of a black studies program on the campus. Third, that there be established an academic structure on the campus permitted to providing academic support to minority students. Nothing like that had ever existed, and now it still exists now it's called the IC, the Instructional Center. Where they, there are two or three hundred tutors that do nothing but provide academic support to students who need it. Now, not just minorities, it's--I think almost any student can go in there now. But that's what we had set up. Four, that there be an ethnic cultural theatre and center set up to provide social and cultural support to black, Latino, Asian and, and Native American and African American students. And five, that they hire more African American instructors, counselors and administrators on the campus. And, and then lastly that black students be represented on every policy making board on the campus, including the board of trustees, to us that's what black power meant. And we started educating administrators, the president, board, students, of what our five demands were between January and May.
Story_ID: 599058
Speaker 1: It culminated, suffice it to say in a, 'cause we got frustrated about the slowness of progress, in us taking over the president's office, May 20th, 1968.
Speaker 2: Now hadn't, had there been dialogue with the president before--
Speaker 1: Of course, several meetings (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Were, were you in meetings with the president?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was the vice president of the Black Student Union by then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So what, how, how did that go, how did he, I mean how, how, what was the dynamics of those meetings (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He didn't, he was perplexed he, he--I mean you know, I don't know if he agreed with us that the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] was, he was probably hurt he's a good man. He didn't really realize and understand what was meant by institutionalized racism. We said, "President Odegaard [Charles Odegaard], this school is 107 years old, has 32,500 students only sixty-eight of whom are black." "Dr. Odegaard, this school offers and it's humanity--arts and humanities courses two hundred-- 2,020 classes. Not one of them deals with the black, Asian, Latino, Native American history or culture or contribution." "Dr. Odegaard, there's not even one book used in any class on this campus that deals with the black, other minority experiences." "Dr. Odegaard, there's not even one book used by any instructor on this campus that has even one paragraph about any of our experiences and contributions. That's what we mean by institutionalized racism." "Dr. Odegaard, there're not black--there are only two black assistant, or associate professors, no full on the entirety on this campus. There are no counselors out of 480, there are no administrators out of eight hundred, this is an institutionally, this is what we mean Dr. Odegaard by institutionally racist. Everything is European. In the, in the music department, Dr. Odegaard, the most profound, the most original music in the world was created by African Americans in America, there's not one class or professor that teaches anything about the blues, jazz, the roots of you know rock and roll on this campus. It's institutionally racist, okay?" So that's what we tell him. And he would say, "Well, it takes time for these things to change." We said, "No man, we don't have no time, we want to know what you gonna do now to change it." And given where he was at and given how change is generally made on the University of Washington--it's not made in two or three months. You know but we were, our contextual understanding is that the Black Power movement now, we were students, many of whom would be gone in one or two years. The university haven't--and attracted the brightest people in our community in society should know what the right thing to do is. No, we not gonna give y'all no time and it culminated in a sit-in. And fortunately for us, for the university, I don't know what we would've done if he had said no, 'cause we were gonna close down the whole university if we could (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 599059
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, but describe the scene, now you, you sat in the presidential wing or in his office or?
Speaker 2: In his office.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We busted his office--we had about a hundred young people. Remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, this is important, the dynamics of this now how, you, y'all just--
Speaker 2: The dynamics--
Speaker 1: You met--
Speaker 2: Remember we had learned from [HistoryMaker] James Forman that you don't isolate yourself by just organizing on the campus [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington]. We by May, by May we had organized black student unions at Garfield High School [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington], at my alma mater in Franklin [Franklin High School, Seattle, Washington], at Cleveland High School [Grover Cleveland High School; Cleveland STEM High School, Seattle, Washington] and at Rainier Beach. By May, we had organized the Black Panther Party in Seattle, Washington and hundreds of youths were joining it. And so these are the, these are the, these are the organizations from which we got a lot of young people to come out to the university to support us on May 20th, over a hundred. Dr. Odegaard [Charles Odegaard] didn't know they weren't university of our school, they were street brothers, they were part of they had joined the Black Panther Party. They were black student union members from Franklin, Garfield, Cleveland and Rainier Beach High School [Seattle, Washington]; I don't think we had anybody under sixteen out there. But most of the people in the city under sixteen to twenty-five as were we, band was over a hundred. Had we not been organizing in the black community amongst other youths, we'd probably only have twenty people in our sit-in. Instead we had over a hundred, we took over his office, after four and a half hours, he concurred with all five of those demands. And we marched out of there saying, "Beep, beep, bang, bang, ungawa, black power," over and over again 'cause that was our theme. And that was our chant, and we loved it, and we had a victory.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and to this, and one of the things I'm proud of, that became known as the first affirmative action program in Washington State. We were honored at the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Office of Minority Affairs [Office of Minority Affairs and Diversity], Educational Opportunity Program in 1995. And we were told that the program that we helped develop, the Educational Opportunity Program, to recruit blacks, Asians, Latinos, Asians and Pacific Islanders had had the following impact, that there had been 49,800 students graduate from the university from 1969 'til 1995, and that of that number 55 percent had entered through the EOP program, not through regular admissions. You know the flexible admissions criteria that we setup, and that they graduated, and that today they are--one of 'em in '95 [1995] was a mayor of Seattle [Washington]. There were teachers and (unclear), Norm Rice [HistoryMaker Norman Rice] came through the program, who you already interviewed. And he proudly said, "I was a EOP student, I got in the U 'cause [HistoryMaker] Larry Gossett and all those people in the BSU [Black Student Union] opened the door. And I'm proud of it." We were elected officials, we were teachers, we were administrators, we were social service program leaders. We were painters, we were artist, we were musicians, all over the State of Washington. So that, that was, that's our legacy.
Speaker 1: It's interesting, I mean you were talking to the president about the con- the contributions of s- of African Americans in music and I was--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) thinking that--
Speaker 2: We gave him that example.
Speaker 1: At the time, you know two of the most popular in the country, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones and Jimi Hendrix were both from Seattle.
Speaker 2: They both were from Seattle, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You just--
Speaker 2: And, and it would've been very appropriate to look at those two gentlemen's music, or have--Jimi was dead by '68 [1968], I think he died in '67 [1967]. But have them--
Speaker 1: No, he died much later, well--
Speaker 2: Oh it was that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy [1970]--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was '70 [1970]? Okay then.
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970] or '71 [1971], yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah it would have been great to have him come and, and perform and talk on the campus in his hometown.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Both of them.
Speaker 1: Yeah and those days I think he was more popular amongst white kids than black--
Speaker 2: Yeah he was.
Speaker 1: Yeah in '67 [1967], '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: And a lot people would've come to hear him perform and talk had he come to the HUB [Husky Union Building, Seattle, Washington]. So you know those were, those were the times.
Story_ID: 599060
Speaker 1: In March of 1968, the only other thing I'd like to mention, is that the first sit-in wasn't at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington], it was at my high school, Franklin High School [Seattle, Washington], and that's where I told you that Aaron and--Dixon [HistoryMaker Aaron Dixon], and Elmer Dixon [Elmer Dixon III] and Carl Miller and I all went to jail. I had not even had a trial for the Franklin sit-in in March and here, me and Aaron and Elmer were sitting-in again in May. I mean, if Dr. Odegaard [Charles Odegaard] had said no, we would've been facing a whole bunch of time in jail 'cause we were closing down the university after we had already been arrested for the Franklin sit-in. And the historic thing that I would like to share with you about the Franklin sit-in is that seven of us were arrested on the morning of April 4th, nineteen sixty- '68 [1968]. Does that ring, day ring a bell on your mind Larry [Larry Crowe]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the day that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And we were all taken to jail between 8:30 and 9:30. By 1:30, Seattle [Washington] time, it flashed on the news that Martin Luther King had been killed. So we had young black activists for the first time ever in Seattle put in jail, and Martin was killed that day. So Seattle, which is, would surprise a lot of people, had significant urban rioting on the evening of April 4th. It's one of the 150 cities where hundreds of thousands of dollars in damage was done in Seattle's historic black community, the Central Area [Seattle, Washington]. White businesses were burned, I was in jail, so I wasn't you know out there, but it was a really dynamic period. And I was in jail right where you and I are sitting [in the King County Courthouse, Seattle, Washington], I remember saying this is strange. I'm in jail and I can look out and see the water 'cause the jail cells were all on this twelfth floor there. This was the King County Jail [Seattle, Washington]; little did I know forty years later I would be the chairman of the King County Council, the legislative body that ran the government where I was raised.
Story_ID: 599061
Speaker 1: What was your, your vision in those days, what, what did you project that you--
Speaker 2: I didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have any sense of what--
Speaker 2: I had--I would have just told you that we're trying to build black power; we're trying to control our own communities you know. I probably would've told them I wanted to be a teacher working at a, at a school that taught and, and liberated the minds of black youth. That's what I'd probably would've said. I probably would've said that being involved in electoral politics was, was bourgeois, counterrevolutionary reformist and not really what our people need. That, that was the limits of my vision in 1968 and '69 [1969], remember we didn't have, I think Sam Smith [Samuel J. Smith] was on the city council [Seattle City Council] and he'd only been the second person to ever to be elected to office, black person in the entire State of Washington, and this was 1968, so there's no reference for blacks becoming politicians, even today, Larry [Larry Crowe], there's only three in all of Martin Luther King County [King County, Washington] that there has, and take all this cities and the counties together, there's only about five elected black officials.
Speaker 1: Now how--
Speaker 2: Out of about four hundred.
Story_ID: 599062
Speaker 1: I'm just re- wondering, how, how you felt being arrested on the day that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was, was gunned downed. How did, I mean how did you, it had to be a special kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can--I remember things like that very vividly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I didn't have time to think about it too much because as, as revolutionary activists, we were in jail, we clearly saw ourselves as political prisoners. We didn't see ourselves as common criminals, so we didn't, I didn't feel bad, "Oh, my god I'm in jail." I felt proud that I'd gone to jail for my people, if you'd understand the distinction. And what happened after Martin Luther King died is that the blacks in Seattle [Washington] and King County [Washington], like any other urban committee, the, a disproportion number of people in jail were black even in 1968. So even though we might've been 4 percent of the county population, about 15 or 20 percent of the people in jail at that time were black. And what they wanted to do is beat up white prisoners, 'cause Martin had been killed. We said no, these white, and remember we had some class conscious- we were all college, revolutionary college students. And we said, or high school students, 'cause there was a couple of high school kids that got arrested, but they were eighteen, so they were in jail with us. We said, "No, what we should have is a teach-in and talk about the legacy of Martin Luther King and what he stood for. And how it relates to the need for jail and prison reform, and we should involve the white prisoners in that conversation." And that's what we did all night, the night of August 4th--
Speaker 1: April 4th, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We got the black and white prisoners talking about what needed to be done to improve the situation of prisoners in jail. Why we can't let ourselves be divided because of race, we had those kind of, suffice it to say, by the time that the morning came, August, excuse me, April 5th, 1968, the guards and the jail administration want us, wanted us out. But in the broader white committee the clamor from the superintendent of schools, Mayor Braman [James D'Orma Braman] and, and the principal of Franklin [Franklin High School, Seattle, Washington] and all the white elite, they said, "These young Negroes is tearing our, they gonna tear our city up. 'Cause all the--please don't let them out," so see that dynamic, the guards and it just, they, "Never have anybody ever had an influence over prisoners in the King County Jail [King County Courthouse, Seattle, Washington] like these five young men who are in this jail. And we want 'em out," I thought all the way down to today they should've been happy 'cause we got the prisoners talking about things. But we were talking about things that would've caused the guards and the administrative to change and have to be more accountable to prisoners. And that certainly is--and that wasn't something that they desired or saw the need to do at that time. Yeah so that's, that's, that's on--I wanted to mention that to you.
Story_ID: 599063
Speaker 1: Was there any sort of commemorative service on campus for Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] on the Washington university campus [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh. Not back in those--no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we would've been the ones to organize it and all of us in jail, and what happened is that April 5th, we had a courtroom down on the ninth floor of this building that holds about eight hundred people. But there were fifteen hundred black people in and outside that court, King County Courthouse [Seattle, Washington] have never seen the likes of which since or before, there's never been a case that that many black people came down and wanted to know what was gonna happen, and they did not know how to deal with that. And even though it was a gross misdemeanor sitting-in, we came down in chains, our, both of our hands chained, our waist chained, our legs chained. And three of us, we had about three--me and Aaron and Carl, was chained together, it was, it was something that this made the, the, the crowd of blacks assembled even more determined. And start talking about, "Beep, beep, bang, bang, ungawa, black power," right in that, in the chamber and the judge he had never heard anything like this, and started gaveling. So it was, it was, it was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well--
Speaker 2: So suffice it to say the, the, the, the judge was kind of like the guards and the other people in the criminal justice system they wanted us out, so he let us out on our own personal recognizance. However, in the summer of '68 [1968] when we finally did have our trial, we went down in history of having the shortest jury trial in the history of King County [Washington]. [HistoryMaker] Aaron Dixon and Carl Miller and I--
Speaker 1: What, what happened (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What I'm telling you, we were tried together, and three people, the trial lasted six full days and the jury was only out seven minutes.
Speaker 1: What was the verdict?
Speaker 2: Guilty as charged and the judge said, "I don't need no time on these kind of people to sentence; I'm ready to sentence now." And we got the maximum six months in the county jail and fifteen hundred dollar fine. But all that meant is that the next morning the Black Student Union, the Black Panther Party and hundreds of more black youth wanted to join, when they saw that we had jail for what we had done.
Speaker 1: So did you serve full, full time?
Speaker 2: No, our lawyers appealed it, we got out in three or four days, I think yeah, about four days.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now this is, wow, this is some of once again a tense time when, when fifteen hundred--
Speaker 2: People, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) people are outside the courthouse that same day.
Speaker 2: Inside.
Speaker 1: Cities all over.
Speaker 2: Inside.
Speaker 1: Inside, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, inside.
Speaker 1: Well, that same day cities all over America were on fire (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They were burning up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so you can imagine how intense, yeah and the, yeah the, what was happening nationally you, you're raising Larry [Larry Crowe] is a good point. 'Cause that was coloring the situation here too, they were trying to figure how do we deal with this?
Story_ID: 599064
Speaker 1: You mentioned a film called 'In Pursuit of Justice' ['In Pursuit of Social Justice']?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, it's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, is that a film about this--
Speaker 2: It's a documentary history of the University of Washington's [Seattle, Washington] Black Student Union, it's founding, and the impact that it had on the university in the greater Seattle [Washington] community.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's available to people who--they, they--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They can type it on the net [Internet] or something if they want to find it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That, who, who directed it, who, who--
Speaker 2: UW paid for it, U- UWTV [Seattle, Washington] to be specific.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: UWTV, and we can make sure that if, if there's some way that somebody wants a copy, we'll get it to them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the University of Washington produced it, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, now what happened after the president agreed to your demands (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was true to his word, that's why most of us really held a healthy amount of respect for Charles Odegaard. He was true to his word.
Speaker 1: Now how do you spell his--
Speaker 2: O-D-E-G-A-A-R-D, first name Charles, Dr. Charles Odegaard.
Speaker 1: Okay, then--
Speaker 2: Was the president of the University of Washington, I think he came in '63 [sic. 1958] and left in '75 [sic. 1973].
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so most of these things were put in place then?
Speaker 2: Right, I'm telling you, I was hired as a student recruiter, and over the summer of '68 [1968] I recruited black and Latino students all over the state to come to the university. In the summer, I mean in the fall, show you how these things work, in the fall of 1968, 127 new blacks students entered the University of Washington, thirty-four Latinos, seventeen Native Americans and about twenty low income Asians, mostly Filipinos who had never had a chance to go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell--you know the national image of University of Washington by most people in popular cul- I'm talking about the popular cul--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --cul- culture image is one of, of a school that celebrates diversity at least through its football team 'cause you had like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Warren Moon.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember Warren; he was quarterback (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sonny Sixkiller (laughter).
Speaker 2: --in the '70s [1970s], yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and you know and you know all these--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the ethnic--
Speaker 2: Athletically--
Speaker 1: --ath- athletes.
Speaker 2: Even back, remember I had told about the '60 [1960] and '61 [1961] Rose Bowl, most of the halfbacks, running backs and skilled players were African Americans even then at the university. But not the student body, not the student body.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so more black students and more Latinos and more--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Native Americans--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --started coming in to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right then--
Speaker 1: University of Washington.
Speaker 2: --in the fall, five minutes after the sit-in--
Speaker 1: Now did you have, what was your, what was it like recruiting in the Native American community, had, had anybody ever done anything?
Speaker 2: No, it was the same in every community, disbelief, and if you see this film, 'In Pursuit of Justice,' you'll hear Latinos, Indians, they say, "Man, when these African Americans came up there and said we could go to college," and black students, "we never saw college as being an option for us, but with black students coming in saying they were there and that we could come we'd listen. And we went on and applied." We--you have blacks, Latinos and Native Americans all saying that. But with us doing the recruiting, we probably got a lot more than they would if there were some white person going out to recruit them. We students did the recruiting ourselves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In those first few years, and naturally now the university had to make their admission criteria more flexible. I mean you can't say that you got to have a 3.0 [grade point average] to get in, they had to let, they developed what was called, basic reading and writing test, and if students passed that, they let them in and we provided the academic support, counseling. And the university hired all kind of, about twenty or thirty black, Latino, Native American administrators and professors over the first two or three years of the EOP program [Educational Opportunity Program].
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, how, how long (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To providing support to these students.
Story_ID: 599065
Speaker 1: How long did you perform this function for the school?
Speaker 2: Well, I graduated in, in 1970, but then I went to work for the Office Minority Affairs [Office of Minority Affairs and Diversity], as a supervisor of black students. And I served in that capacity from 19--from September 1970 to June 1973. So for three years after graduation, I worked as a recruiter (cough) of black students at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] as a supervisor in the Office of Minority Affairs.
Speaker 1: Okay, between 1973 now how--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I wanted to get off the ivory campus, and I wanted to give back to the community. 'Cause remember in '67 [1967], I said my life is committed to working with the poor and the working class in the African American community in particular, and to support oppressed people in general wherever they may be.
Speaker 1: Now, now, were you during this period of time a member of the Black Panther Party?
Speaker 2: I was--this is why I, I say that I was a part of the founding of the Black Panther Party. In March of 1968, in March of 1968, I, I, and Carl Miller, E.J. Brisker and [HistoryMaker] Aaron Dixon, we, we organized about twenty-five black students from high school and colleges in Seattle [Washington] to attend the Black Student Union Conference [National Black Student Union Conference] at San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]. Remember how close San Francisco State is to Oakland [California]. While there, the keynote speaker was one of the most dynamic charismatic man that any of us had ever met. His name, Bobby Seale, the chairman of the Black Panther Party for Self Defense, not a, he was also at that Black Youth Conference, but we didn't hear him speak there, and this is also three or four months after Huey P. Newton had been arrested for allegedly killing a police officer in Oakland. It was two days after Little Bobby Hutton became the first Panther to ever lose his life in a gun battle with the police. So that was the context of, of him coming across the bridge to speak at the Black Student Union Conference. And in, in March of 1968, around March 15th, remember this is still just ten days before the Franklin [Franklin High School, Seattle, Washington] sit-in. That we went down to San Francisco [California] to attend this conference, and then Bobby invited us, brother, to the funeral of Little Bobby Hutton. Which was taking place the day after he spoke at the BSU Conference; we were so enthralled, so inspired by his speech and the existence of this revolutionary youth organization. I mean, we had never heard that there could be a black organization, all-black youth. And their philosophy was Marxist-Leninist and socialism and black power, we had just never heard that before. And we were enthralled and very interest- and that they would put into practice working for the freedom of black people by any means necessary, and they all carried pieces. So we went to the, to the funeral and we had never seen a scene like what we saw in Oakland. And that was about five hundred to a thousand black youth all sitting and stand- I mean all standing in a very discipline bastion. With black leather coats and black berets on, in honor of Little Bobby Hutton, and it impressed us greatly. And after the funeral, some of our members, some of the people on our delegation like Aaron, E.J., Carl, and Elmer Dixon [Elmer Dixon III], his brother, and I and others, we met with Bobby Seale. And Bobby Seale made a commitment to come up Seattle to investigate the potential for starting a Black Panther Party. And this was in March, and he came up to Seattle on April 14th, 1968, to start the party. I never joined or got to be an activist, I just participated in helping in its founding, but--and I was a, you know a strong supporter of the party. But my focus was on organizing what became known as the Seattle Alliance of Black Student Unions. So '68 [1968], '69 [1969], I focused on building the Seattle Alliance of Black Student Union, over the course of that year and the next year, '69 [1969], '70 [1970].
Story_ID: 599066
Speaker 1: All right, so let's catch back up with the chronologically here. Now, so in '73 [1973] you left the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Office of Minority Affairs [Office of Minority Affairs and Diversity] at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] and then--
Speaker 2: Wanted to go back to the community--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I got a job at an anti-poverty agency.
Speaker 1: This is in the C.D. [Central Area, Seattle, Washington]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Central Area Motivation Program [Centerstone] was the name of the organization, and I became the director of its Youth Action Council. So I, my job was to organize low incoming youth all over Seattle [Washington] and in other parts of the county.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they called this CAMP, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) C-A-M-P.
Speaker 2: CAMP, C-A-M-P.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Central Area Motivation Program, so I went to work for them in 1974, and by 1979, I'd been selected at it's, as its newest executive director. I became the executive director of CAMP on April 1st, 1979, and I remained in that position as executive director of CAMP until 1993 when I was--for fourteen years--when I was elected to represent the inner city communities of Seattle on the King County Council. So '79 [1979] to '93 [1993], executive director of CAMP, '93 [1993] to present, District 2 representative, King County Council.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were some of the issues that you were working with the community on at that CAMP, you know?
Speaker 2: CAMP was the antipoverty program so our, our, our responsibility, our mission was to org- not only for providing services to the poor, but to organize and try to influence public policy that impacted their lives. Community action agencies, community action programs all across the country in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] had that as their major theme. So we, we set up programs to organize tenants in the Central Area, we set up programs to improve the schools in, in the Central Area. We set up programs to help low income people weatherize their homes and, and we set up programs to provide low income home energy assistance, i.e., helped them to pay their electric, gas and oil heating bills. We were inspired by all the food banks and food programs that the Black Panther Party had setup in the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s]. And we start setting up bi- food banks to provide bags of food for the poor in the late '70s [1970s] and early '80s [1980s]. So we in time, by '85 [1985] we had the largest food bank in Seattle with the Central Area Motivation Program. We set up housing programs; we set up valuing orientation programs for at risk youth, eleven to fifteen. We set up housing assistance and tenants' rights educational programs, we set up, up a wide range of programs to serve the people who were at or below poverty line in the Cen- Central Area during the fourteen years that I was its executive director.
Story_ID: 599067
Speaker 1: When you men- mentioned value you, when you when you were in orientation programs--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --how did CAMP [Central Area Motivation Program; Centerstone, Seattle, Washington] approach that? There are so many of these programs now approaching it as--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as a Christian thing, you know and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we didn't do it as a Christian thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: We did it as, we organized in, what we call the Rites of Passage Experience program [ROPE], and it was more like, probably like cultural national type of stuff that people like [HistoryMaker] Maulana Karenga and others have done. Where we take eleven to fifteen year old youth, where they're at and we teach them you know life skills. We help--teach them a little black history, we teach them about their culture, we teach them that you come from a people that have a history of sharing with one another and looking out for brothers and sisters who needed food or shelter or help. And we gradually changed their individual values, their thing that they can only survive by themselves, or that they needed to be parasitic on the community, and we showed them what knowing their history, relating to their people could mean for themselves. We help get them jobs, helping people in the community, and the aim was to change their value, their viewpoint their, I, their vision of life from where it was when they came to us, to one that they became interested in, and you know helping out in the community and trying to make things better in their schools. And in their homes and in their neighborhoods, rather being parasitic, because a lot of these kids that we got, get in trouble with the detention centers when they first came to us. They were referred by the King County Youth Detention Center [King County Youth Services Center, Seattle, Washington] or from parents that couldn't handle them and that kind of stuff. That's what I mean by value the orientation.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was, of- often--
Speaker 2: And that was an example--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --of some of the kind of--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --programs that we setup.
Speaker 1: Often youth are associated with crime and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: And did you have, what, what was the, did you have a crime related component in, in, at CAMP to deal with--?
Speaker 2: Well the Rite to Passage was one.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: At risk youth, they had to be pretty at risk, already interacting with detention or likely to, to get into that program.
Speaker 1: But was there a, was any organizing done with, with the block clubs, the neighborhood groups to, is it, usually one of their big issue is they complain to the police about kids, really about youth doing anything.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They, they're seen as a threat--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, CAMP was more likely--and we got involved--and this happens with every black community--no we didn't have people complaining. I mean the center is still mostly black in these, if my, if we had complaints about the police; it was police brutalizing young black kids or black men and the community mobilizing around that. There was very little that we had to you know stop the kids from, you know getting involved with crime, you know and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's much more of that in the Central Area [Seattle, Washington] today because 50, 60 percent of the neighborhood is, is white today, middle class homeowners. And they're very concerned about the black youth that's still living in the neighborhood saying the crime that they perceive on the streets.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you go to the neighborhood councils today, you'll hear more of what you're talking, but not in the '70s [1970s] when I was over CAMP.
Story_ID: 599068
Speaker 1: Well, tell, tell me about how you were elected to the King County [King County Council]--
Speaker 2: Well, as you might imagine, given the history that I had in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], I was a well known grassroots community organizer, and longtime political activist, that every month you would see me down in the city council or school board meeting advocating for low income African Americans or the poor in general. In the 1980s though, here's the more significant reason, why I got involved in electoral politics. In 1984, Jesse Louis Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] ran for president of the United States. I got involved in the effort of Washington State to give him the Democratic votes throughout Seattle [Washington] and throughout the state. By 1986, I was the president of the Rainbow Coalition and got more and more involved in electoral politics. In 1988, in the State of Washington, Jesse Louis Jackson got 39 percent of all the Democratic votes in our whole state. We did, we built, we built, we activists, mostly from African American and Latino and progressive white communities, built a formidable progressive multiracial political organization, where Jesse was preaching all across the country at that time.  We did it in Washington State, he often came here and spoke and said, "The most rainbow state in the union, as far as I'm concerned," said he, "is Washington State," 'cause we're extremely multiracial, and I had a major role in helping to build that, and people started saying in '89 [1989], "I mean Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Gossett], we gotta get some local people elected too. We think you should run," you know and I in '89 [1989] became interested. Ron, excuse me, Norm Rice [HistoryMaker Norman Rice] was on the city council [Seattle City Council], he got on the city council in the early '80s [1980s], but by '89 [1989], he decided to run for mayor, he came to the Rainbow and said, "I need a experienced political, organization like Rainbow Coalition help me become the mayor of this town." And he convinced us that he had a chance of winning. It never been a black mayor of Seattle. We were still only 8 percent of the population. There was a lot of do- do- dubiousness, yeah we were dubious about the potential for Norm Rice, even though he was already on the city council to win as mayor. But we voted to support him and with the resources of the Rainbow Coalition behind him, and by golly he won.
Speaker 1: Now this is in nineteen eighty- (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-nine [1989].
Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989], right.
Speaker 2: He became mayor of Seattle in '89 [1989], and he will tell you to this day that the primary group that helped him to win was the Rainbow Coalition.
Speaker 1: He did tell us that too.
Speaker 2: Oh, he did?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He mentioned that--
Speaker 1: I just wanted you to know that he did tell us that, 'cause I asked him what groups were the most important allies in his campaign.
Speaker 2: When you asked--
Speaker 1: He said the Rainbow Coalition--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --which represent a real Rainbow Coalition.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he talked about the diversity--
Speaker 2: Oh he did?
Speaker 1: Yes, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh that's good to hear, and see you're interviewing us separately.
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: I appreciate that. So we helped him, and then he hired some of our leaders, but people said, "Larry, you should get his spot on the city council." So I did throw my hat in the ring, but only eight people had a vote, the other eight members on the city council. And they, given my history of progressive and radical politics, I was not somebody that they wanted to be their colleague at that point. So I did not win, but I still, I got more involved in electoral politics in '90 [1990] and '91 [1991]. And then in '93 [1993], the King County Council extended, and I got a picture of it, extended it- its membership from nine to thirteen. And they created a new district, and lo and behold they created a district that was made for me. It included all the inn- the inner city communities like the Central Area [Seattle, Washington] and parts of Rainier Valley [Seattle, Washington] and Beacon Hill [Seattle, Washington]. It, it included Capitol Hill [Seattle, Washington] where all the gay and the lesbian and the hippy and the progressive white communities were. I said, "Oh Lord, I can win that," and you only had to win your district to get elected as a local legislature. Where as in the City of Seattle, when you run for the city council all nine of them run citywide. It was much more easier for a progressive with a long radical background to win in District 10 of the King County Council in '93 [1993] than it would have been for me to run for the King County- the city council in '93 [1993]. So I ran for the King County Council rather than city council and was fortunate enough to build a grassroots organization including a lot of the old Rainbow people, and I got elected. And I'm now serving my fifth term on the King County Council, and I see myself as a progressive and just as a social conscious of the county, particularly as it relates to issues, public policy issues that impact poor working people, people of color and so on.
Story_ID: 599069
Speaker 1: Now one, one of the big issues that came up was actually the name of the King, of King County [Washington] and can, can, you tell us about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: The struggle--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to change the meaning of--or the, I guess what the name actually, King County represents.
Speaker 2: Okay yeah, 'cause this has been quite controversial in our state, in our state actually over the last seven years. In 1986, under the leadership of then, King County councilmember and now King County executive Ron Sims, who is an African American, and King County councilmember Bruce Laing, they passed a motion laying the historical foundation for renaming King County after Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. They passed a motion on a five and four vote, it was controversial, saying that they wanted the state to rename the county in honor of Dr. King, and that, heretofore, the King County Council would sa- would define this county as Martin Luther King, Jr. County. That is what they did. I got elected in '93 [1993], and I did not even--even though I was here in '86 [1986], I was a political activist. Remember I told you that was the year I got elected as president of Rainbow Coalition, I was not even aware that, that Ron Sims and other members of the King County Council had renamed this county in honor of Dr. King. I'd have been here, I would've been very excited and happy, but we didn't know. I found out when I got on the county council in '93 [1993]. But I still only, it didn't become a big issue for me until '99 [1999] when at a, at a annual celebration that we have for Dr. King at Garfield High School [James A. Garfield High School, Seattle, Washington], remember the historic black high school, and every year around his birthday we build a people's tribute to Dr. King. Where we have workshops, big march and rall- a big rally and then a march, usually with five or ten thousand people, dealing with some issue that's impacting the poor and workers and disadvantaged here in Seattle [Washington], in order to commemorate his legacy.
Story_ID: 599070
Speaker 1: It was at one of those celebrations that somebody, Eddie Rye, Jr., longtime black community activist, Eddie Rye, Jr., which--who would be a good candidate for interviewing for, for what you all are doing. Turned to me and said, "[HistoryMaker] Larry Gossett you represent King, Martin Luther King, Jr. County [King County, Washington] but nobody knows it. Why don't you write a law or develop an ordinance or resolution to change the county logo from an imperial crown," hopefully I'll be able to show you that imperial crown, "to an image of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], by doing so, everybody would then know that this is Martin Luther King, Jr. County." And that was in, on January 17th, 1999, and if I can fast forward, every year we come to the state legislator first, remember the county council [King County Council] laid the historical basis, but the state government never officially changed the name. And every year I would go to this, this is you know persistence; I'd go down to the state legislature [Washington State Legislature] and testify as a county councilmember saying that we would like to see you formally change the name of our county to Martin Luther King, Jr. And every year they would say no, but in 2003, in 2006, yeah, 2006, in the spring, I was able to get the state legislature with the leadership of Senator Adam Kline in the Senate [Washington Senate] and Representatives Eric Pettigrew and Sharon Tomiko Santos in the House [Washington House of Representatives], we finally pushed through legislation formally renaming this county from William Rufus DeVane King to Martin Luther King, Jr. County. And then the governor in May of 2006, Christine Gregoire, came up here to King County and formally signed the legislation into law. Now what that did, remember for seven years I'd been trying to get the county council, my colleagues, to change the county logo from an imperial crown to the image of Dr. King. And finally in March of 2007 this year, on a vote of nine to zero, on the basis that we were now formally Martin Luther King, Jr. County, I got the King County Council, and I really appreciate it 'cause half our members are Republicans and the other half are Democrats, on a nine-zero vote to support my motion. But to change our logo of eighty years from, from our, from a crown, imperial crown to the image of Dr. King. And I wanna show you a picture of where that was--then we hired a, a design group to do his image, and they did a very good, good job in my opinion. And we formally adopted in March. And now since March, our letterhead, our cars, our buses, everything is gradually; the logo has been changed from the crown to the image of Dr. King. And we have thousands of people, mostly white, they ended up supporting this, we also had a lot of people that resisted it. But, but we were able to get it done and that is, that's a part of my legacy that I'm particularly proud of. Because symbols are important, you know they don't put food on your table but having his image as the logo of our county, we're able to build a, you know a lot of public policy around that, or expose contradictions, they use his image as a way of reinforcing that, it's been good. And I think that most of the people in our county are, are proud of the logo that we have.
Story_ID: 599071
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the original King for whom this county was named, William Rufus DeVeer King?
Speaker 2: No, William Rufus DeVane.
Speaker 1: DeVane.
Speaker 2: D-E-V-A-N-E, William Rufus DeVane King [William R. King], was elected vice president of the United States of America under [President] Franklin Pierce in 1852. Or, I guess should say or around, in 1852 Franklin Pierce was elected president of the United States, and his running partner who he selected as his vice presidential mate was William Rufus DeVane King, who was a senator from the State of Georgia [sic. Alabama]. And Pierce took office on January 1853, Rufus William--William Rufus DeVane King never made it to Washington, D.C. and died six weeks after Pierce was sworn in. From a serious illness that he had gone to Cuba to try to get some relief from, he died in Cuba and his body was brought back to Georgia and buried, on his plantation when he died, he had 159 slaves, there's no other particular legislation in [U.S.] Congress that he's associated with. There's nothing in terms of content of his character that stood out from all the research that we did. And the men and women on the King County Council in 1986 felt that it would be much more significant, much more meaningful to rename this county, it was already King County [Washington], after Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] because this would be an image or a namesake that would bring great honor to our county, whose symbol represent people solving problems nonviolently and with love and respect for their fellow men and women. This would be an image that it would represent and reflect a peace, fairness, justice, racial equity so forth and made a lot of sense. And the majority of the King County Council members bid a vote of five to four in '86 [1986], in April passed a resolution laying the historical foundation for renaming the county after Dr. King. They did not have the authority to formally name it after Dr. King, as I said a little earlier, because only the state can change a namesake of a county and that did not occur until 2006. And most people have come to believe and support the idea that Dr. King is a much more inspirational namesake for our county than William Rufus DeVane King had been.
Story_ID: 599072
Speaker 1: This is a question we usually ask, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my hopes and aspirations for the African American community today is that we develop even more effective strategies, political strategies for creating opportunities for those sectors of the black population that are still the least, the last, the left out, the most marginalized. I'm talking about the 50 percent of black youth in our country that dropped out of school. I'm talking about the fact that in this country only 12 percent of the 188 million people reside, I mean the 288 million people that reside here are African American. But over half of everybody in prisons and jails throughout the country are black, and by which is 1.1 million out of 2 million, that we figure out ways of providing a second chance and opportunities for them, and decrease the nature of racism and classism that traps so many black people in the bowels of the criminal justice system with little hope of ever getting out. My hope for tomorrow is that we can have a time ten years from now where we have more blacks in graduation gowns than we have in, more black males, excuse me, in graduation gowns than we have in jail fatigues. My hope for tomorrow is that 85 to 90 percent of our youth graduate from college. My hope is that we create a national healthcare system where every category of healthcare of blacks are not disproportionally suffering from a wide range of illnesses. In fact, that all blacks and all people in our country have decent healthcare. That--those are some of the visions that I have for the future. I, I, I look at the cost of housing. The average house in Seattle, Washington cost a half million dollars, when the majority of people, particularly all young people regardless of color cannot afford to live in our city today. Most federal guidelines for what is affordable in terms of house is 30 percent of your income after taxes. I would like to see our country make a commitment that we create housing where nobody has to pay over 30 percent of their income to live in housing, a fifth of the shelter of human beings. I believe that in order to get there Larry [Larry Crowe], that we're going to have a much more progressive and broader political movement of grassroots folks working together across racial, geographic, class, age, gender, general orientation lines than we ever been able to build in, in our history. But by building an alliance like that, we're able to more vividly de- democratize, humanize, empower, it empower average everyday people in our country. And create the institutions that would make their lives a lot better than they are on average now, that is my vision for the future.
Story_ID: 599073
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any, any major thing you would do differently, if you had to do it again?
Speaker 2: No, I have a healthy respect for the way in which I've been able to live my life and contribute to the, you know to the people that I, I have had the opportunity to serve. And there's not much that I would do differently.
Story_ID: 599074
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back at everything you've done in this point today, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Okay, one of it I've already mentioned, I, I'm very proud of the legacy that I left at the institution of higher learning from which I graduated, and my legacy on the University of Washington campus [Seattle, Washington] of being an architect and a leader of a reform movement that led to opportunities for higher education being provided to untold thousands of minority and lower income white students to get access to higher education. And as a result, contribute in a very wide range of occupations and professions in ways that was much more suited to the potential--that wouldn't have been the case if they had not gotten these opportunities that have been closed off to them, off to them, because of race and class prejudice. That's one. Two, our legacy of working in an antipoverty agency [Central Area Motivation Program; Centerstone, Seattle, Washington] for fifteen years, where I led the effort to provide opportunities for employment, housing, a higher sense of, of humanity, respect for self and others, and influence on thousands, and thousands of lives, I see that as part of my legacy. I think that that had a lot to do with me, (unclear) elected the very first time I ran by all the people who see, already saw me as a leader, already saw me as a genuine servant of, of the people. And then thirdly, leading the effort to formally rename, and to develop as a symbol of our county [King County, Washington] the image of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. I, I do think that will end up being part of my legacy too.
Story_ID: 599075
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family now.
Speaker 2: I have a, a wife, you know I have a lovely wife of thirty-three years, Rhonda Gossett [Rhonda Oden Gossett], whom like my parents, Johnnie [Johnnie Carter Kelley] and Nelmon Gossett, I met when I was in college at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]. A beautiful black woman who together, who we together have created three children; Nicole [Nicole Gossett], Malcolm [Malcolm Gossett] and Langston [Langston Gossett]. And I'm hopeful that part of my legacy will be them or their offspring, and learn something from my image. Although I don't always see where they listen to me today, but where they will in turn contribute something positive to the community. I mean all my brothers and sisters; I have five; Brenda [Brenda Gossett], Ricky [Ricky Gossett], Glenn [Glenn Gossett], Theresa [Theresa Gossett] and Patrick [Patrick Gossett]. I think that by 1974, I was very proud that I helped all five of my younger brothers and sisters get into the University of Washington. Three of us graduated from the UDub, and I'm, I'm proud of that part of my legacy too.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there anything I have not asked you that you think we ought to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, like I said to you while we were off record, this has been the broadest, longest, most in depth personal historical interview that I have ever had. And we covered more than I'd dreamt was possible. So I can't think of anything readily right now.
Story_ID: 599076
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like the epitaph on my tombstone to read, servant of the people, after my name. I, I like having a legacy that--where people speak to, "Man, he helped me out. You know, that brother was down for the people." Yeah, "Mr. Gossett [HistoryMaker Larry Gossett], when I had no food, instead of sending staff, drove it by himself and left a bag, I'll never forget that." "Do you think I would've graduated from college if Larry and those cats had not opened up the doors of the university [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington], oh no." "Don't be talking about him in front of me," that's the kind of legacy that I, I appreciate.
Story_ID: 599077
Speaker 1: This picture here is me with four of my brothers and sisters, it was taken, I look to be about ten years old, and around 1955. We were still living in the housing projects in High Point [Seattle, Washington]. And from left to right is my youngest sister Theresa [Theresa Gossett], above her is Brenda [Brenda Gossett], and going to the right leaning on the TV is me, [HistoryMaker] Larry Gossett, and below me is, is Glenn Wayne Gossett [Glenn Gossett]. And it's my mother [Johnnie Carter Kelley], the big body looking, and in between her on the far right peeking thorough is my brother Ricky [Ricky Gossett]. So five of us Gossett children are in that picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is another picture around 1954, and at the kitchen table in our house in High Point is our, in the forefront there is my sister, Brenda, to her left is my sister, Theresa, behind Theresa is me, Larry Gossett. And to my left is my brother Ricky and the far right over here is my brother, Glenn, about 1954.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is my immediate nuclear family, and that picture was taken in 1993 when I ran for office, it was in my first brochure. From left there is my son, Langston [Langston Gossett], next to him is my daughter, Nicole [Nicole Gossett], and next her is my wife, Rhonda [Rhonda Oden Gossett], with her left hand on my shoulder. And to my immediate right is my son, Malcolm [Malcolm Gossett].
Speaker 2: That is a picture of me in--around 1997 when I visited the other country that calls itself the People's Republic of China, Taiwan. And I'm in their legislative chambers getting ready to bring their legislative body to order. I was given that honor when I was a visiting legislator there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead.
Speaker 2: In the year 2000, I participated in a sla- in a trade mission to Brazil, and that is me in one of the horrifically poor inner city communities in Sao Paulo [Brazil]. And, just visiting with some of the people that lived there, I really enjoyed myself and people appreciated that I was willing to come down and talk to everyday people.
Speaker 1: I mentioned a little earlier that when I first got elected to the King County Council there were thirteen members. This is the King County Council in the year 1997, and those are the thirteen members of the King County Council. And I'm the second from the right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: That's me with three of my longtime revolutionary compatriots; we're collectively called the four amigos. From left to right is Bob Santos, who is the executive director of the International District Improvement Association [InterIm CDA, Seattle, Washington]. Bernie Whitebear there who is executive director of United Indians of All Tribes, me, I was on the King County Council and leaning on my left shoulder was Roberto Maestas the executive director of EL Centro de la Raza [Seattle, Washington], the center of the people. All of us had been activists and working together in third world coalitions, and people of color coalitions for over thirty years.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: When I was talking about my history, this is, picture was taken on April 4th, 1968, the reason why I remember it was the first time I'd ever gone to jail. And [HistoryMaker] Aaron Dixon on my right and I were arrested for the Franklin High School [Seattle, Washington] sit-in.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my college days, and to my right is Verlaine Keith [Verlaine Keith Miller] who was a prominent member of the Black Student Union. To my left on the picture is E.J. Brisker, the first president of the Black Student Union and one of the most brilliant man that I ever met in my life. And I don't remember the other person, the white gentleman.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This picture is of two, this is the, the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] sit-in, the aftermath. Two of the members of the Black Student Union in this picture on the, in the center is Gordon DeWitty, he's the only blind member of the Black Student Union in 1968, he was born blind. And he was the inspirational personality behind our sit-in. And what I mean by that, when we were deciding whether or not we were gonna follow through and really take over the president, President Charles Odegaard's office, many members got to vacillating because it might lead to us being suspended or taken to jail again. And he stood up and said, "I'm blind and I can see clearly that we have to follow through and take the president's office, take over the president's office if our demands are gonna be met. And I don't care if none of y'all go, I'm going over there by myself." That's all we needed to hear, we went.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 1: This is me coming out of Dr. Odegaard's office after he had signed off on the five demands on May 20th, 1968, that the BSU had presented to him.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's the, the three people in the forefront who were considered the primary leaders of the Black Student Union at the University of Washington in 1968. That was the press conference we had after about a hun- a hundred of us left Dr. Charles Odegaard's office successfully and triumphantly. And all the microphones that are in front of the president of the BSU at that time, Mr. E.J. Brisker. And then I'm in the center and to my left is Carl Miller, another key leader.
Story_ID: 599078
Speaker 1: This is a classic picture of [HistoryMaker] Aaron Dixon, the first leader of the Black Panther Party in Seattle, Washington. Bobby Seale made him the captain of the Seattle chapter when he came up here on April 14th to organize the first chapter outside the State of California of the Black Panthers. When this picture was presented by the Seattle magazine, the founding fathers of Seattle, the white, the white corporate elite, everybody got so upset that they put a pamphlet on the front page, that this magazine's entire source of income through advertising dried up.
Speaker 2: This was in last month's Viewpoint. The Viewpoint is the alumni newspaper of the University of Washington Alumni Association. And I was really pleased that they featured the effort that I led to adopt the image of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] as the logo for our county, Martin Luther King County [King County, Washington].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That is a, a painting, a picture that was commissioned by the Fremont Public Association [Solid Ground, Seattle, Washington] when they honored the four amigos, who I spoke of earlier, for the outstanding community services that we had provided here in Seattle for thirty years. And they commissioned African American artist Al Doggett to, to do something that reflected us over thirty years. So what he decided to do is take images of us in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] and then compare to us as all elder statesmen. To the right of me is Bernie Whitebear, from United Indians of All Tribes, to my left is Roberto Maestas the executive director of El Centro de la Raza [Seattle, Washington], and to his left is Bob Santos who was the executive director for many years of the International District, Chinatown Improvement Association [International District Improvement Association; InterIm CDA, Seattle, Washington].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is here is a picture of the 2007 members of the Metropolitan King County Council, the legislative body that makes the laws and appropriates all the funds to operate our county government. It's the first year that I ever had the honor and privilege of being the chair, and that's why I'm in the middle. I am the chairman of the King County Council, and to my immediate left are council members Jane Hague, Larry Phillips, sitting. And then standing from right to left are council members Dow Constantine and Pete von Reichbauer. To my immediate left sitting are councilmembers Julia Patterson and Reagan Dunn, and standing from right to left are council members Kathy Lambert and Bob Ferguson.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 2: When I spoke earlier I talked about every year Seattle organizes a tribute to Dr. King on his birthday, it's always the third Monday of January. And this is the march that we had in 2007, just this past year, on the signs is, is a picture of Dr. King and it has our theme for the year, solidarity for peace, human rights and economic justice was the theme that we saw. And behind us is about eight thousand people who participated in this year's march. In, in the front lines is marching with me are three other leaders Eddie Rye, Jr., to my left, to his left Tony Orange.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMEMRA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Eddie Rye, Tony Orange and I can't remember.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is the, I think it was on March 5th, we had a big community rally at Mount Zion Baptist Church [Seattle, Washington], the city's largest African American church. Where we unveiled the new image of our government, and that's me and Governor Christine Gregoire, the governor of the State of Washington. We had the honor of unveiling the new image of the biggest county in and Washington State, King County, which was the image of Dr. King. And about a thousand people were there, and we got a roaring ovation.
Speaker 1: Early when I spoke, I said when--about three months into my sojourn as a VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA] in Harlem [New York, New York], I was wearing dashikis and I let my hair grow. When I first went to New York [New York], I had a (unclear) you can see here my natural is bor- is growing and I had a dashiki on. And I was trying to look militant and that's my little studio apartment on 117th Street between Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard].
