Story_ID: 598826
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines the interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: I surely will.  Mattelia Bennett Grays, M-A-T-T-E-L-I-A, Bennett is my middle, is my maiden name, B-E-N-N-E-T-T, Grays, G-R-A-Y-S [HistoryMaker Mattelia B. Grays].
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: July 26th.
Speaker 1: Your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Houston, Texas, Harris County.
Speaker 1: And what is, is or was your occupation?
Speaker 2: Educator.  I was teacher, principal, and retired as district superintendent for Houston Independent School District.
Speaker 1: What is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: In my home in Houston.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: March 11th--
Speaker 1: Two thousand and eight [2008].
Speaker 2: Two thousand eight [2008].  Busy schedule, been--I had to think of that (laughter).
Story_ID: 598827
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Turquoise.
Speaker 1: And what about a favorite food?  What do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: Seafood of any fashion.
Speaker 1: When you go on vacation, what is your favorite destination?
Speaker 2: The city where you have nice shopping (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, I love the fall and believe it or not I love winter, because our winters are not severe in Houston [Texas].  So, you know, you have a few days of really, really cold and then a few days to warm up and thaw out and then you get it again.  Every twenty-four hours you wait a while it'll, it'll change for you.
Speaker 1: Wow.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It's not too difficult to do, it's live every day as if it were your last, because tomorrow is not promised to you.  Be happy as much as you can.  And do not allow negative anything to take up your energy.
Story_ID: 598828
Speaker 1: First part of this interview will be used for a documentary about the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.].  So let's begin by talking about your election.  What influenced your decision to seek the position of supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: Actually, I was on the ballot for what we call our first supreme anti-basileus which is the vice president.  And prior to our going to Dallas [Texas], I got a call awfully late one night that says, "We're going to be in South Central Region.  You're the hostess regional director, and we think you need to move to the--on the ballot to run for the top office.  It may sound very weird."  And it was about two o'clock, I guess, my time, and they said, "We'll let you think about it and I'll call you back tomorrow."  Well, of course, I, after shuddering a little while because I always held that office in such high esteem and my child [Karen Grays Ortiz] was really not that old for me to take on anymore travel than I had had as regional director, but I was blessed, my parents [Dilcia McNeal Bennett and Abel Bennett] lived with me for about sixteen, eighteen years.  And so the next day we had a little family council to determine who would have to do what, when, and if.  And it took me about three or four days.  That weekend I called and said, you know, "You're the guys who have been in this business much longer than I."  And I decided to go for it.  And so I did but I had to get up and remove myself from the ballot of, when we got into the session, I had to withdraw from the position I had initially run for and then I was nominated from the floor by Soror Eugenia Long [ph.] of Tyler, Texas.  And it went from, went from there.  I had just taken, very interesting that you would ask, I had just gotten a, a brand new assignment here as principal of our lab school [Texas Southern University Charter Laboratory School, Houston, Texas] which was perhaps the most visible of HISD schools [Houston Independent School District], because I was located right next door to the administration building.  And I decided then, I said that well, okay, shall I try this or not, because it does impact a lot of things.  First of all, it impacts family and with mother and dad being here and my husband [Horace Grays] here, then they said, "We can, we can swing this," and so I ran on the ballot.  I had a new assignment, I had to come back home, I left that day, flew to Houston [Texas], my secretary brought my daughter to the office, I, because the first day of a contract year so you had to be on sight.  So I left Dallas that morning, flew into here, went to the office, stayed the full day, my secretary brought my daughter to me, and I went back to the airport and that was the day they were voting, so I was not on the premises at all.  So I sort of took that as an omen maybe it was meant to be.  I have thoroughly enjoyed it, however.
Story_ID: 598829
Speaker 1: How would you describe your ascension to supreme basileus [of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it started with, well in undergraduate school, I was initiated at Dillard University in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And very active in the undergraduate chapter.  I left there, of course, and went to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And at the time I met another very dear soror, Soror Weslyn Simpson [ph.] from Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].  And we had to--they had an overflow of undergraduates that year, so the place that I thought I was going to be living when I left here, they had changed on us and because I was a graduate student I was only twenty years old, but if mother [Dilcia McNeal Bennett] had had any idea that I was gonna be staying someplace else I probably would have had a little explaining to do.  But the two of us met at the women's union building, and we met and then we decided to go look for a place to live.  And they had listed, of course, families who were taking in graduate students and we ended up selecting a place about three houses apart.  And I lived there for that, for that first year and went--we became very close friends but I attended the undergraduate chapter meetings while we were there.  This was a way to get to know some of the sorors there.  And that year that we were there I just attended those meetings.  And, of course, from there when I came back home [Houston, Texas], I sought out and became identified with the, with the graduate chapter here, Alpha Kappa Omega, which I am still a member.  And at the time the sorors were very, very (laughter) almost intimidating to new, younger sorors because they get kind of rigid and set in their ways and nobody knew.  They did not initiate too many others at the time.  So we started going to meetings and kept involved in everything that was going on.  And after a few years I was elected to basileus of the chapter.  I think that had to be about '61 [1961], '2 [1962] '3 [1963], because I was still in that office when we went to regional conference.  And the pattern that I just explained to you about running for supreme basileus, almost the same thing happened at regional conference when we got there.  And some of 'em came to me and said, "You need to run for regional director."  And so I did and won, and so I was the regional director of South Central [South Central Region], which covers, of course, Louisiana, Texas, Arkansas, and New Mexico, for four years.  At my last conference in Corpus Christi [Texas]--I think I showed you one of the pictures of Corpus--at that last conference then the region decided after we told them that, when we got to Dallas [Texas], I would be running and the region endorsed me.  And I moved from that office into, after the election, I moved into the basileus-elect, which at the time was a two year term since, it has since become four years at your first anti [supreme anti-basileus], but I was basileus-elect for two years, elected in Dallas in '68 [1968] and installed in Kansas City [Missouri] in '70 [1970] and served 'til '74 [1974].  I came out of office in Miami Beach [Florida].
Speaker 1: And what do you think propelled your candidacy for supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: Well, I believe, that the members saw that I was committed to the organization, that I had touched a lot of members during the time that I had served as regional director, and if I must say so had been effective in, in doing that, and communicating well with your membership.  I feel that's awfully important because when you stay in close touch with your membership and they get to know you as a member and as a leader, it brings a certain degree of comfort.  And, of course, your competence, when you do a good job in one thing which is what I always tell people, if they have any aspirations for anything else, do a good job where you are first, and then the other, the other will come and you won't have to seek it.  It--they will find you, and this is more or less how it happened because as I told you, I was not aspiring at the time that I ran, I was solicited to, to run.
Speaker 1: Well, they must have understood that you were a leader and wanted you to be one of their leaders.
Story_ID: 598830
Speaker 1: So on your leadership style, what was your vision for Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: The main thing I felt as I went into that office [of supreme basileus] was that the decisions in the organization were always more viable, more relevant and all if we got the membership involved rather than a top down.  A few people sitting around a table in a board meeting decided what needed to happen in Houston [Texas] and Mississippi and Michigan and all, should not necessarily come from the ideas around that table.  It should come up the other way with an emphasis on what do the chapters need?  Where, where are their interests?  What focus can they grab a hold of and actually make a program and make it viable where it's visible in that city, it's pertinent, and those who have to implement the program can feel a part of the decision to have that program?  That was really the main thrust of my initial program.  I called it Personal Involvement Now, meaning that I wanted the decision making to begin at the massive level, where the masses are, the, your membership.  And then you let them float up and then the board could from those ideas pick those things that had the widest interest, the widest need, and what have you.  And that has been my guide all along.  I believe the leaders make an error when they come already determined what they're going to do without any input from the membership.  You can get lost, you can do a program but they will have no sense of belonging and ownership.  They've got to own your program.  No matter how gorgeous or how brilliant it is, if that membership does not embrace it, and see how they fit into the total picture, then it's not going to be as productive as it could be if they had a part in the decision.
Story_ID: 598831
Speaker 1: What or who influenced your vision for, for AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Those people that I came, became very close to as I worked through the ranks of Alpha Kappa Alpha were ladies that I thought were just the living end.  I can remember the first supreme basileus that I saw as I always say as a lowly freshmen at Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana] where we had chapel on Sunday afternoons at four o'clock to which everybody was required to come.  You had two approved absences, I think, two or three during the year.  And this particular year Alpha Kappa Alpha had its Founders Day observance on campus.  And the ladies came in, they were the sharpest things I had ever seen.  We were in the hat era then, and everybody had a fine hat on and Edna Over Campbell [Edna Over Gray Campbell] was the supreme basileus.  I had a background in speech and drama, and when she opened her mouth the diction and all of that was just spellbounding for me.  And I jokingly told her when I met her years later that I--she was the first one I had ever seen and I said that day um-hm, I wanna be one of those.  She was the one who pinned me when I became supreme basileus.  And, of course, was a part of my first regional conference.  I think, I showed you a picture where there were four of us here, the, that particular conference--that was my second one--was in Houston [Texas] and she was my keynote speaker at that and that relationship just grew and grew to be almost family.  I think I showed you where she and her husband [Abdella Campbell] spent that Christmas here that my daughter's [Karen Grays Howard] debutante was here, because we had a party and she was standing with us to receive the guests.  And I think I got my main inspiration from Soror Campbell, because in my book she was both smart, sensitive, and the typical vision of what I perceived an Alpha Kappa Alpha woman to be.  Gracious and smart and in charge, competent in whatever you chose to do and just a fine, genuine lady that, of dignity and grace that I fell in love with as a freshmen and decided then.  But I left Houston knowing which Greek letter organization because I had a, a very cherished teacher in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Houston, Texas], Ms. Jenny Hayes [ph.], who was a Zeta [Zeta Phi Beta Sorority] by the way.  But she said to me, "I'm Zeta but when you go to school, I want you to pursue Alpha Kappa Alpha."  Very strange, right?  But even then in high school days, because I had been in all the dramas and was one of the leaders in my class and what have you in high school, so that it, it just sort of just followed in a pattern that almost looked like it was, it was set.
Story_ID: 598832
Speaker 1: Tell me in what ways was your vision designed to ensure Alpha Kappa Alpha's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] survival?
Speaker 2: Very definitely, because if the members own it--if you own something, you're gonna give it your best, you're gonna protect it, and you're gonna be involved at every level where it's humanly possible, you're gonna make sure that the image that is projected in the location where you operate is top notch, that the people perceive Alpha Kappa Alpha as the service organization that it is intended to be.  Those who reap the benefits of your programs, tell your story for you if it has been good, if they see the value, and if they've received direct benefits or they've had contacts so that they get to know the members.  That's where, that's where we build the future and that guarantees your survival because you move from that program to another, but you always can find an audience.  If they have a name and you say Alpha Kappa Alpha is presenting this, they'll come, because you've established a history of being effective and being sensitive to the needs of your neighborhood.
Speaker 1: So how was your vision communicated and carried out throughout the sorority's programs during your administration [as supreme basileus]?
Speaker 2: Like I said earlier, the, my, my theme that I, that I used was Personal Involvement Now.  And as we went through that, chapters had the option of looking and assessing the needs in their specific locale under any one of the phases or the subtopics that we had under there.  Of course, we had Job Corps.  We had voter education, which was very, very relevant at the time, because we were going through the struggle to get all the voting rights and all.  We produced what we call how to do it kits that gave an array of programs, and you got booklets on how to get started, what were the main phases of your development of the program, what your needs would be to get it done, how to introduce your program, and then how to implement it to the fullest.  And so within that wide spectrum, chapters could find their place.  And because they were not forced to use something that I told you was decided around that board table, then they could grab on to it and see and address the needs in their varying communities.  We had economic development way back there, on getting us to know as a race of people to become sensitive to what the dollar means, and how to prepare for the future, and how to pay for college for your youngsters and how to, to get prepared for home ownership.  Just an array of, just living.  Because I see the need now just as great as it was way back there in 1970 depending upon where you are.  And we've had many programs since, but nonetheless the needs remain with--you look at today's economy and everybody's losing a home and the foreclosures and all of that.  There is a need there, it's not to buy beyond your means, regardless of who comes to offer, if it's too good to be true, it usually is.  If your salary will not stretch over that and for god's sake don't sign a variable mortgage (laughter).
Story_ID: 598833
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Besides--besides the how to kit, what other kinds of things did you specifically do to successfully communicate your vision and effectively institutionalize it as a guiding principle?
Speaker 2: We have now--we have regional directors, each responsible for the states in that general area.  There are ten regions; I think at the time we had nine regions.  And they become the ambassadors because they get all of the briefing, they get the discussions of all the concepts so that they can formulate and know what they're doing.  Then when they go back to their people, their job then is to transfer from the board table the program emphasis to the chapters for which they're responsible to have demonstrations of that.  And at the regional conferences--regional conferences were really designed as teaching and learning conferences so that when your members came to the regional conference, they got another full dose and with those--along with examples in all the chapters who had developed wonderful programs and were implementing them with a high degree of success to share with all the other chapters present which were then--you would see the lights go on, it was almost like teaching school, you can tell when the youngster finally got the, which ever, whatever fact that you were dealing with at that particular time.  This inspires them to go back because they're no longer reticent about trying something, they have examples of how to do it, you can sit, sit with and are often, I know when I was regional director [of the South Central Region] I would put them in groupings so that you can go to the person who's presenting the phase that you're particularly interested in for your locale.  And so that way it fans out across the entire region.  And then when you put all of those regions together and you come to boule and you--we compare then and get reports on what's happening in each of the nine regions, you're growing and you're teaching how to and inspiring others.  I always say a leader who cannot inspire anyone to follow your, your ideas and your vision for the organization, you're--you better stop and take another look at what's happening.  It was one soror that we always, and I always remember one of our other brilliant sorors, Soror Rose Butler Browne said to me the night that I was installed, "Soror Mattelia [HistoryMaker Mattelia B. Grays], I wish you all the success in the world but as a leader always look back to see if anyone is following.  If no one is with you, you're not leading, you have gone for a long walk."  I've never forgotten it.  And I've passed it on to the younger ones that I come across for just that reason.  A leader who stays in front and you forget that you better have your members with you, you're going for a long walk, it's not real leadership.  At every level that is important if you're gonna have any success in leading any group.  And that's true whether you're dealing with members of the sorority, whether you're dealing with a group of administrators or whatever, because those same strategies, and I always say too that Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] prepares you to lead anything and anybody (laughter).  After I, after I had been supreme basileus, I came back here and was, I think, the first woman of color to lead our Houston administrators association [Houston Association of School Administrators], because what works the, the, the underlying rules are the same.  People will follow if they feel included and a part of what's going on.
Story_ID: 598834
Speaker 1: Speaking about leadership, which leadership style did you use to bring your vision to fruition?
Speaker 2: One of inclusiveness, one of setting high standards and expectations.  The real leader sets goals where your people have to strive for, step up a little bit and what you--if you set high expectations, 98 percent of the time they'll rise to those expectations and often exceed them.  I did that with teaching my children; I expected them to be classy and to perform and what have you, and they never disappointed.  They would rise to the occasion every time because it's done with gentleness, but I don't believe in falsifying or giving you a colorful picture when it is not true.  I say to those, I've talked--I was talking to a group of regional directors and those in our leadership academy just this past week and I said to them, "Always be sure that you are factual with what you say, that you're not double talking, that you are the image of what you're telling others to be.  I can't demand of you what I'm not willing to do, nor can I lead where I have not been.  If I don't have the devotion, the commitment, and my focus is self-promoting and some of the other things, you're not gonna get there, because everyone is not dumb; many can see through that.  So that you want to by all means be genuine."
Story_ID: 598835
Speaker 1: As the individual with the ultimate responsibility for making decisions which would shape Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], what was the fundamental test you applied?
Speaker 2: It's relevance to the philosophy and goals upon which Alpha Kappa Alpha was founded, making sure that you never veered from the preamble of why we were founded.  Among those: to improve the lives of college women and beyond; to stress scholarship and we still do, it's in the forefront, because often you and I know that we have to work harder sometimes.  We have to be ten times better to get the chances that were commonplace to others, and to stimulate our people to always care and be sensitive to the needs of others.  That's why it's called a service organization too, that of all the things you do, I think I've heard often to whom much is given, much is required, and so we don't have the right to ignore the needs all around us.  I know firsthand that we have a responsibility--that's one, been one of the guiding forces I've used in my professional life as well as in Alpha Kappa Alpha--to always make sure that you reach back and bring somebody else.  When, before I left district, the district superintendency of Houston Independent School District, I could count, I think, I had eight other protegees who had become administrators.  I have one right now who is the finest in the city that came up under, under my tutelage as one of my teachers.  I hired her.  And you nurture them and give them responsibility and the encouragement, and I believe in that safety net.  I'm not gonna allow you, if you're one of mine, I'm not gonna allow you to fail.  If it's sitting in here, I can remember having a principal sitting in that very chair, you are eleven o'clock at night and we're sitting over here away from the family and all for a few quiet moments in helping them to determine the best course of action, they may be working with a situation that's real touchy at their particular site.  The same is true with what we tried to do when we led the leadership seminar program that was developed under, under our twenty-fifth, Soror Norma White [HistoryMaker Norma White].  And she asked me to take that, and as a past supreme basileus I was, I--she knew I was not gonna turn her down but it was one of the most enriching experiences because there we got, I got to work with younger sorors all over this country in developing leadership skills and to know what it is and how you go about it, and, and what's required of being a good leader, and some of those qualifications and characteristics that ensure success.  And so I feel very strongly that we have a responsibility to those who come after us because I want Alpha Kappa Alpha surviving.  I may have a granddaughter one of these days, so I want it to be there for her because it has enriched my life in so many, many different ways.
Story_ID: 598836
Speaker 1: Which former supreme's [supreme basileus] leadership style, if any, did yours parallel?
Speaker 2: Soror Campbell [Edna Over Gray Campbell] first, Soror Larzette Hale [HistoryMaker Larzette Hale-Wilson] who preceded me and took me under her wing because fortunately or unfortunately, I was one of the youngest elected in this organization and so Larzette had no meeting, no--and even outside of our meetings we would talk into the wee hours of the morning on those things that were relevant and those things that had proven successful for her in the organization [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and those things that in the short time prior to me becoming the first supreme anti-basileus that I may not have had a chance to know because I was not familiar, as familiar being director in just one region.  I then got exposure and she saw to it that I got exposure in all of the regions so that as I came into office I would not be a stranger to them nor would they be a stranger to me.  That's how you select your, your lieutenants.  As I'd go, I used to keep--maintain a little book and when I'd see somebody stand and give a fine report and very, had a degree of, high degree of familiarity with the English language, 'cause I hate it when you slaughter English, and we're teaching our children, I'd make a note of the name and chapter and would put what particular skill I saw in that person.  And then that little book became vital to me when it was time to set up my administration and name my chairman and committee members and what have you because you had to have representation.  We make it a point to have representation from each of the ten regions.  And so you know them and you're not shooting in the dark.  You always get some recommendations from others, but for the most part I wanted to know the people, okay.  And so that's how I used that, you use that exposure you're building all the time.  I learned that specifically from, from Soror Larzette and that was how from everything I had had heard because Soror Edna was supreme basileus before I was initiated.  Soror Laura Lovelace [Laura T. Fife Lovelace] was the supreme basileus by the time I was made.  Campbell was it when I first saw a supreme basileus but by the time I was made, it was Soror Laura Lovelace.  I got to know all of them intimately which also strengthened me, you can learn so much from just sitting and talking with.  During my boules, I always had some small intimate session either we had breakfast together or we had lunch with just all of the past supreme basileus so that we could talk and they could share with me any areas of concern that they saw that we needed to, that I needed to look at, to help, help guide you.  I think everybody needs that.  You need a, a sounding board because you can't be everywhere and everybody's not as free and as comfortable to deal with the truth and the facts because back then they held the, that office in such awe that you had to make sure that you come to them and make them comfortable in talking with you about real facts rather than what they think you want to hear.  I've never been one who wanted to hear what somebody thinks I wanna hear, I want the real facts, I don't have time, the other, that takes up too much of my time.
Story_ID: 598837
Speaker 1: What else did you learn about leadership while serving as supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: I learned that they may not agree with you on all things, but they will respect you for fairness, for truthfulness and being factual.  One of the things that I remember that a few of the older sorors called on me.  When I became supreme basileus, the men were not coming to the main event and that was a banquet.  It was a banquet; men did not attend.  And so I told them that coming into my next boule, it would be open to the husbands and significant others.  And a lot of the older sorors, you would've thought that I had declared war.  And I told them, "You're just gonna have to trust me, times are changing."  And I think, I could never get it through my head that at our finest event where we had on the finest garments we owned, with many of 'em, the poor man didn't know that they were not paid for at the time.  And they were outside someplace at what they called a smoker, waiting for us to finish because the formal dance always followed at that time, followed the banquet.  And personally my husband [Horace Grays] had worked as hard for Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] almost as I had.  He was the one running to the post office at midnight and somebody sending checks for me to sign, at that time we didn't have all the electronics that they have now, and the stuffing of envelopes and all.  That was a family affair because daddy [Abel Bennett] put the stamps on, mother [Dilcia McNeal Bennett] stuffed, this one sealed and what have you.  And I just could not understand why the men couldn't come to the banquet.  We had no ceremonial things that we could not schedule beforehand that were not open to the public and all.  And so they came to call on me about that and I just told 'em, "This is one of those times when you're just gonna have to trust me.  I've decided that this is something that I'm gonna do and I'm gonna try it."  And Soror Bernice [HistoryMaker Bernice Irene Sumlin] was gonna follow me because she was installed at the end of my last boule in Miami [Florida] and I said if she wishes to change it and we get a lot of flak from the membership then she will be the one to change it, but for now we're gonna have it.  The men have been coming ever since (laughter).  And they love it because just like my husband, they do the same things.  I, I know I used to even feel guilty at times, because the rule here was for any activities my daughter [Karen Grays Howard] had they had to get approved on Thursday because on many a day, Friday I was gone.  You know, I'd leave the office and go to the airport.  I tried that several times until one day I got out there and it was no place to park and luckily the, one of the skycaps was a good friend and I told him take his car, park it, leave me a note where it is and leave it in the Delta [Delta Airlines] desk when I come in I'll get the keys and find out where it is.  But since then, my husband carried me to the airport every time I have to go, you know, he picks me up.  So his (laughter), his weekends were limited also to what my schedule was, you know.  I tried to take my daughter with me occasionally every third trip or so, I'd take her with me because I wanted to expose her, the poor baby, you know, that's all they knew is pink and green anyway, you know (laughter). They were dressed in pink, and pink blankets and little pink dresses and green bows and all, so then it becomes a family commitment which goes back to what I told you when they first asked me to join.  We had a family powwow to determine how this would work and what impact it would have and so.
Story_ID: 598838
Speaker 1: Well, tell me what lessons or what lesson learned was most instructive for you?
Speaker 2: I learned a lot of 'em.  I learned that people are not always on the right side of an issue.  I found that we're--you will always have to be prepared for those who do not like change. That change must come in bite sized pieces.  You cannot put more on 'em than they can make that transition.  One of the things I, I did while I was supreme basileus was to kind of restructure our board of directors, your numbers were a bit prohibitive.  We had more than twenty members and economically it was not becoming feasible to, to keep it that way.  So that there were some positions that we had to move from the board that was one of the big things.  And in that I learned that if you explain to people what it is you want to do, why you want to do it, how it is going to be done, and how does it relate to you, normally, but that takes time.  You can't say it one time and think it's gonna fall in place because we just don't take change that easily.  I think that's one of the biggest things to learn as, as a younger, at the age I was, that it doesn't just happen, you've gotta really give everybody time to do it because I was accustomed, you know, calling the shots and doing it and, and it gets done and what have you.  But that's a very different relationship in sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] where we're all on a volunteer basis for the most part.  I find now that, that it's unreasonable to expect anybody to do what is demanded of that office now on a volunteer basis.  It just doesn't make any sense.  This is 21st century and if you look at gasoline prices today that, that, that's crazy to expect anybody to do that and use all the skills that they've honed through the years and gone to college for, practiced in, and been successful in their profession, to ask them to do all this on a volunteer basis to me is dumb and out of touch with the real world.
Story_ID: 598839
Speaker 1: What was your greatest challenge or controversy that you faced, and how did you respond?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That brings to mind a person who was well grounded in the sorority, who was my greatest complainer when I introduced the idea of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] buying the birthplace of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  He had been killed, you know, a few years earlier, and I remember specifically this person saying that Martin would not have wanted this.  And I was kind of smart alecky too, you know, at certain times, and I said, "How do you know what Martin would have wanted?"  I knew that with a man of this stature eventually there would be some fantastic--there had to be some fantastic memorial to his life and his contribution.  (Background noise) That's the cuckoo clock that we can't do anything about (laughter).  And there was a little following with her in questioning the feasibility.  I had proposed that we buy the birthplace of Martin Luther King, because I also knew that any memorial would also include the birthplace.  I was not wrong.  It became the centerpiece for the Martin Luther King, change what they call it?  For social justice and change, the memorial, that memorial in Atlanta [Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia].  And so we set out to do the assembly.  Opposition just kind of reduced itself, because I went to each region, personally, to explain to them what it was.  Because I thought it would make a, a magnificent contribution for Alpha Kappa Alpha, that we were sensitive to the grandeur of all he had done, and by that time he had sacrificed his life, he had three [sic. four] little children to leave.  But I figured that in the future, even beyond what you could see and imagine at that time would be very, very relevant, and time has proven that I was not wrong.  And so at my first boule in '72 [1972] I presented to, we made, we, she was inducted as an honorary member soror, Coretta Scott King, and she was my main speaker for our undergraduates which I also thought was significant, that this was the next generation coming along, many of whom may not remember.  'Cause, you know, how quickly we can, the contributions that we make fade into the woodwork after a certain time.  But I was doing two things at once, we made her an honorary member.  Just prior to that, I think, it was Soror Larzette [HistoryMaker Larzette Hale-Wilson] had, had done that but I presented her the check to purchase the birthplace of Martin Luther King at the undergraduate luncheon in Denver, Colorado in 1972.  And there's been nothing that has happened during my entire contribution in Alpha Kappa Alpha before or since that has had the magnificence in my mind that I sensed at the time.  I was doubly thrilled when our current supreme [HistoryMaker Barbara McKinzie] had me to represent her at the current memorial, the groundbreaking for the current memorial in the, in the country's capital [Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial, Washington, D.C.] last year, I believe it was [sic. 2006].
Story_ID: 598840
Speaker 1: On whom did you rely on for counsel or guidance when you were responding to challenges or controversy?
Speaker 2: I had a confidante here to whom I owe much of the guidance that I received at that time.  Because you have to have someone that you can talk with, regardless, even when you have some apprehension about whether this is the right thing to do or not, Soror Esther Hamlett Payne who was to me--I called her my royal friend.  If just the two of us were going over and I was over to her house and we were sitting down having refreshments or something, we had to have the finest crystal glasses and the finest china and what have you, and I trusted her with my life.  She was my supreme parliamentarian for the second half of my administration [as supreme basileus].  And I trusted Esther, she had lots of experience.  Her father [James Arthur Hamlett] was a bishop, and so she knew the political scene.  I was a novice at running for anything with anybody.  She had wide experience.  She was a, a master social worker in my opinion, which meant that she had touched many people close up and could help me filter through the signals of real controversy versus those that you hold--you, you, you keep your place, you stake out your position and you stick to it regardless and convince the people that what you're trying to do is the right thing.  I think Esther Payne had more to do with that kind of midnight talk and all than anyone.  That that also was the greatest loss I can ever remember too, that she died like quickly overnight.  I talked with her at twelve o'clock and the next day I left my office to go to lunch and came back, and my secretary was in tears and my husband [Horace Grays] was at my building and I said, "What is he doing here?"  But they had come to tell me that Esther had been killed.  But that was my, you're talking about my rock, Esther Hamlett Payne was it along with Edna Over Campbell [Edna Over Gray Campbell], which I maintained all through the years, maintained close contact with her and did her, her Ivy Beyond, the ceremony [Ivy Beyond the Wall Ceremony] when she passed away.  They were waiting for me to get to Baltimore [Maryland] because everybody knew that I would have to be the one regardless of who was in office, I'd have to be the one to do it.  And so I lost both of them.
Story_ID: 598841
Speaker 1: Describe for me an irritation that spurred you into action.
Speaker 2: (Pause) An irritation?  I'm not so sure that it was an irritation that spurred me into doing what I was doing.  It was, number one, being sought out because a lot of people thought I had a lot to offer, that my leadership style was very relevant at the time, that it was going to be a most significant factor in the continuing effectiveness of the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] at that, at that time so, it wasn't an irritant.  I took it as just the opposite, that here are people who believe you can do the job, that they have evidently seen enough of the traits and characteristics that would make them even make that first move, because as I told you the first move--I didn't make the first move [to run for supreme basileus].  And I think once you show that kind of confidence, this goes back to what I said about expectations of people, once they set that high standard for what they believe I can do, it's gonna make me work ten times harder not to, to disappoint but to rise beyond the expectations and do a better job than I perhaps would have done otherwise, you know.  So that while it was an irritant, I felt strongly that if we were to continue to hold our place in the whole scheme of things, we had to remain relevant, we had to remain involved, our membership had to own what we were doing, (background noise) and everybody needed to feel, feel a part of what was going on.
Story_ID: 598842
Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about (background noise) your achievements.  Tell me what standards would you measure the success of your administration [as supreme basileus of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: I measured the success in bringing my people with me.  That those closest to me--first, you must get your board on the same page, that they have to embrace both the idea, the vision, and the philosophy of how you work with people.  They have to feel valued, contributing members of whatever we were going to present.  And I feel without that, without your people being with you, you cannot attain the degree of success that you are pursuing.  And I, I consider that as the, the main part of any success that I had was bringing my people with me and convincing loads of others, like I said, they were my lieutenants.
Speaker 1: Back into that, okay.
Speaker 2: Hm.  I believe the success for any organization depends upon convincing your board as we, we call it--we call it our directorate but it's really a board of directors--to embrace your vision, your ideas, and your course of operation and how to implement it.  And once they feel a part of the decision making and implementation and all, then they can sell it because they truly believe in it.  You cannot sell what you've not bought.  And so the involvement of your people, you keep me, hear me come back to involvement.  I'm a firm believer that any organization succeeds best when your people are with you and they feel ownership and thereby they feel the responsibility for the success of the program.  You cannot do it alone, your people have to believe in what you're doing.  You have to be able to articulate your vision and they can relate directly the benefit to themselves, their chapter, their region, from the course of action you plan to take.
Story_ID: 598843
Speaker 1: The question was what one thing would you have liked to have done that you were unable to accomplish?
Speaker 2: One thing that I would like to have done that most of our organizations in some degree I know are still dealing with, and that was to convince our members that hazing has no place in Greekdom.  That being unrealistic and having mean spirited chores for those who are attempting to belong to your organization or enter your organization, that you do not buy allegiance, confidence, love, and understanding with anything that falls under the guise of hazing.  I detested it then, I detest it now, but it appears as long as we're dealing with human beings, it appears that we are going to be dealing with wiping out hazing and all related activities.  Well, you told me one thing, I have another that I think it's gonna be a continuing thing, and that's developing a membership that is knowledgeable about what it is the organization is about in order that you feel a responsibility to select the best leadership you can find to ensure the continued success of your organization.  I can't stand it when you elect somebody because it's your friend, or you knew him way back when, and they can't spell Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] but you elect them because that's my friend.  I think it's critical that we be unselfish enough to spot talent and the real thing when we see it and select that for your leadership.  Because your organization cannot grow with incompetent or inefficient leadership.  The demands continue to grow and so we're going to as members have to carry more responsibility in the selection process all along the way, that's both in selecting new members and selecting leadership that you've gotta make sure that they embrace the founding principles of Alpha Kappa Alpha.
Story_ID: 598844
Speaker 1: It's said that we do not remember days, we remember moments.  As supreme basileus, what was your greatest moment and I know that you talked about the purchase of the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birth home, but was there another great moment, a proud moment, and a happy moment?
Speaker 2: During my years as supreme basileus, oh, I had lots of happy moments.  I'd have difficulty determining which of those would be the, the greatest without it sounding as if (laughter)--I was so happy to complete my four years (laughter).  I was thrilled to have Soror Edna Campbell [Edna Over Gray Campbell] pin me with my pin, the supreme basileus pin.  I was thrilled to have Larzette [HistoryMaker Larzette Hale-Wilson] put the pearls around my neck.  Those are two standard traditions that go along with that office.  And I was also thrilled to salute Soror Carey Preston [Carey B. Maddox Preston] who perhaps had done more than any single soul to undergird the business part of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.].  She established and formulated all the rules and regulations for our headquarters.  And she served in that office by having been the, the, the very first one elected.  She had a massive job to do and by the time she left there was a legacy that remains of our headquarters in Chicago [Illinois]--that, and to be a part of that and to work along with her, she was another bright mind who knew Alpha Kappa Alpha in and out because she served under many for twenty-five years, and our offices are what four years?  So she served many presidents in her role as our executive director.  And so we called her the walking encyclopedia so far as Alpha Kappa Alpha was concerned.  And to have her as thrilled as she was when I was elected was something that carried me through.  I'll never forget that day.  I'll never forget the look on her face when the results were in because she so looked for it.  I think part of, of her commitment to Alpha Kappa Alpha also was to expect the finest performance from those who would lead us and so that was not only a high compliment, but it was a statement of confidence.
Story_ID: 598845
Speaker 1: Can you compare the Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] you inherited from your predecessor to the one that you left your successor?
Speaker 2: I inherited from Soror Larzette [HistoryMaker Larzette Hale-Wilson] an organization whose financial situation and structure had been refined to the highest degree.  I found that awfully comforting to go into that office because I told you in my opinion she was one of the brilliant minds, and I cannot think of anyone that I would have preferred following more than to follow Larzette who was a CPA [certified public accountant] and was the first woman in many instances.  She was the first in, in many of the roles that she carried, but I inherited from her a sound, soundly based financial situation with the structure set in place for reporting and carrying through that if we just followed that, it would have a great impact on the financial stability of Alpha Kappa Alpha.  I think what I left for Bernice [HistoryMaker Bernice Irene Sumlin] was one thing that she had to complete because I had committed us to it, was UNCF, United Negro College Fund.  I had made the commitment for Alpha Kappa Alpha always being in close partnership with UNCF.  As a matter of fact, I worked with, with Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] on the first, we had radiothons then; we were not so updated we had telethons.  We did the model here in Houston [Texas] and I chaired that, and, of course, it grew in the years after to become the telethon that, but we established the model right here.  And before I left office we had made this financial commitment on which we had made some payment but Soror Bernice completed that million dollar commitment to UNCF, because I had been a direct beneficiary of UNCF's support and financial encouragement for our young professionals to go on to get your graduate degree and what have you.  You know, I mentioned to you that I had finished Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] in May, we had planned to get married that summer, and I called up and said, "I have this fine fellowship from UNCF, the, the Farina Laska Fellowship [ph.] for graduate work."  And that was how I got to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] to do my graduate work at that time.  And so I still feel, I came home and was on the, their board of directors in the city for a long time, but Soror Bernice graciously picked, picked that up and completed that million dollar commitment that we had, that we had made and I will forever be grateful to her for that.  But that's a carryover, and it also shows the linkage across administrations that any organization that has lived 100 years would have to be significantly proud of, because you, you cannot do it, you can't correct all ills or all deficiencies at one time but if everybody does something, then as, as you--we build on that then in a hundred years we, we, we, we should be top of the line.
Story_ID: 598846
Speaker 1: Which of your contributions had the most impact?
Speaker 2: I think making the leadership more closely aligned with and conversive with the membership.  I wanted very much for that office to be perceived as a part of--I can remember a statement I made in my inaugural address to the body in Kansas City [Missouri] was that I would not elect a leader with whom I could not talk about the good and the bad as I saw it.  So that for me that was a guiding factor of everything I did in those four years was to make sure that I never allowed so much distance between the leadership and the membership to cloud any issue or to make us reticent to deal with realities and facts.  I still say that to me to deal in anything else is a waste of time and energy and so I sought to do that in everything I did, and I never lost sight of that and I think because of that, it set a tone that has lived on too.  'Cause I can remember the time when everybody was just in awe when the supreme basileus [of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and there she is, you know.  I don't like that.  I am human.  I'm a part of this and you're important as the owners of this organization, and I never want there to be that perception that you cannot talk or sit with and share your ideas, question decisions, and all of that because it stick to the issue and don't make it personal, because I disagree with you does not mean that I don't like and respect you.  And if anything, I could wave a magic wand in most of our women's organizations that would be it, that we'd lose the benefit of our brightest minds and all when we make issues in elections so personal that we feel we have to be destructive of each other in order to come to the best decision for the organization.
Story_ID: 598847
Speaker 1: What accomplishments of your administration do you wanna be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Oh, all of them.  I wanna remember for being real, for being realistic, for being that person who was approachable, for the one who gave her best, that there was nothing that I could've done that I didn't do in the four years that I was there, and that I always kept an eye out for the brightest minds to lead after I'd passed off of the scene.  I have close relationship in identifying and nurturing many of those who have come after me, in particular the twenty-fifth [HistoryMaker Norma White], and our current supreme basileus [HistoryMaker Barbara McKinzie], they were like I say, I don't know what--whether I can call 'em proteges, but they were talents that I spotted a long time ago but worked very hard to make sure that they stayed in the fold and that any encouragement I could give in whatever task they were doing at the time.  Because I was looking beyond my terms to those who'd come after you to make sure that they're the best, best of the best, that we can find and encourage to take on the role of supreme basileus, and I've done that.  And I hope that somewhere along the line Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] will always remember that I sought not only to give it my best but I sought to keep our best in the forefront so that we could have the grandest leadership possible, the most competent.  And there is no substitute for brain in my book.  And so any brain that I can spot to keep in leadership in Alpha Kappa Alpha you can bet your bottom dollar I'm gonna do it, without apology to anyone.
Story_ID: 598848
Speaker 1: What key elements of the sorority's heritage or legacy have been powerful enough to keep the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] vibrant through the test of time?
Speaker 2: I think it's the, the foundation, the bonding that comes with working together through the years, maintaining contact with those who know that you value them, those who had the opportunity to really get to know you and to work closely with you and still say--I had an experience Sunday morning as I was leaving the hotel with a soror who approached me just in her words to say thank you for all you do and continue to do for Alpha Kappa Alpha.  And I said to her, "I think that's my role, to always exhibit and demonstrate the image we want of all Alpha Kappa Alpha women to, to emulate."  And there were tears as we embraced standing at the front door of the Philadelphia Marriott [Philadelphia Marriott Downtown, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And the little notes that I get, you know, the leadership group that I talked with while I was at that meeting, and when the report came that afternoon I wasn't even in the session but the regional director said, "I'm sorry you missed it, but when I called your name they gave you a standing ovation for the inspiration they had received from your presentation to them that morning."  That's the part that I cherish, and that's why I stay alive and that's the reason I keep going.  Told, at least my daughter [Karen Grays Howard] told me my schedule was impossible that, "Do you think you need to go every weekend in March?"  And I said, "Make the reservation."  So when I come in and I'm exhausted she said, "You get no sympathy from me, I tried to help you out in the beginning."  But I wouldn't miss it for the world.
Story_ID: 598849
Speaker 1: Tell me what one thing is essential to ensure that Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] walk rather than back into the next hundred years?
Speaker 2: An awareness of the changes that have occurred in society and in our world.  That we begin to think like our current supreme [supreme basileus, HistoryMaker Barbara McKinzie] has tried to portray, explain, dialogue with us about, and that is that we're a part of a global existence now, and if we're going to have a successful next 100 years, we're gonna have to broaden our vision and our, our thoughtfulness and understand how far your reach goes.  We've got chapters every place, Korea, Japan, Nassau [Bahamas], like I told you, London [England]--I don't know how active that one is right now--Germany, and what have you.  But that with this global approach the demands continue to change, we've gotta think out of the box, we've gotta be more open minded and more sensitive to the demands on both our officers, this is not the same thing.  When I was supreme basileus I think maybe we had maybe over five hundred chapters, we now have more than 950 chapters.  My region had forty-three, my current regional director has a 123, I believe.  And so the demands have magnified.  And I think if we're going to remain successful, our membership is gonna have to open up and realize and put more value on the contributions that these current leaders are expected than we, we brought to this in the first 100 years.  I pray for that and that's--you keep hearing me talking about a knowledgeable, informed membership because without the proper understanding of what makes Alpha Kappa Alpha what it is today and where we wanna carry it in the next 100 years, and that it's gonna depend on everybody meeting her part of the responsibility.  A membership has its privileges but it also has some very real responsibilities that I'd like to see us embrace without as much question.
Story_ID: 598850
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you, has the sisterhood dimension taken a backseat to the pledge to be of service to all mankind?
Speaker 2: (Cough) Has the sisterhood taken a backseat?  I don't think one can exist without the other.  The sisterhood has to be there.  With your sister you have disagreements, but you come together because this is family.  Once we make whatever compromises, once the explanations are done, once we change the attitudes and the understanding, and here again, that educated, knowledgeable membership, but it's the sisterhood that is the safety net under all change.  All progress has to have that as the guiding factor so that I'm got gonna let you fail.  I'm not gonna drop the ball by not meeting my part of the responsibility.  If that leader's vision carries us in this direction and I'm still here (demonstrates), I've gotta recognize that it is my responsibility to get the knowledge, the background, the literature, the discussion and all that's necessary to help me take it in that direction and not wanna sit here where we were fifty years ago, okay?  Because you're gone be by yourself.  We have always more progressives and those eager to learn.  That group the other day just in one region, there were over 350 young ladies who had gone through all this course of, of study for, for leaders, to be significant leaders.  We should not be wanting for good, strong, knowledgeable leadership.  But the second part of that is it takes the sisterliness to be open enough to recognize it for what it really is and to know the difference between my friend and my best choice for a leader in order to ensure that this next 100 years [of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] that we never lose sight of our goal and our mission from January 15, 1908.
Story_ID: 598851
Speaker 1: Now, you spoke about hazing earlier, besides that is there something else that you perceive as the greatest threat to the survival of the sorority?
Speaker 2: Hm.  One of the greatest threats in my opinion is loosening the requirements for membership and not then insisting that if you're qualified and a, going to be a supportive, functioning member, that you understand and can embrace the mission and the philosophy of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.].  That can be a threat when people are in for other reasons.  Just for instance to put on my resume because it's become a plus to say Alpha Kappa Alpha.  I don't need that kind of member because all you're looking for--you're a taker.  I want those who understand that service organizations are built upon giving first.  The rewards come in the sisterhood part.  You've got that, that, that person that with whom you connect, you got lots of 'em.  I've got that.  When, when my grandson [Kristopher Howard] leaves here and goes to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] to go to school, and he's ill or something, I can pick up the phone and call Anne Davis [Anne Mitchem Davis] who served on my directorate and say, "Anne, get over there and see what the devil's going on.  I can't get an answer, I can't do this."  That's sisterhood.  It's being able to depend on that unconditional love and that caring and that connection that only grows, it never lessens through the years, it grows through the years.  That I find, if we don't work hard to maintain that kind of connection across the board, yes, it jeopardizes the, the, the survival and the continuity that is expected over the next 100 years.  And the other I mentioned just briefly to you, the other is that we have to come to terms with, the business level we operated on fifty years ago is no longer there, that here at 100 years the demands and all are so significant that we're gonna have to be very, very clear that it is--I don't know whether how appropriate this words gonna be but it's the best one that comes to mind now--we're asinine to expect the professional skills that we need on a volunteer basis.  You pay for what you get, okay.  And because we demand a more knowledgeable, highly skilled professional of the highest quality, we're gonna have to be willing to put our money where our mouth is and pay the bill.
Speaker 1: What elements of the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] must be maintained or changed to ensure a perfect sisterhood?
Speaker 2: Perfection I don't think we'll ever reach.  We can continue to work on it but I see continuing growth be necessary on all levels.  I see it being very necessary at our alumna level, because they have the option of inviting new members.  And if they do not bring with it that same sensitivity that I was talking about, "Just because you've been my friend forever and I like the way you look and you wear the right brand of clothes that I'm gone bring you into the sorority."  That's not a reason in my book to bring you in, that needs continuing emphasis.  Undergraduates need to continue to understand that this organization is about high scholastic standards, and if you don't measure up you're not gonna be active.  And that nobody, and we do that for a reason, nobody is gonna hire you.  In your big corporations and all now, they look at your transcript and you've got a mediocre transcript, where do you think it goes?  In file thirteen.  They don't have time to deal with that, they're looking for the best of the best and that we have to keep in the forefront at the undergraduate level.  Generally in the organization is that emphasis and getting rid of the personal biases and the self-promotion and all that leads us into getting weak leadership.
Story_ID: 598852
Speaker 1: Now, we talked about perfection not really being in the picture.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So instead of using the word perfect, what is your vision of an excellent sisterhood?
Speaker 2: Where there is the high degree of respect for each other, where there is a sensitivity to both the issues and those who have been charged with the implementation of our programs of service.  These are areas that I feel will keep us in the forefront, that will help us to enlarge on an image that has lasted for 100 years but it's gonna take more in the next 100 years because the demands are greater, both of society and, and otherwise.  Hopefully, we will never get to the place where we stop growing and learning and developing and preparing for the years beyond any particular period in time, that we do not just sit down and think this machine is gonna run on its own forever.  But instead we remember the vow that we took to do all within my power to perpetuate the organization.  And that's where I am.  Every member has the responsibility to make Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] better, and make it live forever so that future generations will have the availability of the fine, enriching, and growing experiences that we have enjoyed.
Story_ID: 598853
Speaker 1: Now, we're going to talk more about your life growing up and, and your family.  And I'd like to start by talking about your mother and father.  Would you tell me your mother's name?  Tell me where she was born and when she was born if you know that information.
Speaker 2: That's sure--
Speaker 1: Please, spell her name.
Speaker 2: That sure is the truth.  My mother's name was Dilcia, D-I-L-C-I-A, Dilcia McNeal, M-C-N-E-A-L [Dilcia McNeal Bennett].  She was born in a little place close to Wharton [Texas], called Glen Flora, Texas.  Of course, by the time we came along she was a Bennett because my father was Abel, A-B-E-L, B is his middle initial, Bennett [Abel Bennett], who was born in Edna, Texas.  That's not too far from Glen Flora but they did not meet, they both had come to Houston [Texas], they met in Houston, met and married (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, well let's, let's talk about your mother and her side of the family.  Did your mother talk about her growing up?  Did she share any stories about her growing up in Glen Flora?
Speaker 2: Well, you get a few but as time passes, I know my mother was from a big family, she had five sisters and I believe there were four boys, let me see, Uncle Reuben [Reuben McNeal, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: You can say their names out loud.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Ollie [Ollie McNeal], Uncle Reuben, Uncle Phalia [Phalia McNeal], and Thurman [ph.], those were the, the four brothers, all of whom eventually had come to Houston to live, they, when they were growing up.  My Uncle Ollie and Reuben eventually ended up in Michigan.  They were in--they lived in Detroit [Michigan] for a long time and then Uncle Reuben moved to Los Angeles [California] and Uncle Phalia moved to Los Angeles, they both are buried there.  My mother was the oldest girl and her mother [Frances McNeal] died very early in childbirth with that, her baby sister.  And so she became the mother (laughter) to all of the younger ones which made her mature very quickly and all.  And it was not easy from what I can understand because it was not a lot of money, and with no other female adult in the house, her older brothers, of course, assisted but as they married and moved away, I told you some went to Michigan and the other went too, they were not around when the younger sisters and brother were, were, were growing up.  So mother took, took that role.
Story_ID: 598854
Speaker 1: So we used to tease her that, because she always had so many of them, she always cooked too much.  Our house was Grand Central Station (laughter) when we were growing up, and we used to get kind of tired of the house always being full.  And mother [Dilcia McNeal Bennett] had a habit, if you didn't wear your clothes in a certain length of time, the next time you'd look for 'em she'd given 'em away to somebody (laughter).  And so we kind of, we grew to kind of have a resentment for all these others occasion- occasionally (laughter) but they were a very close knit, close knit family.  I remember her father whose name was Reuben, Reuben, Sr. [Reuben McNeal, Sr.], at, at our wedding.  And I think it was the first time that he'd had on a tuxedo, because I had insisted he get this tuxedo on.  And then he started feeling extremely proud of himself, you know, it's a, he took over at the reception and says, "I am the cause of it all; without me none of this would be happening," so.  He was a jokester, he liked to frighten us, he wouldn't come to the door and knock like people, he'd come to the window, we were all stacked up talking in a room, he'd come to the window and scare you half to death 'cause he'd say something in there but I have very fond memories of Papa as we called him.  And mother's sisters were all very, very close and all.  We, with everybody being in Houston [Texas], everybody knew everybody and as long as mother lived here like I say, she lived with me for about eighteen years and then after my Karen [Karen Grays Howard] had gotten up some size, my baby sister's children were younger and, of course, she wanted those grandbabies to know her, daddy [Abel Bennett] had retired from the church that he had pastored for years up in Chappell Hill [Texas], and they moved to, they then went to Los Angeles [California] and stayed with my baby sister.  They lived in, in, L.A. and they both are buried there.
Speaker 2: Do you know your grandmother's name?
Speaker 1: Yes.  My grandmother's name was Frances McNeal.  And, of course, I told you Reuben, Sr.
Speaker 2: And where they lived was rural?  Was it on a farm?
Speaker 1: It wasn't too farm-ish.  I don't remember Papa doing any farming.  He worked for some family up in the city proper whatever size that was, it could have been the size of this room but he worked for somebody up there.  But as far as I remember, he was not farming.
Speaker 2: Do you know whether they owned the land that they lived on?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I have nothing to indicate that they did but we would go--my mother's mother had a brother who lived a long time up in Wharton [Texas].  And I can remember going to his place but it was not, it was not a farm, he had just a house on a block like everybody else, but he was the comic in the family.
Speaker 2: That's your uncle?
Speaker 1: Uncle Dick [ph.] is all I remember.  But he was fun, fun, fun with us when he'd come and have us doing stupid things like he used to say if somebody lost his temper or something he'd say, "Okay, come on and rub the rock."  But it was a lot of psychology in what he was doing, it was (unclear) it was supposed to calm you down because when he'd tell, come up with something silly for you to do you would start laughing and, and forget you were angry really, you know.  He was a (unclear), he was really a psychologist by, by nature because he had little tricks like that that he played getting everybody to get along with each other.
Story_ID: 598855
Speaker 1: Now, tell me more about your mother [Dilcia McNeal Bennett].  Do you know how much schooling she had?  How much education?
Speaker 2: I don't believe mother finished high school, because like I told you she took on the responsibilities of motherhood and, and all of that so very, very young because her mother [Frances McNeal] died at forty-eight years old, I believe.  And mother kind of took over all the rest of it, seeing that everybody else got to school and meals and, and all of that (background noise), and that they were all taken care of.  But as far as I can remember I don't believe that she finished at any secondary level but I don't know specifically where along the way.
Speaker 1: Describe her for me.  Tell me about her.
Speaker 2: Mother had beautiful hair.  She was very creative.  She was a seamstress by the time we came along.  Had many customers, was to me a perfect companion to my father [Abel Bennett] who lived in Houston [Texas] but pastored a church up in Chappell Hill [Texas] which is about ninety miles from here and she went and traveled with him every weekend up there 'cause, you know, how the, in the country how the smaller churches were and all, the pastor didn't live up there; there was no parsonage or anything up there.  But he drove up every weekend because he, and I can remember when daddy entered the ministry but he was--well, you told me to talk about my mother didn't you?  (Laughter) A great companion to my father (laughter) and preceded him in death, too.  Loved her family, choir member, a good, good church member.  Served in many capacities in church because our home church here was at Pleasant Hill [Pleasant Hill Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas] where I told you we got, we [Grays and Horace Grays] got married.  And so often in the early years daddy would go up there, up to Chappell Hill and we would go to church in, in Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas].  But then as time passed she started going with him every Sunday because she didn't want anything to happen that she didn't know about (laughter) and didn't want him driving alone because here again things were beginning to change and so she went with him the whole time until he retired.
Story_ID: 598856
Speaker 1: Now, you told me that your father's name was Abel B. Bennett [Abel Bennett].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And where was he, he, he was born (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was born in Edna.
Speaker 1: --in Edna--
Speaker 2: Edna, Texas.
Speaker 1: --Texas.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Describe your father to me.
Speaker 2: My father was a grand soul.  If he had had the benefit of all the education that he needed, he would have really, really been something, something special.
Speaker 1: How much education did he have?
Speaker 2: I think he had less than mother [Dilcia McNeal Bennett] did.  But he was very creative, ambitious, a workaholic.  And many, many times we thought that because he wanted the best for his family always.  Always had a good job, always insisted that mother take us on a vacation in the summer while he worked his vacation time, got the money and worked so that the money for the vacation would pay for us to go someplace to Austin [Texas] so we could see the capitol [Texas State Capitol] and first one place and, and then another.  Could do some of everything.  Part of the landscaping out there, I have plants out there that daddy planted forty something years ago when we moved, moved here.  My fondest memory of the first night he spent the night here.  I moved on one day and had the movers to go to their house the next day and after everything had settled down and he took a shower and was standing at the window upstairs and he said, "Baby, I never would have thought that I would have lived in a place with this much space and this much beauty surrounding me."  And that was all that I needed, 'cause they always called me a daddy's girl.  And I think you can tell by now that I was talking about him when I should have been talking about somebody, talking about mother.  But I found him to be a staunch gentleman in every way.  I never heard my daddy use a curse word.  I never saw him take a drink of anything.  I saw him maintain a house on little money and maintain a car because the man he worked for loved him and even during the World War II [WWII] when nobody could get a refrigerator (unclear) backup because when his boss would get a new refrigerator we got one too.  When he got a new car every two years, we got one too.  And Christmas was a time that he loved and mother used to beg him--he was going to paint for Christmas.  I can remember on many a night Christmas Eve or a day or so before Christmas and he's in the kitchen touching up and mother begging him, "Honey, please don't have any wet paint in here."  "Just a little bit, it'll be dry by morning."  He's gone touch up that cabinet where he saw a scar on there, where the paint was off.  But a very, very genuine, hardworking family provider who thought there was nothing too good for his children.  I can remember when we'd finished dinner, daddy may have worked all day, and we finished dinner and he said, "Get your lesson, I'll do the dishes."  Those are the memories I have for my father.  He lived to be 101 and we buried him in Los Angeles [California] in '95 [1995], I think, um-hm.
Speaker 1: What type of work did he do besides being a pastor?  You said he worked for a gentleman?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.  He was both the night watchman and the chauffeur at a manufacturing company some place out there.  I don't even remember the name of it, but the owner of that business, he kind of was his attendant really because when he had to go someplace daddy would, daddy would drive him.  Okay.  Daddy would drive him there, which was the reason for the cars, keeping all the cars and all in shape.  But then when that was not necessary he would--he was a night watchman at the, at the plant and he did that for years and years.  And then when that business shut down and all, he was a master landscaper, and he worked in one of our finest areas as the main caretaker.  And he had a staff of five or six people who took care of the two or three acres in River Oaks [Houston, Texas].  You may have heard the name River Oaks that's, that's what he did after that.  He bought all the plants and directed the planting and the maintenance and all of that, of it, that was the last job he had before, before he retired and went into pastoring full time.
Story_ID: 598857
Speaker 1: Do you know your grandmother and father?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What were their names?
Speaker 2: William Bennett was my grandfather, Lucy Bennett was my grandmother who always had my chicken gizzards on the back of the stove when we got there.
Speaker 1: When (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Daddy [Abel Bennett] was also a mother's boy.  When they got up in age every Sunday we went to El Campo [Texas], they lived in El Campo, and we went to carry groceries and to see that everything was shipshape there and all now in El Campo.  So we knew that each weekend at some point, we were gonna take that drive of that ninety miles or so up to grandmother's house.  And so my little bowl was sitting on the back of the stove with my chicken gizzards 'cause that's all I would eat.  And I was a picky eater and everybody else was eating the chicken and I'd eat the gizzards.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about your grandparents and, and where they lived?
Speaker 2: Well, they lived in what we used to call the big house in El Campo.  It was on a farm because my brother--my daddy's brother who had lots of children lived right close to grandmother and grandfather and he maintained the working parts 'cause he had boys and all.  But when we would go up there, grandmother's house was like, I guess, maybe fifty, seventy-five yards from where the big house was.  They lived there in their later years because when they moved in from the farm closer into the city, by the time you needed doctors and all that sort of mess, they had a smaller house there but the big house was really headquarters up in El Campo before they moved into the city proper whatever it was.  It was a small town to us coming out of Houston [Texas] but it was still their city, business district.
Speaker 1: Did they own the land that they lived on?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you know how they acquired the land?
Speaker 2: No, except hard work and keeping the boys working and all of that is about all I know about it.  Daddy was not one to go into a lot of detail. If there was something to be done he did it without much fanfare about it.  But he was determined to take care of his parents as long as they lived and they died exactly a year apart. August of '48 [1948] was--'41 [1941], August of '41 [1941] for one and August of '42 [1942] for the other.
Speaker 1: Do you know the names or any information about your great-grandparents on either side?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  That's as far as I know there.
Story_ID: 598858
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Abel Bennett] share any stories about his growing up?
Speaker 2: (Cough) Yes, because my father could speak fluent Spanish, and he used to tell us how he learned it growing up.  Evidently, there were a lot of people moving into (air quotes) El Campo [Texas]--the name itself tells you--and so they evidently played and worked together and all, so he always knew, knew Spanish.  Whether he knew the, the folklore or the, you know, every, every, every little village has its own flavor in many of those language, languages, but he always could communicate with whomever came along.  He worked hard is all I can remember.  And they were, they were--it was necessary that they not, that they do work, was more important in those days than them going to school, which was the reason that he was robbed of the, the years necessary to complete his secondary education.
Speaker 1: Any other stories about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Not in particular that I can recall at the moment.  He loved animals.  He could train anybody's dog to do anything, sit up straight, jump a hoop or whatever.  He talked a lot about life when he talked with us.  Part of our ritual was if daddy was working we still didn't have dinner until daddy got home.  And we all were at the table, you had to tell him everything about what happened that day at school and what was coming next and all of that.  He was a perfect supporter and learned many things from us, too, because he would ask questions incessantly.  Now, that's my childhood but I can remember that daddy was the one always questioning: why do you think this happens this way?  What did you do today?  What did you learn today?  And then, show me.  Okay, smart.  And so I had a great deal of respect for him, he was both a family man but a, an excellent worker because nobody he ever worked for ever wanted him to leave, dependable, self-sacrificing we thought in many instances, but good man.
Story_ID: 598859
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Dilcia McNeal Bennett] and father [Abel Bennett] met?
Speaker 2: There was this old gentleman who lived on the street where, he knew my mother's family because they lived down two or three blocks down on Spencer Street [Houston, Texas].  And he owned a rooming house and daddy had a job at some place when he first came to town and he roomed with Mr. Wash [ph.], and we used to call him Uncle Wash, who thought he owned all of us, because he knew all of us.  I have memories of him every time I came home from Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], he was gonna give me two or three dollars and he was not gonna leave it for me for somebody to give to me, he was gone put it in my hand before I left to go to the train station to go back to school.  But anyway, he introduced them because daddy had a room in his rooming house and he, and finally introduced him to mother.  And that's how they got together and got married.
Speaker 1: And where did they live when they got married?
Speaker 2: At his rooming house (laughter).  For a long time they lived there, but they eventually bought a house across the street, still on Spencer 'cause that's the first house I remember, that's where we lived 4202 Spencer Street, which is out close to the Heights area [Houston Heights, Houston, Texas].  It's before you get to Heights but between Washington Avenue, Yale [Street] is on the east, Shepherd [Drive] is--no, Shepherd's on the west, Yale is on the east, and Washington's on the south.  And all, part of the freeway came back there now where 10 [Interstate 10] is, was the north end of, of that section where they lived, but daddy bought his house, yes, he owned his house.
Story_ID: 598860
Speaker 1: And did your mother [Dilcia McNeal Bennett] work outside of the home?
Speaker 2: She did.  When we got up old enough in school where she did not have to--I think we were in high school before she took a job outside and worked for the school out in the Heights [Houston Heights, Houston, Texas].  Because she was getting ready for us to have to go to school and she took a job at that school as a, in the maintenance, custodial staff there.  And she worked there for a long, for a long time until I finished school I know because that was subsidizing the, the school money, they had to subsidize daddy's [Abel Bennett] salary.  I won a scholarship to go to, to Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], but you still had to do your own residence, that, that part of it, your board, you know, had to be paid.  The tuition and all were in the scholarships so as long as I maintained that average then I got my scholarship all four years.  And then I started working the day, the week after I got there.
Story_ID: 598861
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: That's in Dallas [Texas] at the boule where I was elected.  I think that's Soror Hale [HistoryMaker Larzette Hale-Wilson] and this, oh, you said start at the left.  I believe that's Soror Carey Preston [Carey B. Maddox Preston] who was our executive director, I believe.  And Dr. Hale who was the supreme basileus at the time and I was the hostess, regional director.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: We were just kind of celebrating my election there.  That's at the Dallas boule.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 2: So you got it?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, got it.
Speaker 2: Ready for the closing banquet at the Denver [Colorado] boule in, yeah, Denver.  That's my first boule.  Ready for the banquet.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 2: Turn it the other way.
Speaker 1: It, it's easier to capture it--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --this way.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They're gonna do Photoshop and turn it around.
Speaker 2: I see, okay.  (Laughter) Look you see me getting ready to lay down to see it.  That's a picture when I was regional director.  I believe that was Houston '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: You had on red and black?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Oh, that's a darling one.  My brand new grandson and my mother on that picture--
Speaker 2: What's your mother's name?
Speaker 1: --with me.  Mrs. Dilcia Bennett [Dilcia McNeal Bennett].
Speaker 2: And what year is that?
Speaker 1: Oh, let's see, that had to be '79 [1979] because he was born in '78 [1978] and he looks about three months old so it had to be early, he was born in November, '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: There was a public meeting at the Dallas boule.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968].  That was my grandson's eighth birthday and we had a formal portrait made, my husband [Horace Grays], my daughter, the man of the hour, Kristopher John Howard [Kristopher Howard], and me.  My daughter, Karen Howard [Karen Grays Howard].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That was the chartering of our chapter in London [England].  That had to be '93 [1993], '94 [1994].  So [HistoryMaker] Mary Shy Scott was the supreme basileus.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000], Dallas boule.  That's the principal ballerina for the Houston Ballet company who had been an elementary student of mine at the school where I was a principal for sixteen years, Lauren Anderson and me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That also was, this was Dallas, 2000.  My niece, Ciji, C-I-J-I, my daughter [sic. sister], Joan, J-O-A-N, me, and my daughter, Karen, K-A-R-E-N.  We had just finished the Legacy Parade.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: State of Texas.  Upon my retirement from Houston Independent School District, we had a grand celebration and a proclamation was presented to me at the capitol [Texas State Capitol] in Austin, Texas.  And that is our soror who at the time was represented in our legislature, [HistoryMaker] Wilhelmina Delco, D-E-L-C-O.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 1: That was taken in Alaska in about 2001, I believe, with three sisters, that's my baby sister, Joan, me, and my older sister, Willie [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That is the original honey do, Horace W. Grays [Horace Grays], and me at the ball, one of Alpha Kappa Alpha's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] balls, I'm not sure which.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 1: Magnificent day.  A solemn pilgrimage was held on Howard's campus [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] on the day commemorating our 100 years, January 15, 2008.  We were founded in 1908.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That is also a scene from there where we were unveiling the marker that was placed on the camp- campus.  I was there, I cannot see who that is leaning next to me but the twenty-fifth supreme [HistoryMaker Norma White], the current regional director for the great lakes region, Schylbea Hopkins [Schylbea Jean Hopkins] and Tari Bradford [Tari T. Bradford] who is my regional director from South Central Region.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's in Sacramento, California, '06 [2006], '07 [2007] at far western's regional conference where I was with one of my, I mean, I love him dearly, Cornel, with Cornel West.  I'm not sure who the other party is--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 1: --on there.  Our region has three living supremes, they called us the Three Supremes, Soror Faye Bryant [HistoryMaker Faye Beverly Bryant] who was the twenty-first, I was the eighteenth, and Soror Julia Purnell [HistoryMaker Julia Purnell] of Baton Rouge [Louisiana] who was the sixteenth supreme basileus.  And we're at a conference, at a regional conference.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's at a conference in south Atlantic region in the, somewhere in the '90s [1990s], I believe.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: That one was at, I was women's day speaker and being introduced, I was introduced by the soror standing next to me, Soror Ruth Strange.
Speaker 2: This was a grand finale of our leadership seminar in 2001 in San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Another celebration, I think when my daughter was initiated.  That's my oldest sister, Willie, my daughter, Karen, me, and my baby sister, Joan.  She tells me stop calling her baby sister, she's too old (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Another grand occasion, Kristopher's graduation from Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], May, '07 [2007].  My daughter, Karen, Christopher, me, our centennial supreme basileus [HistoryMaker Barbara McKinzie], and my husband, Horace.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  Next.
Speaker 2: This is the City of Houston, the Mattelia B. Grays Day as proclaimed by our mayor, Mayor Kathy Whitmire [Kathryn J. Whitmire], me, and our representative for this district at the time, Al Calloway.
Story_ID: 598862
Speaker 1: Oh, that's a great one.  On there you s-, at the time I was regional director, that was at my conference held in Houston [Texas] with Soror Beulah Whitby [Beulah Tyrrell Whitby], a past supreme basileus, Soror Edna Campbell [Edna Over Gray Campbell], Soror Whitby is from Michigan, Soror Campbell is from Baltimore [Maryland], Soror Julia [HistoryMaker Julia Purnell] was the reigning supreme basileus at the time from Baton Rouge, and me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], immediately after my election as basileus elect in Dallas [Texas], me and my husband [Horace Grays].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 2: Oh, happy day.  That was our wedding day August 23, 1952.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Another happy day, graduation day, Dillard University, New Orleans [Louisiana] in May '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Me making a presentation to my dearest soror, Soror Esther Hamlett Payne who had served as midwestern--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) stay.
Speaker 2: --hm, it just won't stay there.
Speaker 1: Is this the same (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.  That's showing me with my supreme parliamentarian during, from '72 [1972] to '74 [1974] and a previous regional director of the Midwestern Region.  She was, I was making a presentation of some sort to her.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This was at my daughter's debutante reception with me first, my daughter [Karen Grays Howard], and Soror Campbell who was my main mentor and the back is to one of our board members, Mrs. Kamrath [ph.], K-A-M--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That is at a boule with, leading that line is, is Soror Eugenia Long [ph.] who was the one who nominated me for the office of supreme basileus elect and other past presidents, Marjorie Parker [Marjorie Holloman Parker], Wallace [Arnetta G. McKamey Wallace], the head of our Job Corps, Zelma George [Zelma Watson George], Wilhelmina Drake [Wilhelmina B. Drake], Charity [ph.], and I can't see the other person.  But down on the end, on the far end I'm there, Soror Hale [HistoryMaker Larzette Hale-Wilson], and our executive director Soror Carey B. Preston [Carey B. Maddox Preston].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This was the occasion of us making honorary member, that's our executive director and me and Kathryn Dickerson [Kathryn Kennedy Dickerson] and her husband [Earl B. Dickerson], two guests congratulating her on being made an honorary member.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: A regular board meeting, hours and hours, you can barely see the supreme basileus on the end but that's Soror George, probably making a report about Job Corps.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) or a big one.  I think we have enough pictures.
Speaker 1: This was my leadership team when we developed the certification and leadership development curriculum under the twenty-fifth supreme basileus [HistoryMaker Norma White] who's seated right next to me, Soror Caroline Nunnery [ph.] and the rest of the team, Ruth Easley, Shawn [ph.], Joyce Henderson, and Joyce D. Pretlow [ph.] from Richmond [Virginia].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That's a--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Description, please.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: A gathering of past supremes in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] for our Founders Day.  Seated is Soror Edna Campbell, who is, I believe, the twelfth soror [supreme basileus], Lorraine Richardson Green who was the second supreme basileus of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], Arnetta Wallace [Arnetta G. McKamey Wallace], Julia Purnell, standing left is Bernice Sumlin [HistoryMaker Bernice Irene Sumlin] who followed me, me, Barbara Phillips [Barbara Kinard Phillips] who was the supreme basileus at the time of that photograph that's why we were in Winston-Salem, Soror Marjorie Parker, and Soror Faye Bryant [HistoryMaker Faye Beverly Bryant].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That's Faye Bryant?  She sure looked different.
Speaker 1: She is really different.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
