Story_ID: 611025
Speaker 1: I'm Larry Crowe interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Donald George, D-O-N-A-L-D, G-E-O-R-G-E.
Speaker 1: All right and do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Bankole, B-A-N-K-O-L-E, Eardley, E-A-R-D-L-E-Y
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: As far as I know I know I hail from the freed slave settlers.  My ancestors were settlers from Nova Scotia [Canada] so some of the names I have had to do with British colonization.
Speaker 1: And what does Bankole mean?
Speaker 2: That name was given to me because my uncle--my mother's brother was a very, very clever individual who was very outstanding.  He was a very famous outstanding journalist who excelled in his career.  So since the day I was born my uncle looked at me and says this is the exact image of me, he's going to excel in the world.  So he named me Bankole--he gave me the middle name Bankole.
Speaker 1: Okay so you were named for your uncle a famous journalist  (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes who lived in Ghana and then ended up in the United Kingdom and he works for the queen in England [Elizabeth II].
Speaker 1: Okay, I think I've heard that name before.
Speaker 2: Bankole Timothy that was his name a very famous journalist.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: T-I-M-O-T-H-Y, Bankole Timothy.
Speaker 1: What is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Thirty-first of May '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: And where were your born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Freetown, Sierra Leone.
Speaker 1: All right. And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Today I am the international multicultural education coordinator stroke international coordinator for AMISTAD America [AMISTAD America Incorporated] in New Haven, Connecticut.
Story_ID: 611026
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask and they only require a short answer.  They're kind of like a warm up.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: What is it?
Speaker 2: I like cassava leaves.
Speaker 1: All right, cassava leaves. All right.
Speaker 2: Have you heard about it?
Speaker 1: No, I heard of the cassava, I guess it's like a melon or something?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah you have a solid cassava underneath and then you have the leaves growing on top.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The leaves are very famous it's a popular source back in Freetown [Sierra Leone].
Speaker 1: Is cassava more like a root like thing?
Speaker 2: It's like a solid root but you eat it.  You boil it and it's so delicious you can eat it with butter, you can eat it with palm oil with whatever you choose to eat it with but it is very delicious.
Speaker 1: But the leaves are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh the leaves are super; most people love it back home.
Speaker 1: Do you eat it like greens like black people eating greens?
Speaker 2: It's like greens, well the American kids call it the green soup, that's how they call it green soup.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like black and white.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Coming from a country where we have just two weathers the hot weather and the rainy season.  For me back home I love what you would call the summer season back home and that's from October to like March of every year.
Speaker 1: It's more or less the dry season.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's the dry season.  I don't like the rainy season too much because it's messy, it's really messy.  The way we have rain it's not like the way you get rain.  Well, I start to see some semblance like the flooding; we have lots of that because people have been cleaning the bushes--cleaning the forest to be lousy so there is a lot of erosion.  So the water just runs down because Sierra Leone is hilly, we are mountainous so everything is just running down now, nothing to stop the water.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination, where is that?  Wow, I've been to so many places; I don't want to be bias.  I'm trying to see what was my favorite vacation spot?  I think when I went to visit my brother [Emmanuel George, Jr.] in Tallahassee, Florida.
Speaker 1: Tallahassee, Florida, okay. And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do unto others what you would want them to do unto you.
Story_ID: 611027
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you about your family history and hope we have enough video to cover that.  I know you probably have a lot more history than a lot of folks we know, but I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Emmanuel George, Sr.] side.  We will start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for me?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Marie [Marie George], M-A-R-I-E, Georgiana, G-E-O-R-G-I-A-N-A, Namoi, N-A-M-O-I, George, G-E-O-R-G-E.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She died--actually she died at the age of seventy-five and that's ten years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was born in 1925, I guess that would be about 1925.
Speaker 2: In our culture we don't ask our parents what year were you born, it's a different culture.  You just--it's kind of a little disrespectful if your mother or your father wishes they could tell you.  All you know is oh my mother's birthday is January 14th, that's all you know and you know their age.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know the date--I mean the month and year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was born on January 14th.
Speaker 1: What do you know or how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: I only know that my mother's side she was born by a woman called Mommy Kadey.
Speaker 1: How do you say that--okay mama--
Speaker 2: Kadey.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: K-A-D-E-Y.
Speaker 1: K-A-D-E-Y.
Speaker 2: And Mommy Kadey was married--well my mother's father went off to work in the countryside and then my grandfather met Mommy Kadey and gives birth to my mother.  Later on my mother was like seven years old and my grandfather took my mother down to Freetown [Sierra Leone], the capital, to give her to his wife, is one of the wives he got married to, and then in turn his wife handed her over to my grandmother--my grand aunt, my mother's grandmother.  So that's as far as them.  Mommy Kadey got married to Chief (unclear) of Moyamba District [Sierra Leone].
Speaker 1: I'm not going to try to write--yeah that's interesting so do you--are there stories that are passed down through your mother's side of the family about life in the early days in Sierra Leone or how the family got to Sierra Leone 'cause you were saying earlier that your family had roots I guess in Newfoundland [Canada] and maybe in the British--as the British were leaving America so they had roots--they had been slaves and had fought in the Revolutionary War, they went to Newfoundland and then was shipped to Sierra Leone when that was founded in the early 1800s right?
Speaker 2: Yeah that's in 1792.
Speaker 1: Seventeen ninety-two [1792], so well tell us the story of that.  Is your mother's side involved in that?
Speaker 2: No that's my father's side, my mother's side they were already existing because these were--my mother is the Loko, she came from the Loko tribe.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: L-O-K-O.
Speaker 1: L-O-K-O.
Speaker 2: Yeah, which are cousins to the Mendes.
Speaker 1: The Mendes are where people--where they talked to her about Mandingas and Mandingos that same thing?
Speaker 2: No, the Mendes they are different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of the largest ethnic groups back home.
Speaker 1: And that's in Sierra Leone?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 611028
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Marie George] talk about what it was like growing up?
Speaker 2: She went to--my mother went through a difficult process.  When my mother was brought down to Freetown [Sierra Leone] to my grandmother, my mother had education but my mother had to go to the--my grandmother was an entrepreneur and she makes what we call ginger cake and coconut cake.  That's something that people love back home.  So my mother would take--at night when my mother had to study, my mother would go to the baking house and she would be in the baking house with loco lamp with kerosene and she would light that while she's preparing the mixture for the coconut cake and the ginger cake.  That's the time my mother would have whilst the things in the oven baking.  That's the time my mother would have to read her books and she grew up--she had to get up very early in the morning to pack the things for my grandmother to be shipped to different parts of the city before she would wash up, dress up and go to school. I mean, I think about that as a tough life because she didn't have much, like she works all day long and not much time to kind of have her own laxity, have her own space. She didn't have that luxury.  She was just working for my aunts, help my aunts and enrichy great-grandma, I call her my good grandmother--my great-grandmother built a house out of the resources my mother helped her to gather up and that's how my great-grandmother helped to educate my uncle--this Bankole Timothy I was telling you about, that's how we got to educate him, give him the best education.  My mother didn't have that privilege to go to a private school, but she went to where she could go to and have that basic education.  The reason why I'm proud of my mother is because she is a strong black woman.  She had that education and she pushed herself into becoming somebody even though she was poor.  My mother was poor, she was really poor but she has a heart of gold and she would just push herself until, you know, she'd find a job.
Story_ID: 611029
Speaker 1: She [Marie George] was twenty-one years when she got married to my father [Emmanuel George, Sr.].  Well, by that time she had my elder sister who passed away.  That's why you don't see that one on the list because she passed.  She had already given birth to my eldest sister at a young age before she got married to my father at the age of twenty-one and she starts to breed children.  My elder brother [Emmanuel George, Jr.], my other sister in England, Ellen [Ellen George], and some of them passed while they were babies.  They passed away before I was given birth to.  I was the last of that family.
Speaker 2: Okay, how many?
Speaker 1: I would say about seven and about four have passed away and so I'm just the baby of that family and so I got to see all--when my brother said to me, "You didn't see half of what our mother went through," but the little that I know--because I was very, very close to my mother.  I was a mother's boy; I loved my mother to death everything is about my mother.  She's there for me, she pampers me and people would say, "Oh the way you pamper this boy, this boy will not be independent. This boy will just be spoiled.  He will not be independent whereby if you die or something happened to you he can't make it in life."  So people have all these predictions, but my mother would say to me, "A bird in the hand is worth a thousand," that's her favorite word, never choose.  So at my early age things were so difficult but she always tried to encourage me. She'd tell me, "The sky is your limit, don't give up."  She always said to me, "I know you're going to be somebody one day; you're definitely going to be somebody."  She would go through thick and thin, she would--I knew her when she was almost at the age of retiring.  She'd wake up like five a.m. in the morning, she'd take a bath, she's running to catch the mini bus like six a.m. in the morning to go all the way to the ports because she used to work for the ports, she was a store keeper.  Sometimes I would see her shoes--the sole of the shoes would have bust.  As old shoes, she would pull card like cardboard and put it there just to go find money to take care of us because she single handedly raised us.
Speaker 2: Now was her life--I mean was it tough for women to be able to get an education in Sierra Leone in those days?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Was she--?
Speaker 1: I would say yes because this at that--it's still went on until recently that they talk about the girl child, the rights of the girl child because in the native setting they don't believe girls should go to school. Girls should be domestic women walking us home to sort of make a living, which I don't think is right, education is for all.  It's not for just the male child.  The male child could be educated but if the female child is educated too, they are empowered to bring two incomes to make one big whole, you know that's what I believe in.
Story_ID: 611030
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side.  Can you give me your father's full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Emmanuel, E-M-M-A-N-A-U-E-L, Robert, R-O-B-E-R-T, Modupeh, M-O-D-U-P-E-H, George [Emmanuel George, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Modupeh is a--I've heard that as a greeting, people say modupeh.
Speaker 2: Adupe. It's different, that's in Europa.  Modupeh is a Creole--it's kind of a Creole name, it's what you say is a poor Creole, they have these kinds of names like Modupeh, Adebisi [ph.] this kind of name.  So my father he has this Nova Scotian descendancy.  So I just feel that's why he has that name.
Speaker 1: What year was your father born--I mean what's his birth date?
Speaker 2: Again I come to that, my father died at the age of sixty-five like almost fifteen years ago.
Speaker 1: That's 1930 I guess?
Speaker 2: Something like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was the day and the month?
Speaker 2: Oh his birthday or the day that he died?
Speaker 1: No his birthday.
Speaker 2: Oh man, what is my father's birthday?  It has passed long ago so I don't even--
Speaker 1: That's okay, do you want to get into his death date, do you know that?
Speaker 2: He died in June, June 12, 1994.
Speaker 1: Now, your father has the Nova Scotia [Canada] story, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell that, you know, us about your father's ancestors.
Speaker 2: I learned that his great-great-great, well he is also great because he is much, much younger.  I don't know maybe seven or eight generations.  I think his father's side had David George who was a famous Baptist preacher born in Essex County in Virginia in 1742 and he got married to Phyllis [Phyllis George] in Essex County, Virginia.  He was a slave to man called Chapel.
Speaker 1: That's interesting the location of this office is on Chapel Street [New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), very interesting.
Speaker 1: In New Haven [Connecticut], all right so he was a slave to a man named Chapel. All right and--well, what happened?
Speaker 2: David George escaped and the Creek Indian [Native American] captured him and so he was with them.
Speaker 1: Now did he escape?  Was this prior to the Revolutionary War?
Speaker 2: No, he escaped.
Speaker 1: Or was this during the Revolutionary War?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did escape; I think that was before the Revolutionary War before the Black Salt [sic. Blue Salt] captured him.
Speaker 1: Okay now before that who captured him?
Speaker 2: The black salt.
Speaker 1: The black salt?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's how they called themselves.
Speaker 1: This particular group of Creeks?
Speaker 2: It's a group of Creeks yes and he was with them until the Revolutionary War.  Before he got--well during the time with the black Creeks he got married to Phyllis and they had four children in the U.S.  When they finally journeyed after the Civil War when they were free to Nova Scotia he had two more children in Nova Scotia with his wife, Phyllis.
Story_ID: 611031
Speaker 1: Now let's explain how he gets to Nova Scotia [Canada]. Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, he fought alongside the British as a black loyalist.
Speaker 1: So did the Creeks fight alongside the British?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause there was a--for those who are probably unfamiliar with that history that part of the United States, parts of the South of Georgia and Florida and other places were really not--they were kind of in--some were in Spanish control and some were kind of really not controlled by the--fully controlled by the colonists.  The whole thing was supposed to belong to Britain except for Florida.  But during the Revolutionary War some people here, since it was a British colony, a lot of people fought on the side of Britain.
Speaker 2: Yeah a lot of--yeah because it was still under the British influence.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was an edict by Lord Dunmore [John Murray] I think, he offered freedom to slaves who would come to the side of the British, not that they would be going anywhere 'cause the whole thing was thought of by some as Britain anyway, an extension of Britain.  So it wasn't until after the war that you could define America and Britain.
Speaker 2: And even where we decide right now the whole of Connecticut is called New England because this is where the British really settled right before the Civil War, this is where they settled.
Speaker 1: So at any rate he fought on the British side during the Revolutionary War (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes and journeyed with his wife and four children to Nova Scotia.
Speaker 1: That was part of the reward (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, if you fight alongside you are given a certificate by Colonel Birch [Samuel Birch].  That's why they name it Birchtown [Nova Scotia].
Speaker 1: B-A  (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: B-I-R-T-C-H [sic.].
Speaker 1: The accent is throwing me.  Okay Colonel Birch.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Colonel Birch.
Speaker 1: So this--had they not--I heard there was a lot of conflict going on here because the British started to renege on the promise to take the freed Africans to Nova Scotia (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah to Nova Scotia and they were promised.
Speaker 1: And they only took so many.
Speaker 2: Yeah they took about 1,200.
Speaker 1: A lot of them wanted to go but couldn't go and if they were left here then they are subject to the wrath and re-enslavement of the white colonists of the Americans, right?
Speaker 2: Right, so a lot of them want to go but there was not enough.  Even the ones that were promised to earlier were to take care of them.  What was promised was not delivered 'cause I think they were promised things like apprenticeship, if they get there, and a good place to live so they did not keep to their side of the promise.  So it would force some others to talk about this because it was after the 1700s.  That time the act was already signed in the British parliament so that you cannot take people who are in Africa who are already born and is in Africa, you cannot take them to the new world except those that you have in one way or the other you have to free them because of that law.  So they went over there and it was by force decided that these guys--we have to do something, we can't live in this condition because they were living in huts.  They dig and on top of--there is a thatch like they get the thatch on top and they live underneath because it was very cold and they couldn't do the weather.  So they decided that they're going to send them to find a place for them that is warmer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, warmer than New Scotland [Nova Scotia, Canada].
Speaker 2: Exactly (laughter) so they decided to put resources together and get fourteen ships to take 1,200 black loyalists to somewhere that they are going to name Freetown [Sierra Leone].  So in 1792 what-while they were there David George give birth to other two children while they were there in Nova Scotia.  And in 1792 David George, Thomas Peters and John Clarkson were the founding fathers, the forefront leaders to take the 1,200 men to Freetown.
Speaker 1: John Clarkson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) John Clarkson, yes.
Speaker 1: --he's the brother of the famous Thomas Clarkson, the abolitionist.
Speaker 2: Thomas Clarkson, yes. Yes.
Story_ID: 611032
Speaker 1: There are other sources to this story and there's a book called 'Bury the Chains' ['Bury the Chains: Prophets and Rebels in the Fight to Free an Empire's Slaves'] by Adam Hochschild that details--a couple of chapters detail the founding of Sierra Leone by the British abolitionists.  There's a huge political struggle in Britain to abolish the African slave trade and to the establishment of Sierra Leone as well.  It is a tremendous story but it wasn't an easy thing to do was it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, until 1807.
Speaker 1: So, you've got Thomas Clarkson--John Clarkson the brother of Thomas Clarkson who was probably the most strident abolitionist in Britain and you've got a guy named Peters [Thomas Peters] who used to be a slave trader and your ancestor.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, David George, the Baptist minister.
Speaker 1: Who was a leader of the blacks of Nova Scotia [Canada].
Speaker 2: The black Nova Scotia, yes.
Speaker 1: So they're on their way to Sierra Leone.  Now describe what they found.  We talked about Bunce Island, which was very close to where they--what was Bunce Island, describe Bunce Island?
Speaker 2: Well, Bunce Island was the slave fortress that the British had to keep slaves.
Speaker 1: This was a private corporation run by a guy from Scotland.
Speaker 2: Yes, but he was British, it was a British fortress because they flew the British flag right there and this is where slaves, hundreds and hundreds of slaves are kept once the slave ships arrived to take them.  Even today the ruins of it still remain in Freetown [Sierra Leone] because they are trying to--I know there are organizations that are trying to make it a park site.  They are trying to raise funds to build--to recreate it again but it's costing millions of dollars because they want to keep the structure.  The only thing that will make it authentic is if they just enforce the structure or just develop on it a little bit that is safer and kind of look like what it was in those centuries.  They are trying to do it right now, they are getting there.
Story_ID: 611033
Speaker 1: Now are there any stories about what it was like when they first got there passed down to your family in terms of what they struggled with?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure because during the time that my great-descendants were coming to found Freetown [Sierra, Leone], which if you read the book 'Rough Crossings' ['Rough Crossings: The Slaves, the British, and the American Revolution,' Simon Schama] it tells you about how Clarkson [John Clarkson] died on the way.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's the name of the book?
Speaker 2: 'Rough Crossings,' R-O-U-G-H, 'Rough Crossings,' rough that means it was rough, 'Rough Crossings.'  That tells the whole story of how they started and how they ended up in Freetown.  On the way to the journey Clarkson was sick, was really, really sick and I'm sure he went in a coma but the book says he died on the way and they wrapped him up.  You know the sailors' way, they put you in a kind of bag, wrap you up and put lead on you to throw you overboard.  My ancestors, my great-ancestor, the Reverend David George, prayed for his soul to rest in peace and that kind of thing.  Before they were about to throw him overboard the thing started moving, yeah that thing started moving and so they have to unlock him and they found out that he was probably in a coma.  So the journey continued until they arrived in what they describe as Freetown because of the freedmen that came back.  But it was not an easy journey.  Even when they get there, there was power struggle between Peters [Thomas Peters] and Clarkson but the mediator has always been my great-ancestor, David George.  He has always been the one that people would look up to, to kind of give some leadership, some direction and some words of wisdom on how to handle things.  So during the time that thing was boiling up, it was the wrong time to quell it down.  Once it reaches a point when it became nasty.
Speaker 1: So just a--you've got a thousand Africans from Nova Scotia [Canada] on their way who had been slaves in America on their way back to Sierra Leone.
Speaker 2: To Freetown, it was Freetown.
Speaker 1: The natural leader is your ancestor, David George.  Two white guys had been assigned to lead them and they've got a power struggle going on and from what I read the rains came down and wiped them out.  They ran out of food, horrible, you know.
Speaker 2: It was horrible conditions.
Speaker 1: Conflicts with the people who already lived there.  The slave trade is on the other (unclear).
Speaker 2: Remember Freetown was all bushes, they had to clean to find accommodations how to live.  They started to set up shanty houses again and it was during the rainy season.  See, so conditions-I mean the story says some of them died because of, they got sick with malaria which most of them were not used to.
Story_ID: 611034
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so eventually how did your [paternal] ancestor make out? Did he?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did, he survived because Freetown [Sierra Leone] continued to grow and grow until it started to develop into a beautiful city.  So by that time my great-great-descendants have given birth to four children in Freetown and then it becomes the founder of the first Baptist church in Sierra Leone.
Speaker 1: Okay, the first Baptist church of Sierra Leone.
Speaker 2: Yes, which it was called The Golden Street Baptist Church [ph.].  But you won't find Golden Street Baptist it became now it's the Regent Road Baptist Church [Freetown, Sierra Leone].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry it's called what now?
Speaker 2: Regent Road, R-E-G-E-N-T, no not legent, R.
Speaker 1: Oh, Regent.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Regent Road Baptist Church, which he was pastor for a couple of years and went to Liberia and did the same thing.  So in a nutshell he was the founder of the Baptist mission in West Africa, the famous Reverend David George.
Speaker 1: So he was able to I guess kind of help--he really was the pioneer in terms of African Americans returning to Africa and establishing a settlement.
Speaker 2: I'm sure you would agree with me that they didn't do fair to that history because it is kind of silent.  They don't talk about him very much.
Speaker 1: No, we don't read about him in American history and we certainly don't read about him--
Speaker 2: It's the same with my people too.
Speaker 1: In world history we take that and we don't read about it during Black History Month either, but his story is documented and it's there.  I read it last summer for the first time so it is available.
Speaker 2: So I'm so happy I have the opportunity today to kind of tell the world that there are other silent heroes who make Freetown what Freetown is today and who started the peaceful process in times of conflict.  That was a real, real bad conflict between Peters [Thomas Peters] and Clarkson [John Clarkson] but this was the person who kept the peace until Clarkson was overthrown by Peters who became the leader eventually.  There was division that means division between the Clarkson people and the Thomas people.  It's just like today's politics, it's always conflict and division, oh yeah I want to be this, I want to be on this side, or I would prefer to be on this side.  They had that same conflict during that period.  Peters finally becomes the leader and because him being a white man so you can't tell us what to do in a black man's land.  I think that was the major thing.
Speaker 1: So at any rate--so your ancestor was one of the greatest figures in the history of Sierra Leone.  This was the person who established basically--
Speaker 2: Yeah the founding of Freetown.
Speaker 1: And so had your family sort of had a privilege position as a result--I mean did that side of the family have a privilege position since--because of that?
Speaker 2: No, a minute ago I just informed you that even in my country my countrymen don't talk about David George, only a handful of people know.  It's just like the story of Amistad [La Amistad] only a handful of people understand their history very well.  The ones who know the history don't pass it down to generation because remember these are generations after generations after generations but there is nobody who wants to tell it how it is for to live it as a legacy so that those that are coming now would know the history very well.  I'm sure if you ask a lot of aging people in their forties and their fifties they won't be able to tell you what I just, what I just explained.
Story_ID: 611035
Speaker 1: Could you kind of summarize for us because this is so unique maybe the history of the independence of Sier- I mean how Sierra Leone was able to establish itself as an independent country from the British colonization (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a lot of facts.
Speaker 1: I know it's probably a long story.
Speaker 2: Oh it's a long story but all I know is between the (unclear), the (unclear) that you just talked about was a key pioneer in terms of fighting for us with Governor Clarkson [John Clarkson].  There are several governors but Governor Clarkson was the unique one in a sense that he wanted us, even though he felt very bad in giving up as governor of Freetown [Sierra Leone], but the prayer that he left behind for Freetown was a very powerful prayer before we have our independence that reads, that who has evil plans for this land may the Lord wipe him out of the face of the land.  We have that prayer and most houses--you go to most Creole houses they have Governor Clarkson's prayer on their wall printed.  Because it's just like--they make it like a shrine because this was the prayer he left before we fought for our independence.  It was not an easy fight but at the end of the day we decided we wanted to be on our own.  We wanted to take our own problems; we don't want anybody to tell us what to do.  We want to be a sovereign nation.
Speaker 1: So about what year did Sierra Leone gain independence from Britain?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-two [sic. 1961].
Speaker 1: So all these independence struggles are not without--all these independent nations don't emerge without struggle so then that's a long story.  In the context of that did your family play a role in the independence of Sierra Leone?
Speaker 2: Not really, we are described as kind of the little ones.  We are a major team player but when you talk about Creoles, it's just a few people who identify themselves as Creole because most have some other ethnicity.  But the real ones they are tough people like Sosamir Lewis [ph.] who was a doctor.  Because of the British colonization, most people are being educated by the British.  They've had big time education, doctors, lawyers, you know.
Speaker 1: So the Creoles are the most educated group (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah that's the description.  I hate to say it because I'm not trying to brag about Creoles but the Creoles at that time were the most educated at that time.  So they hold key positions during the new administration after our independence.  They hold most of the key positions in the country.  But I didn't have a direct--like someone who's my direct family or was part of that, part of holding important office--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at that time.
Story_ID: 611036
Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit about your--did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: No, well my father's [Emmanuel George, Sr.] side yes, my mother's [Marie George] side yes, I was privileged to know them.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us about your father's parents.
Speaker 2: Well, my father's father I did not meet because I'm the younger one, but my father's mother I met and she used to pamper me.  We use call her Grandma Kay [ph.] and she love me very much and she always tried to pamper me like this is my son's baby boy that kind of thing.  My mother's side I met--I didn't meet Mommy Kadey because Mommy Kadey was living up country and I was very young.  So I didn't get to see Mommy Kadey, but I got to see my grandfather, who I always called Grandpa Thomas [ph.], I called him Grandpa Thomas.  When he passed away I was a young boy, I was in elementary when he passed away.  So I got to meet him and have some love from him.  One of my grandaunts was the one who I spent most of my life with, my mother's aunt the one who--
Speaker 1: What was her name your grand aunt?
Speaker 2: Grandma Ilet Timothy [ph.], Grandma Timothy we always call her Grandma Timothy, that's Bankole Timothy's mothers.
Story_ID: 611037
Speaker 1: Did your father [Emmanuel George, Sr.] talk about growing up and what it was like?  Did he pass on any stories to you about what happened to him when he was--
Speaker 2: Well some, some of them I know the thing is I was not really, really, really close to my father.  If you see me I spend most of the time talking about my mother [Marie George] because I grew up with my mother. By that time my father and my mother had conflict.
Speaker 1: All right, so he was--what do you know about him in terms--did he--was he able to go to school and?
Speaker 2: My father yeah he was educated, he was an accountant and he was very educated and he had love for God, he had big positions in church.  It was a chorus there and he was a singer just like me and he's somebody who's just full of love.
Speaker 1: And he grew up in Freetown [Sierra Leone]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father grew up in Freetown.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: My mother-- I think my father [Emmanuel George, Sr.] met my mother [Marie George]--my mother was one of the best soprano singers in the whole country and she had the privilege--she was the only--the first black woman who sang with Mae Cotbalt [ph.] the wonderful Mae Cotbalt of England, the leading soprano.
Speaker 1: So your mother sang.
Speaker 2: One of the leading--the best leading soprano in our age in Sierra Leone.
Speaker 1: And she was like--what's the lady's name?
Speaker 2: Mae Cotbalt. She was a British--very famous British singer who went to Sierra Leone to perform.
Speaker 1: How do you spell her last name?
Speaker 2: I think, C-O-T-B-A-L-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother was the only person after the whole entire audition; she was the only person she chooses to sing a duet with.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now she's a good singer, so how did they meet?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was singing for a group called Eastern Choral Group [ph.] and my mother went to a performance--they had a performance and my father was there and during the time my mother was singing, my father fell in love with her.
Speaker 1: So this was about what time, about 1965 or so?
Speaker 2: No because I--it was long before that.  My mother was just like--she was just in her teens probably seventeen, eighteen.
Speaker 1: This was like 1930s or '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Right, because they were both young.
Speaker 1: Yeah 1941, '42 [1942] I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah because they were both young.  I could imagine around that time they were both young.
Speaker 1: And you said you're the youngest so there are brothers and sisters before you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my mother's side, on my father's side I'm not because my father--after a divorce with my mother, after my incident, he got married again to another woman called Matilda George [ph.] who has three children from my father, two girls and a boy; Io [ph.], Alanka [ph.] and Leslie [ph.], who I also have a very good relationship with cause they live in Silver Springs, Maryland [sic. Silver Spring, Maryland].
Story_ID: 611038
Speaker 1: Tell us about-well tell us this now when you consider--I know you weren't around your father [Emmanuel George, Sr.] that much but when you think about their personalities and their talents and disposition who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Wow. I think both sides, I think both sides.  My mother [Marie George] is quiet, she's quiet, she doesn't talk like that but she has a good heart, she's very compassionate when it comes to taking care of people and helping people.  She don't care, she raised a lot of children who was not even her own, who are in prominent places back home today as I speak to you.  But when it comes to a matter of public speaking and stuff and that's my father's side.  My father could stand there and read a whole monologue without holding a book and he was a member of the lodge society and he went up to zed past master and up to zee [ph.]--what do you call it, zee in America (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 611039
Speaker 1: He was a Mason?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It went up to zee and you could imagine a standup and just this guy who is so articulate, he could express himself.
Speaker 1: Now tell me, this is an interesting question and it just popped in my mind. Was he a Prince Hall Mason [Prince Hall Freemasonry], was he related to the Masons that were founded here in the country by Prince Hall or was it another branch of the Masons (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think they're interconnected because my father [Emmanuel George, Sr.] was a member of the British--like a British type of--British conscious type of Freemason.  So I think he was the one who was particular a member that emulates from Britain, all the proxies emulate from Britain and was passed over a list.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you know what I'm asking right 'cause Prince Hall founded a black Masonic group in Boston [Massachusetts].  It was related to the British group too but that's where they got their charter, but all the African American Masons in this country--if your ancestor, David George, was a Mason I don't know who it was but it's likely that he was.
Speaker 2: It's a possibility.
Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause a lot of prominent black clergymen and stuff like that were Masons.  It's possible that he could be related to--I mean be part of that same group of Prince Hall Masons.  I know the Liberian Masons are related to the Prince Hall Masons.
Speaker 2: Well, there must be a relation if Liberia, of course Liberia is inside Sierra Leone and that practice boils down to West Africa.  So there must be a inter-connectedness with that.
Speaker 1: He called--Prince Hall called his lodge the African lodge in Boston so I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that must be-- I'm not a member, I'm not a member I refused to be a member, I was asked but because of the kind of mission I'm so much involved in church activities and not that they don't practice but I practice like a born again Christian.  So I'm not so much into the Freemason side.
Story_ID: 611040
Speaker 1: I was asking you about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You were asking about--
Speaker 1: --where you grew up and the neighborhood and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: That's a very interesting question.  First and foremost I grew up in a very, well, my father's [Emmanuel George, Sr.] side have a little elitism but I tell you I didn't grow from there, I grow with my mother [Marie Georgie].  I choose to grow where my mother was poor, but I love her to death and this is the person I always--earlier on my introduction I tell you about how my mother even though she was poor, she had a heart of gold and she always tried to make us happy even though she doesn't have all the wherewithal to kind of provide.  But she would go out of the way to provide for us.
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this before--it just came to mind I don't know if by custom or by law does a father in Sierra Leone--is he compelled to have to pay a certain amount or do something for the mother with children.  I mean--and did your father--what did he do, did he provide for you financially at all?  It sounds like it was pretty hard on your mother, pretty tough and she didn't have a lot of resources.
Speaker 2: Well, at some point they have a bad story, which I don't like to repeat because it gets me all emotional because I could have a child who would not even survive because of what happened, what he did to my mother.  But the good thing is by the grace of God my life is here today because God was preparing me for a mission.  My mother has always showed that extra love to me because I'm the child who was like the bull, the bull stands alone.  So she's always there for me.  You don't have that love--back home you don't have that love, where in America you would have child support, you don't have that loyalty.  The father can just give back and just like it's just a name that's my child but he can choose to provide, he cannot choose to provide.
Speaker 1: So it's his choice whatever he wants to do?
Speaker 2: It's his choice at that time, it's not like today and one thing I'm proud of today is what happened to me is a lesson how I should treat my own children 'cause my mother instilled fatherhood in me even though she was a woman.  She instilled fatherhood, she showed me that she's a woman, she's a man by providing and set me up because when I look at what she went through just to provide for me and my brothers [Emmanuel George, Jr. and Onikeh George] and sisters [Ellen George].  Today it just makes me a father, although I'm far away from my children, but my children are my priority right now.  It can be I don't have something to eat, I would provide for those children.  I was on the phone yesterday talking to my daughter [Juliet George] who is just ten years of age, I left her when she was like five, I left to come for the mission and she's going to take the NPSE exam [National Primary School Examination (NPSE)].  The NPSE exam is the entrance examination to junior high school and I was telling her yesterday how proud I am for her, how she has made me proud because--she's too small, she's too young to take that exam at the age she is.  But she makes me proud and I was telling her all the wonderful things I would do for her if she goes into that examination and pull it out, pull it off for me.  I just digress a little just to give you a sense of responsibility.
Story_ID: 611041
Speaker 1: Did you ever have contact with your father [Emmanuel George, Sr.] growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was that like?  I mean, what did (unclear) do?
Speaker 2: It was at some point it was good at the end when I'm a grownup now.  When I'm a grownup I had this kind of bond with him because even when I got married I had to--he was there he was very supportive and I had to come live at his house, myself and soon to be my ex-wife. I lived at his house and I would become bothered everything was built on me now.
Speaker 1: Okay, so eventually things got worked out but when you were a little kid though there was no--he didn't--when did you first see him--meet him?
Speaker 2: I met him when I was young.  I do see him not regularly; I do see him once in a while yeah.  He would come over to see my mother [Marie George] even though they are being divorced.  He would come over to see my mother and would pick us up, myself and my brothers [Emmanuel George, Jr. and Onikeh George] and sister [Ellen George] and take us to our grandmother, that's his own mother.  She used to live in (unclear) Town.  He would take us there like every Sunday to go spend time with our grandmother.  So there was some interaction but not until I become an adult kind of or a youth I had that bond with him.
Speaker 1: And most of the burden was placed on your mother.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 611042
Speaker 1: Can you describe like where you--the place you lived in and what was going on there and remember now we're sitting in New Haven [Connecticut] in 2010, the people are used to certain things.  I don't know what circumstances you had, there all kinds of circumstances here in New Haven right now but what--
Speaker 2: Where I grew up it's like I said to you, it's what you would call downtown but it's not the most fancy or elite house.  It's one of these poor house, very poor.  It was board; it was like wood, you know, pit toilet.  Growing up was difficult; to even have nice clothes to put on was a burden on my mother [Marie George].  But I don't mind, I can wear this every time I wash it.  I go to church, I come back, I wash this, I hang it for next Sunday. I don't care.  All I wanted was peace and just move myself.  So I didn't have much clothes to wear at that time, I repeat clothes over and over.  The only time I get new clothes is like Christmas, New Year's or Easter and even my underwear specifically for Sunday service.  When I wear my under vest and my underwear I have to take it off, after church I take it off and I wash it and I keep it again for next Sunday.  Footwear the same, I don't have the luxury like other people who had clothes all over the place, enough that they could even--three people could wear it.  No I did not grow up that way.
Story_ID: 611043
Speaker 1: Try to describe it in terms of the sights and the sounds and the smells.
Speaker 2: The sights were kind of okay.  The smell of course it's Africa people do things against the law.  People throw thrash in gutters.
Speaker 1: Did they have any other place to put it, I mean that's the question.
Speaker 2: Well, that's the question but the sanitation condition is very poor.
Speaker 1: It didn't smell good?
Speaker 2: No, it was very, very poor.
Speaker 1: Do you get used to smelling that after a while?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting I was having a conversation with some of the people I grew up with back home, that a few days ago we are talking about the smell.  When you are over there, there is a certain smell that you smell but when you come over here and leave there for a while when you go back, oh my god you can't take it.  It happened to me in 2007 when I went back.  The smell was not like--like my nephew would open my suitcase and he said to me "Uncle Donald [HistoryMaker Donald George] wow the smell that is coming off your clothes is different because with the detergents and all that kind of stuff."  We don't have that luxury to use detergent and to use it on washing machine and all that kind of stuff.  We wash our clothes with our hands with what we call soda soap, it's made out of soda or we buy soap from the store with no smell on it.  But now that I'm here every time I go back I find it hard.  Sometimes even people's body odor I can't stand.
Speaker 1: Now, this is an urban life in an African town that there is not a lot of--Freetown [Sierra Leone] there is some parts that's developed and we've got cars and indoor plumbing.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Freetown is developed.
Speaker 1: You also have parts that don't have as much, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like up in the rural areas.  There are lots of places of country that people only use bicycles or motor bikes, because of lots of these nongovernmental organizations going out to Sierra Leone to operate, poverty alleviation, you know poverty alleviation groups go over there.  They provide bikes, they provide trucks like (unclear) vehicles, that drive in some towns but outside the ordinary people don't see those things.  Some people have lived there for ages and they don't know what a car is.
Speaker 1: So, what were the houses made out of in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Oh, they were made out of mud--mud bricks and thatched roofs and there are some villages they still do that because development has not reached there.
Speaker 1: Were you raised in Freetown itself or were you raised on the outskirts of Freetown?
Speaker 2: No, I was raised in Freetown.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is in Freetown you've got like mud--
Speaker 2: No you don't have some but some parts--
Speaker 1: That's why I was asking 'cause that's where you were and the neighborhood you were raised in.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, in the peninsula, Freetown is like surrounded with water.  There are still mud houses in the peninsula in Freetown.
Speaker 1: But in your neighborhood it's kind of like a suburb of Freetown?
Speaker 2: My neighborhood is like what you would describe as downtown.  It has a lot of cement structures but also a lot of the British style of house they call it a wooden house, it's all board.
Speaker 1: Well, going back to what I was asking is like what did the houses look like in your neighborhood that you were raised in where you grew up?
Speaker 2: Yeah it's either combination of cement and board and corrugated iron sheet, some houses are corrugated iron sheet all over.  So I had--I am privileged to see a combination of different types of houses.
Story_ID: 611044
Speaker 1: How old were you when you started school?
Speaker 2: When I started school?
Speaker 1: Yes, how old were you when you started?
Speaker 2: I was like five, I started in what we call nursery.
Speaker 1: Is that the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Well, no.
Speaker 1: Nursery school, oh nursery.
Speaker 2: That's how you start to learn to read and write.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Bana, B-A-N-A, Bana nursery [ph.].
Speaker 1: And then you--
Speaker 2: Then I went to class one.  Class one is like elementary.
Speaker 1: So this is the British system?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the British system.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had class one. Is that at the same school?
Speaker 2: Christ Church, Christ Church Primary School [Freetown, Sierra Leone].
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is a church run school or is it a government school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's both semi government--well semi church with government.
Speaker 1: So did you go there for the whole primary school?
Speaker 2: Yes, the whole of primary.
Speaker 1: So you go from class one to--?
Speaker 2: Yes, to class seven.
Speaker 1: Then where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to a Methodist Boys High School [Freetown, Sierra Leone].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: F-O-R-M, we call form there you say--I don't know what you call it.  That's my junior high school.
Speaker 1: Like junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're there until--?
Speaker 2: 'Til the second class--second form and then I left for the Prince of Wales School [Freetown, Sierra Leone] form three to form five levels.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's to the balance of high school.
Speaker 2: I went to two high schools.
Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Some long years.
Speaker 1: About 1980?
Speaker 2: It was 1983.
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers in school that you remember that were particularly helpful to you as a mentor or a (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah some teachers I still remember today.  I really look up to--my brother was teaching at the Prince of Wales School.  My brother was one of my major mentors.
Speaker 1: What is your brother's name?
Speaker 2: Emmanuel [Emmanuel George, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so did he kind of look out for you?
Speaker 2: Yes, kind of looked out for me a lot because my mother [Marie George] was kind of old.  She was getting tired and stuff and since I was the young one so he took me, I went to live with him because by that time he had just gotten married--
Speaker 1: Oh, this is your father [Emmanuel George, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: No, my brother had just gotten married and so he took me over and was mentoring me for school.
Story_ID: 611045
Speaker 1: Now, tell me now when you were growing up, what kind of young man were you and what were you interested in when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I was--all my life I've been very spiritual.  I like church and church activities.
Speaker 1: How do you account for that? Because most young men growing up like sports and they like to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do all of that.
Speaker 1: Or a lot of active stuff and they really don't seem to like to be in church (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I played soccer; I did play soccer all my life, all through my life I played soccer.
Speaker 1: What I'm saying is most young men wouldn't say they like church.
Speaker 2: Yeah, church was my major thing because I was raised up in a Christian family so things like Sunday school--I was somebody since I was young I liked to quote scripture in front of the church because of the Sunday school activities.  I would quote scriptures and I was good in singing, very good in singing since I was young so good in singing.
Speaker 1: What I was asking though, 'cause it's not typical behavior for young men to love church so much that they, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I grew up in that setting.
Speaker 1: Did they give you a lot of things to do as a youth, a lot of responsibilities in the church?
Speaker 2: Yes, since the time I was young I was a leader.  I have been the leader since the day I stepped in the church.  I've been a young--I was a youth leader, I was a young adult leader because this Baptist church that the Reverend David George founded [The Golden Street Baptist Church (ph.); Regent Road Baptist Church, Freetown, Sierra Leone] I finally ended up there and it was like a dead church.  There were few people who were in the church.  There were not many young people in the church, but when I finally get myself to that church I mobilized the young people.  I used my gift in music, I used the ones who are in there, I trained them and we go out--we outreach to the communities and by the time you flick your finger or wink your eyes the benches started to get full with young people because that's a gift in me.  I know how to motivate young people to bring them to do stuff.  I have that--I don't if command is the right word but I have that presence.  Every time I show up they always look at me for leadership and always provide that leadership for them so they emulate it and then I get them to stay.
Speaker 1: What kind of activities were you involved in?
Speaker 2: Oh a lot, I would do drama, would do singing, I create activities for them for self-reliance.  Things like they could--myself and the pastor we set up a (unclear) institute where we get young people who don't have a job to go there to learn how to sew and different activities that they could use with their hands to empower them to become self-reliant.
Speaker 1: Okay so job training.  So all through high school you were involved (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, well I start a little because the church--in the church they sent me for training.  I went for youth development training so in return because when the war [Sierra Leone Civil War] broke up it affected education in my country.  So I had to go find something to engage myself in.  So during that period I had this training, this youth development training with the church--send me on this training and in turn I give back what was impacted in me, I give back to the community.
Story_ID: 611046
Speaker 1: You were in your early twenties when the war [Sierra Leone Civil War] is that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was in my late twenties.
Speaker 1: Late twenties, okay when the war broke out.  Between the time that you graduated from high school and the war broke out what were you doing?
Speaker 2: I was engaged in some of these activities 'cause I wanted to continue my education but the means was not there because of unrest and all that kind of stuff.  So I was doing this until I had this scholarship to go to--to do this cause with Trans World educational college [Trans World Education College] where I have my associate degree.
Speaker 1: It says that you came out of Prince of Wales [Prince of Wales School, Freetown, Sierra Leone] in 1983.  In 1991 you graduated from Trans World.
Speaker 2: Because that's--well the British call it diploma but it's an associate degree.  The British education is different from the American education.
Speaker 1: So this is your first time going outside the country, right?  You got this degree in London [England] (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was back and forth.
Speaker 1: It was back and forth.  So you go to Britain and then you come back and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To take exams and sometimes you stay home and you do it and then at the end of the day if you don't get the required marks, you have to do it again, they fail you.
Speaker 1: Was it mostly like correspondence from--
Speaker 2: Well, kind of yeah but then you have to go--certain semesters you have to be there just like study abroad certain semesters you have to be there.
Speaker 1: How were you affected by England, I mean going to the United King-- Britain?
Speaker 2: It was school that was not a problem because it was school, since it was school that was not a problem.
Speaker 1: Yeah but the weather and the people, a lot of that had to be a lot different (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No England, it's just the weather, but England looks so much like Sierra Leone.  It's not that really much difference in terms of acclimatizing yourself because remember we are colonized by the British so there's a lot of British system back home even though we have become an independent state. But there is a lot of British system back home so it was not difficult for me that much even though weather was a factor a little bit.  I was not there that long for it to kind of affect me that much so it was just like a back and forth thing.
Speaker 1: So when you were going to school did you like stay in a black community or would you stay in a special--in the school or special facilities in the school or what?
Speaker 2: Well, no I was home; I was staying with family members, stayed with family members so it didn't affect me that much.
Story_ID: 611047
Speaker 1: About 1991 or so we're talking about the war [Sierra Leone Civil War] was going on in Liberia with Charles Taylor and these--now how would you typify this conflict 'cause it spills over into Sierra Leone too?  We know from the media and stuff that both countries are rich in resources; diamonds, coltan, gold and other things.  Was this primarily the reason for war you think?
Speaker 2: It's partly the reason for the war and another thing is greed and selfishness.  Sierra Leone was plagued with twenty-seven year dictatorship war, twenty-seven years that left the country kind of broke and ruin.
Speaker 1: Who was the dictator?
Speaker 2: He was called President Siaka Stevens, yeah he was the president at that time.  We went to war all this different economic--we had no power; there was no proper running water.  We had to--the cars have to make lines for fuel.  You have to sleep in lines in the fuel station for like two/three days for just two gallons of diesel or two gallons of petrol.  We went through one of the toughest economic problems during that time.
Speaker 1: This was before the actual war or during the war?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was both before and when the war was going on we went through this because the war started primarily like young, when Stevens was there but it was not so prominent until Stevens' hand over to J.S. Momoh [Joseph Saidu Momoh].
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: J.S., M-O-M-O-H.
Speaker 1: Now this is--how did you--there were so many people killed there and it was a horrible situation there.  What was your experience during the war?
Speaker 2: My experience was I--at that time I was working for CAUSE Canada, Christian Assistant for Under-Assisted Societies Everywhere [sic. Christian Aid for Under-Assisted Societies Everywhere] and I was kind of the humanitarian and logistics officer.  So I was responsible for like the logistics of the humanitarian supplies and the logistics of the organization.  So when these people take over, I was attacked because they wanted the new bikes that we had just ordered for projects and the (unclear).  I refused to do that so in turn my car was burnt down, my car was burnt down completely.  Yeah, and I was threatened so many times because I was speaking against--I'm somebody who believes in democracy and our democracy was very young at that time.  We were trying to launch our democracy so most of the time I would speak against like you know what you guys need to go back.  If you're so much for the people why don't you become a political party, why don't you go to a ballot box, become a formidable force to reckon with, be a political party.  If the people want you, people will vote for you rather than you using the barrel of the gun to terrorize innocent civilian.
Story_ID: 611048
Speaker 1: Now, there was a movie called 'Blood Diamond' made about the conflict in--were they in Sierra Leone or was it Liberia (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they were not; they shoot that thing on Zimbabwe.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it was supposed to be about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was supposed to be about our history about our diamonds in Sierra Leone.
Speaker 1: Right, right you had some problems with where they depicted it 'cause they didn't shoot any of it in Sierra Leone.
Speaker 2: Yeah they did not and most of it--well I understand it's just like the same thing with the story of the Amistad [La Amistad].  It was distorted a little bit, but of course it's Hollywood.  They have to fantasize it so that when people look at it you won't be on your seat like oh what is coming next that kind of stuff.  The thing I don't like is this is about our history, one of the saddest chapters in our history.  I think they should have done more justice to it rather than just showing it the way they do it.
Speaker 1: Was the basic story correct in terms of the exploitation of it?
Speaker 2: Well yeah because this was about a child soldier and our country was plagued with that.  Every time the rebels attacked a village, they would conscript all the young men including boys and they would drug them, give them cocaine to just de-stabilize their lives because then these boys become fierce, and horrible, you know.  They have AK-47; they would tell lies.  People, who are fit to be their parents, they would tell them to follow the flock, beat them up with those guns which I think that's the worst thing you could do to a young somebody who might be the future leader of a country.  That's a bad thing to do; it was a bad practice.  Thank god for an organization that stepped up and said you know what after the peace accord, we should re-integrate this child solider back to civilized society.  I am very proud that I was one of the persons who were involved in that project to kind of--I always use the word recalibrate their thinking, you know, into civilized society again.
Story_ID: 611049
Speaker 1: How did people and I think the same thing is true of Rwanda and a lot of places--
Speaker 2: It's the same, many of these African countries.
Speaker 1: The victims are--it's horrible what happens to the victims but the people that actually committed the crimes.  How did they--how are they accepted back into their communities?
Speaker 2: Oh that's one of the best questions you've asked me.  Back in Sierra Leone, I'm speaking now about Sierra Leone, we set up the same structure as in South Africa.  The one Archbishop Desmond Tutu introduced, the peace reconciliation committee [Truth and Reconciliation Commission].  The council of churches that I was working for and from the entire religious council and so the religious council comprises of Muslims, sheikhs, and iman and pastors in churches.  They set up these bodies to address national issues and they are also the (unclear) of our peace accord that was signed.  The entire religious council--they pressured of the government kind of to set up a truth and reconciliation committee whereby people who commit atrocities and were brought forth to testify in front of a panel and right there after listening to both parties, the one who it was perpetrated to and the one who perpetrated.  They both testify and we have the same one whereby we bring them together, the one who perpetrated the atrocity to apologize publicly. One thing that I do in terms of helping to spread the message in my country was to set up a youth band through the funding of the Bread for the World Germany, the council of churches through the leadership of the general secretary, Alimamy P. Koroma, who is today a minister of the now government, worked with me to purchase instruments for these young people from all over the country.  I bring them together, screen them, audition them, picked the ones that I want, train them and I used that band, for an entertainment component; I transform it to a sensitization component.  I use it, we compose songs, peace and reconciliation messages.  We compose it in our various dialects, in our various languages, our various dialects.  I take this band all over the country to sing songs of hope, songs of togetherness, songs of HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], songs of democracy, songs of human rights.  That strategy helped a lot because it lessen down the heavy odds of most people because we sing so emotionally to them because music I always tell people music and grammar is a very key component.  If you want to transmit a message especially to communities that are not that literate you use the medium that these people can hear you.
Story_ID: 611050
Speaker 1: Give me an assessment of how you think this is working in Sierra Leone--the Truth and Reconciliation [Truth and Reconciliation Commission] and can you give us some examples of how it worked and how it might not have worked and do you think that it is better overall that that's being done than not?  I guess most people would think that it's better.
Speaker 2: Well, it's twofold.  Simultaneously was the peace and reconciliation era that is going on there it is also the special courts set up by the United Nations [UN] for--major team players who are the head of every group that's violated rights of civilians.  Like violations against civil rights or human rights for people who were affected by the war [Sierra Leone Civil War].
Speaker 1: So the leaders there were actually kidnapping the children and drugging them and giving them orders.  Those are the people who are on trial?
Speaker 2: They are on trial; some of them have been thrown out of the country to different countries for their trial.  Whereas the ones who were not so much key players to this whole thing but were involved were the ones who were summoned to the peace and reconciliation committees, and it's working.  I tell you, Sierra Leoneans are people who have tolerance.  We don't grudge the situation that bad, we do talk about situations and we do fill situations when they come, but as soon as there is an apology and everybody moves on.  That's the kind of country--I mean you could imagine one of the cults with religious tolerance, Christians go to mosque, Muslims go to church.  There are some countries you can't even go out there and say, "I'm a Christian."
Speaker 1: As we speak now there are massacres of Christians in Nigeria by Muslims, in Jos, Nigeria and we've seen that in other places.
Speaker 2: But we don't have that.  This is how much tolerance we have in terms of people who perpetrate the worst atrocities on us.  Say for example there are thousands of people who were amputated during this war who had both limbs chopped off.
Speaker 1: With machetes right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but today these same people walking the streets with the same people who perpetrated the atrocities on them, they see them every day.  I mean not many people can stomach that.
Speaker 1: How do the perpetrators feel?  I guess in general--you could generalize about how can they really re-adjust themselves, how are they doing that?  Is it working for them?
Speaker 2: I think some of them, they would put it on drugs--hard substances that they used and they don't even know what they were doing which some of them made remorse over.  But many of them--some of them are bragging that they did this because the Nigerian led ECOMOG [Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group] troop was occupying the country.  In Nigeria ECOMOG troop was there at the instruction of the ECOWAS [Economic Community of West African States] to keep the peace but if they are fired at, they should return fire.  The same law like you attack me I have to attack you.  So most of them didn't like the fact that the Nigerian led ECOMOG troop was running the affairs--the military affairs in our country.  But it would have been worst if these people are not acting swiftly to protect the innocent civilian during that period, it would have been worst because there was a lot of killing.  I see people who are killed right next to me in close range, they were shot at.  People were kept in their house; they locked them in the whole house, a whole family.  They tell them that if anyone happens to open the door they will be shot at.  They light the house and burn the whole house down with people in there screaming.  So I've seen the worst atrocities perpetrated on humankind and I pray to God that it won't happen again to other human beings.  This would be a time--that should be a lesson to teach us how to respect human dignity rather than desecrating human dignity.  It's our past so now what we should do is work on the present so that the future of the next generation that are coming will use that past not to do that same atrocities that caused mayhem, that caused death, that caused losses that we're still recovering from today in my country.  I'm telling you massive losses, it's going to take years, and years to rebuild that country.  It's not going to come overnight because the atrocity is deep.  That war went for eleven years so it's not going to be overnight.  Nobody should make that fool that Sierra Leone--well everything is swell, honky donkey; Sierra Leone is all on our feet again.  No Sierra Leone is trying to be on our feet back in terms of development.
Story_ID: 611051
Speaker 1: You worked with the World Council of Churches for how many years?
Speaker 2: I worked for the Council of Churches in Sierra Leone [CCSL].
Speaker 1: Council of Churches in Sierra Leone--how many years did you work (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I worked for them since 1977--no 1997 sorry, to 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay and have--what's happened with the resources in Sierra Leone all those diamond mines and other--coltan and other stuff they were fighting over?  Has the country gotten control of those resources now?
Speaker 2: As far as I'm concerned right now, yes the government with the leadership of President Bai Komora [sic. Ernest Bai Koroma]--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: Bai, B-A-I, Bai Komora, K-O-M-O-R-A [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so the new president (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he banned all mining activities because remember that's the thing that fueled the war and this is what the rebels were using in exchange for arms and ammunition. So he banned all mining activities and they are looking into new mining laws because countries were exploiting our resources for less--let me put it like that for less.
Speaker 1: The movie--you've probably seen the movie 'Cry Freetown' made by some Canadian filmmakers and they actually traced the money--they followed the money back to Canada to a diamond company in Canada.  This company actually funded the guns and the drugs for the young people so that they could get those resources at a very cheap rate back to Canada to enrich Canadians, which is something that the public doesn't generally know, the trail of money.
Speaker 2: It's the same with Sierra Leone.  I mean you go to most of these countries, the moment you see the diamond you know it's a diamond because one thing about a diamond is it's very peculiar and unique.  You can sell it all over the world; you don't just sell it in a particular place.  It's so unique that you can sell it anywhere.  So they had to stop it otherwise we won't have a peaceful end to the war.
Speaker 1: So the government now is in control of all the mining (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah they have control of all mining activities.  Now you have to have a proper license and proper documentation in order for you to mine in our country.  Otherwise if you're found, you go to prison.
Story_ID: 611052
Speaker 1: Now, what happened in 2004?  How did you-unless is there any--I don't want to leave this until we're out of the--is there a major thing that happened between '97 [1997] and 2004 that you want to tell us about before we move on to AMISTAD [AMISTAD America Incorporated]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was just very active in terms of travelling to various countries and for travel kits for a peaceful end to senseless war.  I was travelling to various parts of West Africa to various meetings, workshops trying to rally around to solicit international community support.  To help not just rally their support but also financial means to help the young people who have been affected by the war in terms of talent development, reintegrating them in talent development.  That's what I've been travelling around soliciting for.
Speaker 1: Now United Church of Christ, this is the same denomination that Trinity United Church of Christ in Chicago [Illinois] belongs to, Reverend Wright [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr.] made famous by the Obamas [Michelle Obama and HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  He was already famous as a leader of the United Church of Christ in a more positive sense before the media kind of vilified him during the Obama campaign.  So United Church of Christ, says here, brought you into the Amistad project.  Now how did this take place?
Speaker 2: In 2003, the now honorary Alimamy Koroma who was the general secretary of the Council of Churches [Council of Churches in Sierra Leone (CCSL)] was in Geneva [Switzerland] on a conference and he met with the UCC people and the director of volunteers' ministry.  Since he lied about Alimamy and how positive Alimamy has been behind the peace process in Sierra Leone because he was one of the major team players in bringing the government and the rebels to talk to broker peace.  He even won a peace prize from New York.
Speaker 1: Alimamy is a--
Speaker 2: Alimamy Koroma.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now how do you-get ready to spell his name.
Speaker 2: A-L-I-M-A-M-Y.
Speaker 1: Now Alimamy, that's really a title--isn't that a title?
Speaker 2: No, that's his name Alimamy P. Koroma [sic.].
Speaker 1: P as in-the rest of it is (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) P as in Peter, Koroma the same as President Koroma, K-O-M-O-R-O-I-A [sic.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So Alimamy was then the general secretary of the Council of Churches and Alimamy was there to represent all general secretaries and so he was asked by the UCC to nominate candidates for this project and I was one of the nominees.  We were asked to send our resumes, fill out the application form and our resumes.  Once they mailed them back to the United States, out of three of us I was selected as the fortunate candidate to come and represent (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  All right, so, so-
Story_ID: 611053
Speaker 1: Why did you want to do this?  Had you, had you--as you said, well as you said in the beginning people in Sierra Leone didn't know about Sengbe Pieh [Joseph Cinque] and knew him as a hero of the struggle against slavery here in the United States and in the world.  So was that on your mind at that point?
Speaker 2: At that moment no, that was not what was on my mind.  All I knew was to come and represent my country, to come and be a spokesman, to advocate for a war torn Sierra Leone. That was the first and foremost thing that I had in my mind, then I know the history will follow.  Because if I speak on behalf of Sierra Leone, definitely I have to use the history to sort of nail down whatever speech or whatever I had to talk about my country.  So the first and foremost thing when I had this opportunity to come, I think about how I'm going to rebuild the battered image of my country.  That was the first thing in my mind.  How can I bring positive publicity back to Sierra Leone?  Those were the things because being an AMISTAD [AMISTAD America Incorporated] international icon this is the forum to talk about a country that is not very famous.  The only thing they know about Sierra Leone is diamonds and war.  Like today you hear how so many positive things that did happen to Sierra Leone before it broke up in the war activities.  So that was the first thing on my mind to bring attention back to my once war torn free Sierra Leone.
Speaker 1: Sierra Leone--I don't think we mentioned this--it means a lion mountain, right?
Speaker 2: Well, Serre Lyoa that was by Edward Osienska [sic. Pedro de Sintra] a Portuguese who was bringing home freedmen and women and they were applying the waters of Freetown [Sierra Leone] and the thunder was roaring 'cause Sierra Leone is mountainous and you know the mountain was like--so they were like, wow the thunder is behind the mountains. So they named it Serre Lyoa in Portuguese which means lion mountain, that's how we get our name.
Speaker 1: Was it the roar of the thunder?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the roar of the thunder.  They think it's coming from the back of the mountains so they name it Serre Lyoa that means lion mountain.
Story_ID: 611054
Speaker 1: Te- tell us a little bit about in general what the AMISTAD America Incorporated is.
Speaker 2: AMISTAD America is a not-for-profit educational institution that represents bringing people together in a nutshell.  Despite race, despite color, despite ethnicity, we walk around communities--broken divided communities. We walk around them to bring those communities together with the visiting of the school Amistad.  Every port we go to if there is division in that port, we make sure we bring those two groups together even before the visit of the ship.  Somebody like me and others would go there to sort of broker peace between the community to get them to work together because we represent peace.  It's a symbol of peace and goodwill.  So we don't want to go to any community that has bitterness and all that kind of stuff.  That's not what we represent.  We want to bring everybody together to work on the same page.  So Amistad is this floating icon that travels around the world today toward peace in people's mind to bring hope and to bring democracy to where democracy is missing.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm just going to try to summarize from the seat here and just correct me if I'm wrong or bring me up on it.  But from what I understand back in, I guess in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] at first Warren Marr [HistoryMaker Warren Marr, II]--.
Speaker 2: Yes, the late godfather.
Speaker 1: Yes, he wanted to rescue and reconstruct the history of the famous Amistad [La Amistad] incident of 1839 that occurred here in New Haven [Connecticut].  Tell us now you're the spokesman for this a lot of times just kind of tell us what (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First and foremost--
Speaker 1: And what Mr. Marr's involvement was?
Speaker 2: First and foremost may his wonderful soul rest in perfect peace.  He just passed away a few weeks ago may his soul and the vision of what was in his heart to bring up his intention.
Speaker 1: Let me just point out too that The HistoryMakers interviewed Warren Marr when he was able to tell his story and so go ahead and just tell us about it.
Speaker 2: Mr. Marr wanted--there was a tall ship parade and he wanted something as all these other ships just the same.  What he wanted was something that represents the millions of souls that got broken during the Middle Passage and the thought of the Amistad came to him like, wow this would be a wonderful thing that we could represent both the past, the present and the future of history.  So he decided that it was going to take a boat called the Western Union [ph.] and then on the Western Union he covered it with the writing Amistad.  He used the Amistad to sail for the millions of souls that got broken during the Middle Passage, during that tall ship parade.
Speaker 1: Now this is interesting, you've got tall ship parade.  Was this like '76 [1976]?  I know they did a big tall ship thing in '76 [1976] during the bicentennial (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that was the time.
Speaker 1: So he sees all these tall ships and they represent clipper ships and other ships (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah all the same old, same old.  There was nothing that represent, right.
Speaker 1: The U.S. Constitution [sic. U.S.S. Constitution], Old Ironside, and all of that stuff and then seeing these big sailing boats and he's saying like where is the African American history?
Speaker 2: Thank you. Where is the representation?  That was his word where is the representation.
Speaker 1: We know that back in the 19th century there were hundreds of slave ships going across trafficking human beings.
Speaker 2: So he just came up with the idea and he let it flow and it generates so much interest and so the project was born.  Even though the ship was not constructed but he set up this committee where they started to raise money to construct this majestic creation that travels the world today as a goodwill ambassador.  So bless his soul for that.
Speaker 1: I think I encountered this project on the web when the Internet first came out. There's a website about raising money to build the Amistad at Mystic Seaport [Mystic, Connecticut] here in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, she's just ten years old as of March 25th.   It was her tenth birthday and on that day she was sailing--historically she was sailing to where our history started to Havana, Cuba after fifty years of U.S. embargo between Cuba and America.  This was the symbol that sailed into Havana with the American flag, the Cuban flag and the United Nations' flag because the United Nations [UN] (unclear) an African union ambassadors, which I am the liaison for this organization too.  Just ask the Amistad to be the floating icon to bring attention to the permanent memorial that they want to erect at the United Nations foyer [United Nations Headquarters, New York, New York] in 2014.  So the Amistad has been asked to be the icon that travels the world to bring attention and to help create an educational component around the permanent memorial.
Story_ID: 611055
Speaker 1: Fill us in on the history of Amistad [La Amistad].  Amistad was really not the slave ship that the mutiny took place on (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she was not philosophically.
Speaker 1: So let's kind of--maybe you'll walk us through the capture of Sengbe Pieh [Joseph Cinque], his voyage across and what happened to the other Africans who were slaves on that ship and to the place where they arrived in New Haven [Connecticut].  Can you kind of walk us through that?
Speaker 2: First and foremost I have to clear the air because of the movie 'Amistad,' wherein it depicts which ship took them from Freetown [Sierra Leone] to Havana.  It was the Tecora, which was a Portuguese slaver that would house about five hundred to six hundred men and women across the Atlantic Ocean, that's the Middle Passage until they get to Havana, Cuba. When they get to Havana, Cuba they are normally--maybe half of them would make it across because of the conditions on those slave ships.  The ones that survived would be taken out, sprayed with water hose and they use oil to shine them because you know the more they look, the more money you get for them.  So during--between these times fifty-three of them were bought by Jose Ruiz and Pedro Montez.  Ruiz bought forty-nine men, Montez bought four children.  There were no women, there were guys on board.  They wanted to take them to Puerto Principe [Port-au-Prince, Cuba] from Havana, Cuba to Puerto Principe on their plantation and the only means they have to take them at that time was on board of La Amistad.  La Amistad was the only available, fast schooner that could do that trip like a finger click.
Speaker 1: So just a point--Amistad was not a slave ship itself it was (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a cargo--
Speaker 1: Cargo ship and in this case it's used to transport slaves (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they used it to transport.  It was a schooner, cargo carrier that was taking petty ship items from point A to point B on the waters of Cuba.  It never crossed the waters of Cuba.
Speaker 1: So on that ship was Sengbe Pieh and others.
Speaker 2: And forty-eight others and four children.  They were supposed to go on a five day journey.  Three days into the journey Sengbe Pieh asked the cook [Celestino] like on sign language because there was communication by (unclear) even among themselves the captives themselves.  By the way we call them captives because they were taken after the 1807 act [Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves of 1807] was passed in the British parliament.  That prohibits people to go to the New World--to take new Africans to the New World.  Thirty-two years after that act was passed, they were captured.  So you can't call them slaves, they were captives.
Speaker 1: You raise an interesting point because really in terms of point of view, none of the so called slaves in this country consider themselves slaves, they consider themselves captives.
Speaker 2: Because they were captured against--
Speaker 1: They should be free like everybody else.
Speaker 2: After the act was passed, 1807 in England, 1808 in the United States Congress.
Speaker 1: But even in a larger sense, even if you were called a slave and legally was a slave you knew that you should be free.  You really should be free 'cause somebody's got you captured.
Speaker 2: Another law is you should only be born of slave parents, but if you are born of free parents, you are not--technically you should not be a slave because that was the other law.  In the Cuban and the Spain side that you should be born of slave parents in order for them to own you.  Because that's the slave boy who was on board La Amistad.  It was Captain Ferrer's [Ramon Ferrer] slave because he was born of slave parents in Cuba.
Speaker 1: I think Harriet Tubman said that, "Real slavery occurs when you think of yourself as a slave."
Speaker 2: It's in your mind so you have to emancipate yourself because it's mental, slavery is mental.  You feel it you can make freedom for yourself.  I could sit here--I could be enslaved physically but in mind I believe I'm a free man.
Speaker 1: Bob Marley: emancipate yourself from mental slavery (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From mental slavery because slavery is mental ['Redemption Song'].  You can touch on my body all you want but in my mind, my mind is free, I'm a free man.
Story_ID: 611056
Speaker 1: Okay so okay now Sengbe Pieh [Joseph Cinque]--.
Speaker 2: So Sengbe Pieh wrote as we are going to five day journey--he gets into the journey.  Sengbe Pieh asked a cook [Celestino] what was going to happen to them and the cook replied in the same language telling Sengbe Pieh that they're going to kill them that day and eat them for dinner and that has backed up this old controversy.  Sengbe Pieh who was sitting on top of cargo boxes breaks one of the cargo boxes because they were not properly chained.  This was one thing, a slaver you'd be chained on your neck and your feet but on the Amistad [La Amistad] they were just chained on their hands sitting on top of the boxes.  So he breaks the box, took the chain, I don't know if they fiddled with the shackles until he broke it.  Once he broke the shackles, all forty-eight, all free and then they take the machetes that they were going to use at the sugar cane plantation, and then they come up decks.  Immediately they come up to the deck, and the first person that they saw was the cook; they eradicate him.  The captain [Ramon Ferrer] was at the back.  His gun was like cock and fire.  You have to cock, fire, finish.  So he had one the next one is gone.  So what they did was to keep Ruiz [Jose Ruiz] and Montez [Pedro Montez] alive and then two other crew members who were on board La Amistad, we are told in Montansas [ph.], that they overturn Montansas and they never know anything about them anymore they escaped, the two crew members who were on board.  So it was left Celestino, the slave boy to Captain Ferrer, Ruiz and Montez they were the only three people left.  So the captives keep Ruiz and Montez alive because they have sailing experience.  So they asked them to sail them back to Africa which they used the rising sun to describe Africa, which I don't know if they would have ever make it.  But they do that on several occasions and were never successful.  So they knew nothing was going on so they threw the anchor over and the Gulf Stream--remember now they were in the Gulf Stream and the Gulf Stream drifted, yes. It drifted them until they arrived at Montauk Point [Montauk, New York].  That's how they get over here.
Speaker 1: In Connecticut?
Speaker 2: In New York, off New York so that's how they get over here.  They are drifting and news of them spread like wildfire in the United States that there was pirate boat on board American waters with black people with no clothes on and they have machetes and stuff.  So that's how the U.S.S. Cortez [sic. U.S.S. Washington], which today you can describe as maybe the [U.S.] Coast Guard went over there and Gardner [ph.] went over there and arrested them and he was also claiming them as his property because at that time they have no rights.  So they tow the ship to New London [Connecticut], tie it up, get all the captives off and put them on manifesto and take everything that was in and then they transported the captives over here in New Haven [Connecticut] and they are jailed in New Haven while the trial was going on in New Haven here.  That's basically how they got here.
Speaker 1: Okay what was the outcome of the trial?  First of all there was a lot of support for them on the part of the abolitionist community.
Speaker 2: The Amistad committee and the congregationists [sic. Congregationalists], there was a lot of support from those people but then you had the other side of it that were saying no they shouldn't let them go.  You have Spain fighting for rights for them.
Speaker 1: Because Cuba was a Spanish colony.
Speaker 2: Yes, Spain fighting for the right that it was their property because we were described at that time as property not human beings.  The--Gardner who was the--what you would call a Coast Guard commander was also claiming them as his goods--"I intercepted them."  So it was a battle until they went to the two court trials, one in New Haven and one in Hartford [Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute, Gardner, the Coast Guard commander, is trying to claim them as personal property although he was acting on behalf of the Coast Guard when they captured--.
Speaker 2: Yeah he wants to, you read it and you will see he wanted to.  They argue and it went to two courts.   It went to the court--the big court in Hartford and one in New Haven and they never found the boats.  At that time controversy was coming because Van Buren was running for re-election so there was pressure behind him.  So he asked the case to go to the [U.S.] Supreme Court.
Speaker 1: Okay, [President] Martin Van Buren the president was (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, was at that time.
Story_ID: 611057
Speaker 1: Tell us about this case now. Was it Roger--
Speaker 2: Baldwin--Roger Baldwin [Roger Sherman Baldwin].
Speaker 1: Baldwin, yeah he was the attorney assigned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was the attorney for the captives.  God bless his soul, he fought tooth and nail to kind of give them their rights.  But of course politics at the end of the day, Van Buren [President Martin Van Buren]--and so he had pressure behind him in giving them away and all of that.  So they decided to send the case to the [U.S.] Supreme Court where the abolitionists, the Amistad committee [La Amistad] they all rally around to find influential support.  I guess probably that's why they had to contact the former president so that there would be some influential support in terms of both political and--because there was mounting pressure now to give them away, there was real mounting pressure to give them away.  The United States was like, "No we don't want to deal with this just give them back."  Which would have been a mistake 'cause then they are not taking time to understand the language that they speak.  They would have just bought what the Spaniards were claiming that they were born in Spain or they were born in Cuba, they are black Cubans.
Speaker 1: Why did the Spanish say--I know but tell the public why the Spanish claim that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they couldn't own them because they had a language barrier.  If you say you own me, we come from the same place, we will speak Spanish together.  Well these people are speaking Mende, Temne, Limba, Kono different languages and there was no connection in that.  So they found out that he is lying.  Officer Covey, who is Captain James Covey, who was in the Navy [Royal Navy] came back to the U.S. on vacation and not to come interpret the entire deal that went on the Amistad.  So if it was not for the timely intervention of James Covey, they could have just given them back because nobody would know where they're in from.
Speaker 1: The Spanish wanted to claim that they were Spanish property because they were born in Spain--I mean born in Spanish property (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Spanish property and that was a lie.
Speaker 1: And not Africans that they kidnapped.
Speaker 2: Yeah because they have them over there for eight days in Cuba and while they were there for eight days they falsified documents to show that they were Cuban born--black Cubans.  See but one thing that they denied was the language.  If you are born in Cuba why can't I understand you?  Simple, why can't I understand you?  One day we are talking, it was not any relations and all the Cubans were saying, oh they killed captain, they killed cook.  Why can't I relate with you?  So it was difficult to put that piece together. So they found out that it's more than just being born in Cuba before they found out that these were free men and women taken away in captivity from their own land in Africa.  That's what Quincy Adams [President John Quincy Adams] used to argue the case that these were free men and women which he successfully won in March 1841.  That's how the surviving--thirty-five surviving of them had to go home with a lousy farewell from the United Church of Christ.  The missionaries were so kind enough to send people to go with them, to go work with them back home which I think that was a big ask because sending people to a strange land of people who were captured and to just give people a way to go like that, I think that was a big ask and a big sacrifice on the part of the UCC.
Speaker 1: So it was the United Church of Christ that did that.
Speaker 2: Yes, I call them UCC for short.  So it's greatly appreciated that these people could go over, work with these people and try to establish a mission.
Story_ID: 611058
Speaker 1: Now clear up something about the character of Sengbe Pieh [Joseph Cinque].  His character has been besmirched by a writer of a book in the 1930s.  A fictional book of the account of Amistad [La Amistad], which he claimed that Sengbe Pieh went back and became a slave trader himself.
Speaker 2: Ironic, very ironic let's take a practical look here.  If me, just me had been in their shoes, I lived it through, all the way three months on the high seas.  I come over here, I come to Cuba, I ended up in the U.S., I was fought for and I used my own hands to fight for my own freedom to free the rest of humanity, how can I practically go home and be a slave trader?  Common sense, that's common sense.  Sengbe Pieh was not a slave trader.  He left for Jamaica in 1846.  He went over to Jamaica and lived there between eighteen and nineteen years, it was over in Jamaica.  Remember the interconnectedness now here back to Nova Scotia [Canada], the Maroons, some of the black loyalist who are rebellious were taken to the islands instead of to Sierra Leone.  So the same time they migrated from Nova Scotia to found Freetown [Sierra Leone] is the same time they were taking them to the islands.
Speaker 1: So some went to Jamaica and some went to Nova Scotia (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah so they are similar-it's a similar history.  So Sengbe Pieh ended up going there and this was a deep research that I did to find out that all the time they were saying he was lost, something about they can't find him, they don't know where his whereabouts is and that's why they assumed that he became a slave trader.
Speaker 1: Well, it was because that author said that actually.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She just said it. It was in a fictional book; it wasn't even a history book.
Speaker 2: They assumed because something about him got lost so people assume.
Speaker 1: That's a canard that continues to be spread about Singbe Pieh.  Where did he finally pass away, did he--?
Speaker 2: In Freetown at (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay he made it back--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he came back to Freetown and died after a while.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he's buried in a churchyard (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes he's buried in somewhere in the country in his hometown.  There is a symbol on his gravestone that reads he was Sengbe Pieh, you know, of the Amistad revolt.
Story_ID: 611059
Speaker 1: When you look back at the Amistad [La Amistad] captives--I know one, you said one of the little girls was--
Speaker 2: Margru-- Sarah Margru Kinson.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was brought on as a student at Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] in Northern Ohio, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, by Lewis Tappan.  Lewis Tappan of course you know is philanthropist for Oberlin College, he was a philanthropist and he was also a benefactor of the same and he was just a good man.  New Yorker, a good man and he just fall in love with Margru because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His family is also the stove companies that people know as Tappan ranges.
Speaker 2: Right so Tappan wanted to give Margru an opportunity because while she was there, they baptized them to Muslim then to Christian.  So Margru was given the name Sarah Margru Kinson by Lewis Tappan and so Margru wanted to continue her education after all the tragedy.  So Lewis Tappan decided to bring Margru back to Oberlin in 1846.  Margru was the first West African to come to that college at that time.  So she becomes historic and she went back home and she became the headmistress of the mission school set up by the missionaries who went there.  Yeah, so Margru had an interesting ending.
Story_ID: 611060
Speaker 1: What are your reflections on the life of Sengbe?
Speaker 2: Sengbe Pieh [Joseph Cinque] has one lesson that I always learn from Sengbe Pieh: never give up, always stand for the rights, stand for freedom, stand for truth because if you give up then you lose everything.  But if you stand up for what you believe in, you would achieve over and beyond what you are expecting to achieve and that's what happened with Sengbe Pieh.  Because he stood up, said, "I'm going to fight, I won't give up just like that for these people to just take me away and take my countryman away.  I'm going to fight for myself and then I did not just give up or just say okay, I'm going to fight to sit down," he demonstrated with action.  So in a nutshell I'm saying if you want to fight for the right thing, you have to demonstrate it with action; actions have to follow your words.  That was exactly what Sengbe Pieh was.
Story_ID: 611061
Speaker 1: This crossed my mind; did you ever meet Djimon Hounsou who played him [Sengbe Pieh; Joseph Cinque] in the movie?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Not yet?
Speaker 2: No, not yet,
Speaker 1: Do you think you will one day?
Speaker 2: Maybe possibly after this great interview, I don't know where this is going though, but maybe.  We realize that there is a quiet hero sitting somewhere.
Speaker 1: So he's not been--have any of the people that were involved in the movie 'Amistad' been involved with the schooner project at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Debbie Allen, I think was inspired by the idea (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that I know of because we're still struggling and if this is the monuments of the late godfather--the dream of the late godfather to represent the millions of souls, the African American community and the society at large.  If this is the only floating museum that symbolize today, I think everybody should come around--rally around find support, find resources to keep her alive because the more we work to keep her alive, the more our ancestors' story will be told to generations yet to come.
Speaker 1: The godfather is Warren Marr [HistoryMaker Warren Marr, II] that you're referring to, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's the way our ancestors' story will continue to be had.  If we leave it die then we kill our own history, we kill ourselves because that's ourselves because once you don't have something to depict the history anymore, I mean you talk blankly.  So we have to do all in our powers to support the Freedom Schooner [Freedom Schooner Amistad] who sails today as the flagship on tall ship ambassador of the State of Connecticut but as the United States as a whole to bring people together despite race, despite color, despite ethnicity.  So we have to work assiduously to raise money, to make sure that we keep her in shape for future journeys because there are big independent anniversaries coming up for Senegal.  Senegal will be fifty years in December and Sierra Leone we just talked about will be fifty next April 27 when we have our independence from the British.  So those are two very symbolic and historic events like the Schooner Amistad we represent because this is what the slave trade act was fight for the rights of Africans that live in Africa. So I think we should work around the clock to find a way to support the means of keeping that legacy alive.
Story_ID: 611062
Speaker 1: Now what are some of your activities?  When we came in you were telling me that you once spent almost a year on Amistad [Freedom Schooner Amistad] or a little over a year.
Speaker 2: A year and a half I sailed on board as a crewmember when I left my home country [Sierra Leone].  I was on board as every crewmember but I was more the person behind the educational programs.  But it's incumbent that you sail because that's the only way you will reach the places that the ship needs to go to bring educational outreach to places that have water.  Places that don't have water, I use other means to get there.  So I sail like every other crew, I know that boat like the back of my palm.
Speaker 1: So who are the--there's a crew that handles the ship but there are also other people that sail.  Do historians and writers and other people (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it's like I tell you sailing is not an easy thing.  Especially on a re-creation like Amistad, which is difficult to sail. I mean when you see it it's a difficult ship to sail on.  I mean if you can do water, it's good but if you cannot do water then you've got to just be up with seasickness until you have sea legs because that's what I was confronted with until I had sea legs.  So it's up to you, if you are an historian you feel you have the passion, you have the call to serve, you can come aboard.  You don't have to have sailing experience.  You come they will teach you how to sail and then you take it from there.  The important piece is you know history and you can continue telling history to the present and for the future.
Speaker 1: Okay so you're sort of an ambassador on the boat (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Kind of ambassador to history.
Story_ID: 611063
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a story associated with these trips 'cause it seems like there would be a lot of stories associated with these trips?
Speaker 2: There are so many.
Speaker 1: Well, who have been some of the passengers on the Amistad [Freedom Schooner Amistad]?
Speaker 2: I've sailed with passenger--I've sailed with some prominent people.  It's been a while that I don't even remember, but one person I will work with that was part of a short piece of the sail was the guy who acted--Kunta Kinte.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah you're talking about--
Speaker 2: John Amos.
Speaker 1: Oh John Amos who played the role of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of Kunta Kinte, yeah he was part of the ones that make the trip from the Atlantic tour [Atlantic Ocean] on one particular leg.  So I had the opportunity to interact with him and we shared history, we shared past, we shared the present and we talked about the future for our young people and how we could work to bring the world together if people could just be on the same page.  We talked about wars and we talked about hatredness and we talked about people's skin color.  You know we talked about a lot of things which I was privileged to have that conversation with him at least (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  You, you could--
Speaker 2: It will always be on my mind.
Story_ID: 611064
Speaker 1: You typically go to the port with the ship and then you discuss the history--
Speaker 2: Yes, I am one of the spokesmen in front of the media both electronics and prints and also I do some of the outreach to schools and churches and communities about the incident and the importance of our visits to their various cities or countries.
Speaker 1: So you've been doing this since 2004.  How many places have you been since then?
Speaker 2: I've been to like--in the United States I have probably been to up to twenty states.  I've been to several other places around the world that the ship has been to.  It's an incredible experience that no form of education would give me, no form of education even if I read all the books.  Just the experience, experience in culture, experience in tradition, experience in language, experience in just the history of those countries.  I don't think I will read any books for a Ph.D. or master's that would give me the experience that I have acquired through this--just this travelling.
Speaker 1: Now here is a logistical question 'cause it occurred to me that when the Amistad [Freedom Schooner Amistad] came to Chicago [Illinois] it had just been to New Orleans [Louisiana] I believe and I was thinking how did they get it from--so it must have been transported in some other means other than sailing, I guess.  How did you get it to Chicago?
Speaker 2: This is the interesting side.  That ship is built for blue waters.  You know what blue waters is, right?  Oceanic.
Speaker 1: Oh ocean, okay.
Speaker 2: The Amistad travelled a fourteen to sixteen mile voyage by herself both sailing and engine.  She has a twin engine--Caterpillar engine.  She has all the latest navigational things you could think of electronically. She can go anywhere, everywhere.  Remember she sailed from Canada from Nova Scotia [Canada] to Liverpool [England], Bristol [England] and London [England] by herself.  She left London, she went to Portugal to Lisbon and Madeira and she left there all the way down the coast to Freetown, Sierra Leone by herself no help or nothing.  She left there, she go up the coast again to Cape Verde then to Barbados and back to the U.S.  She just travelled to Bermuda, to Dominican Republic and to Cuba and she's back home.  She travelled by herself, no help. She was built for that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but the question about Chicago was how did--did you all come through the St. Lawrence [St. Lawrence River] or go through (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She go to that--I don't know what you call it.
Speaker 1: The Great Lakes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, through the Great Lakes.  She goes everywhere, she goes everywhere, she was built for that, that's why she was built.
Speaker 1: Okay so every time that the Amistad appears it actually has sailed there.
Speaker 2: Sailed or the motor, they use the engine to get her there.
Speaker 1: Now what's the future look like for the Amistad and what's being planned?  Is there an exhibit in New Haven [Connecticut] dedicated to the Amistad case?
Speaker 2: Yes, there is in the historic center but most recently there was one in Hartford [Connecticut] that has been brought down and as I speak to you now she is at the United Nations [United Nations Headquarters, New York, New York] at the main hall for the March 25th International Slavery Remembrance Day [International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade].  This is an explicit exhibit; full story everything about the story that lights up the things that were used on the ship, the bias and all of that.  This is a bigger exhibit and she has just been taken down from the historic center in Hartford.  She's going to go to the New London customs house [New London Custom House, New London, Connecticut] where the original captives--where they took the manuscript, where they all floated before they bring them over to New Haven where the ship was tied.  So this exhibit is going to go to New London and we're going to unveil and dedicate it on the 21st to the 25th of May.  It's going to be a big homecoming for that exhibit after we take it down from the United Nations.
Story_ID: 611065
Speaker 1: You were telling me I think before we started that the Amistad [Freedom Schooner Amistad] was taken to Sierra Leone actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, 2007.
Speaker 1: How did people react?
Speaker 2: Oh it was so emotional to see how coming into the harbor and thinking about the same place where our people, not so much were taking from because that's not a hidden location, that's a location you can be fired at.  But this is where when they bring them back; this is where they were all floated.  They call it the Portuguese steps, it's named the government wharf and that's where the Amistad [La Amistad] historically entered and tied up.  We plan to be in Freetown [Sierra Leone] just for a week, we ended up staying in Freetown for two months because the welcome, the hospitality given to us by the government and the people was so overwhelming.  For me being a Sierra Leonean, I was so proud because Sierra Leone has one of the greatest attentions when the ship was over there because you know international media follow Amistad.  We have one of the greatest international attentions since the war.  So for me it was profound, that's the word I would use, it was profound, it was historical and it brings a lot of hope to the people that they have not been forgotten, they have not been forgotten.
Speaker 1: Now is Christopher Cloud [HistoryMaker Christopher R. Cloud]--is he still the--
Speaker 2: No, he's the ex-president and CEO [of AMISTAD America Incorporated], the now president and CEO is Gregory Belanger, yeah, Gregory Belanger, who was a board member and took over from Chris.
Story_ID: 611066
Speaker 1: You look back over everything that you've done so far, now you've done a lot of things now and been involved in some serious----
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: --some serious issues, is there anything that you would do differently when you look back at everything?
Speaker 2: Every day different challenges come and different opportunities come. So all I would say for now I take one day at a time.  I address each situation and each opportunity as they come.  As of right now today, as I'm speaking with you.  I'm ready for new challenges.  I am somebody who is not--I don't want to sit like--I don't want to be in a comfort zone.  I always like to explore other things.  Go to bigger things that you would look at that is not within my capability but sometimes I go there and I just pull it off because there is some gift in me that I have not identified which I have in me.  I can do all things but I use a Christian word that I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me.  As long as I have life, I have breath, I can do anything.  There's nothing like a challenge in front of me.
Story_ID: 611067
Speaker 1: Once again when you look at everything you've done to this point, what today, and you're still a young man, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Bringing education to the young people, bringing inspiration.  I have a lot of children I have mentored or have become a fine gentleman right now and for me to be back home to give support to my people whilst the war [Sierra Leone Civil War] was intense in Freetown [Sierra Leone], to serve them food, to provide shelter for them that most of them were not killed.  Every time I sit I reflect on them.  I say to myself if nobody say to me I say well done thou good and faithful servant because I consider myself a servant.  I'm not a boss, I'm a servant.  I will continue and that's what I think I was born for to serve humanity. To give endless support to humanity and that's what I was born for.  I like to be in conflict areas where there is conflict, I have that skill to bring people together even fighting factions.  I know how to talk to both parties to bring a peaceful solution to their conflict.
Story_ID: 611068
Speaker 1: That leads to another question we always ask and that is what are some of your hopes and concerns for our community both here and on the continent of Africa?
Speaker 2: I want to say that we still need to do more for communities especially with the crime rate and the heartlessness of people.  I don't want to go into this but I think I have to say it's very inhuman, the people who sexual abuse children, that's a crime.  Not just punishable by the government, but you have to go answer for that to the higher one above.  Killing indiscriminately of our young people: we are destroying the talents by destroying the future president; we are destroying the hope of any better nation, any bigger nation.  I think we should work very hard to combat our communities to put them in more meaningful programs to engage their minds from gang related activities to useful and meaningful projects that would keep their minds from idleness.  I think we need to introduce more programs to keep the youth out of the streets, out of using guns.
Story_ID: 611069
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you a little bit about your family. Can you tell us, like, what your family consists of now and?
Speaker 2: You're talking about if I have children?
Speaker 1: Yeah children and your family life.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I do. I have two wonderful children. I have Desmond [Desmond George] who will turn fifteen September 15th, this year he will turn fifteen. He's a teenager; he's in high school, junior high. And I have Juliet [Juliet George] who is my princess. She's very brilliant, she's very articulate, she's very friendly, but also very studious. And that's the one who is about to take the NPSE [National Primary School Examination] examination to go into high school. For that age, for her to attempt the NPSE exam, it's a plus for me. And I'm really proud of them.
Speaker 1: Now do they live here or in Sierr--?
Speaker 2: They live back in Sierra Leone but I talk to them on the phone. I last see them two, three years ago when I take the boat [Freedom Schooner Amistad] to Africa. My son was part of the docent, interpreting the story, amazing, fourteen year.
Story_ID: 611070
Speaker 1: And the last question, may I ask, is always similar to legacy but it's a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as the quiet hero. Quietly fought for what is right. Speak against injustice. Fight for human and civil rights. Fight for justice and equality among all, not just some. In a shorter form, I want to be remembered as a positive activist for humanity.
Story_ID: 611071
Speaker 1: That is my son and my daughter, Juliet [Juliet George], and Desmond [Desmond George], 2004.
Speaker 2: That is me speaking at the Whitney Young library [Whitney M. Young, Jr. Branch, Chicago Public Library] in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: This is me during the Amistad Sunday; I was the guest speaker at the Dixwell United Church of Christ [Dixwell Avenue Congregational United Church of Christ] in New Haven, Connecticut.
Speaker 2: This is when I was a crew member on the boat [Freedom Schooner Amistad] in 2004 in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: This is in Sierra Leone during the maiden visit of the Amistad.  I am standing with Mrs. Lee Hart [Willie Lee Hart] who is the president of the Chicago Friends of the Amistad [Chicago Friends of the Amistad Research Center] at the Whitney Young library.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) this is on the boat in Martha's Vineyard.  That's my father, Mr. Emmanuel Modupeh Robert George [Emmanuel George, Sr.].
Speaker 1: That's my son Desmond in 2007.
Speaker 2: This is me (unclear) back in my home country about ten years ago.
Speaker 1: That's my mother Mrs. Marie Georgiana Namoi George [Marie George].
Speaker 2: This is me during praise and worship about ten/fifteen years ago.
Speaker 1: This is me during a praise and worship in my church back home ten years ago.  I was admonishing the old people after our young adults Thanksgiving service.
Speaker 2: This is 2004; it was autographed by Congresswoman DeLauro [Rosa DeLauro] during our visit in Delaware.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Amistad during our maiden visit to Sierra Leone in 2007.  I was doing a presentation to a class in Waterbury in Connecticut.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me on the helm of the Amistad.
Speaker 1: This is me on our newly designed exhibit I helped to design.
