Story_ID: 571607
Speaker 1: My name is Adrienne Jones, and I'm the interviewer.  Neculai Burghelea is the videographer, and Clive Salmon [ph.] is the observer.  Good morning.  Can I get you to state and spell your name, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Monique Greenwood, M-O-N-I-Q-U-E, G-R-E-E-N-W-O-O-D.
Speaker 1: And what is the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Washington, D.C., June 22, 1959.
Speaker 1: What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I own a collection of bed and breakfast inns called Akwaaba Bed and Breakfast Inns.
Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We're now at Akwaaba Mansion which is our location in Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 1: And it is October 11, 2007.
Story_ID: 571608
Speaker 1: First, I'm going to ask you our five People magazine type questions, and you can just answer with whatever comes to mind.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Gosh, I have so many favorite foods, but I guess my number one favorite food would be shrimp (laughter).
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I love the summer.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: To wear, black.  To decorate with, kind of a sage green.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I love to take a vacation at home when no one knows I'm there.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Make it happen.
Story_ID: 571609
Speaker 1: Can you tell me your mother's name?  Let's start with your mom.
Speaker 2: My mom is Joann Lemons Greenwood.
Speaker 1: And where was she from, where was she born?
Speaker 2: My mom was born in West Virginia.  She can't even remember the little small town.  It may not even had a name, so she just says she's from Montgomery, West Virginia, which I think is the biggest town closest to where she was actually born.
Speaker 1: And did she tell you any stores or anecdotes about when she was coming up?  Do you have any sense of her upbringing?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I know that my mom's father worked in the coal mines, and my grandmother, Virginia Lemons, was a seamstress.  They were raised quite modestly.  My mother is the youngest of three children and, you know, she hasn't told me a whole lot of stories about herself growing up.  I think my grandmother, who's now a hundred years old, is the one that we kind of go to, to tell the stories.  And it's amazing because even with this project, I realize how much more we need to talk about, you know, where we come from, who we are.  My father [Carl Greenwood] couldn't remember his mother's [Catherine Greenwood] birthday, couldn't even remember where she died, couldn't--you know.  I was like, "Do you remember her at all?"  No, but, you know, so it's important to, to kind of document that, and be conscious of it.  My sister [Gina Greenwood Gayle], on the other hand, who is the sibling, who most recently had a child, has been going about the process of, of trying to identify the various members of our family.
Speaker 1: So, could you tell us perhaps a story that you heard from your grandmother, Virginia, about perhaps being married to a coal miner or just her life in West Virginia (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think my grandmother, Virginia, was quite a catch in her day.  And she was married to her husband, Henry [Henry Lemons], until he passed away.  And they think he probably passed away from black lung from being in the coal mines but, of course, nobody really diagnosed things then.  He was rather young fifty-seven.  And that she, she grew up in West Virginia as well, and her mother, I believe, was probably half-black and half-white.  And--but her mother could actually pass, but it was my grandmother, who would always give her away.  Not that she tried to pass, but, you know, my grandmother tells stories about how being on the, on the railroad and the train, the conductors would insist that her mother move to the white car.  And she said, "No problems, as long as I can bring my Negro children with me."  And they would get, you know, flustered, when they would see my grandmother.  But--so she would talk about those kinds of stories.
Story_ID: 571610
Speaker 1: But, again, she [Greenwood's maternal grandmother, Virginia Lemons] was quite a catch then, she's quite a catch now, almost a hundred years old, in a couple of months.  And my grandmother is an inspiration to me because what she shows is, it's never too late to kind of recreate your life.  And she grew--I grew up in a house around the corner from my grandmother, so she was like always a presence in our, in our life.  And at age eighty-five, my grandmother decided that she was bored with Washington, D.C., and needed a change of pace.  And so, she moved to Columbus, Ohio, where she does have a daughter [Audrey Lemons Foster]; my aunt lives there.  And when I first went to visit my grandmother in Columbus, I almost didn't recognize her.  And I said, you know, she told us at the time she wanted to move to Columbus because the houses were all on one level.  She liked the church that she would visit when she would go there.  She liked the fact that the seniors would walk through the malls in the morning before the stores opened to get their exercise, and all those things were attractive to her.  But when I showed up in Ohio and discovered that my grandmother, who really has, always had these long silky braids, almost like Indian [Native American] braids, two of them she wore, but you never saw the braids.  She always wore them tucked up into an auburn wig.  And so, that's it, she had the auburn wig.  Only a few people knew about the pony tails.  I have seen those before.  But when I got to Ohio, she had a little short gray Afro and, you know, it's everything about her.  And so, again, just after all those years of being a lady with the auburn wig, she became the sister with the short gray Afro, again, transforming her life and who she, who she saw herself as.  And so, I'm, I'm quite inspired by her, and she's completely competent and can share the stories of the past, and can certainly remember what you told her fifteen minutes ago.
Speaker 2: Don't--you said that your grandfather--your grandmother influenced you by letting you know that she could reconstruct her life.  Had she done that before or did you have a sense that she'd done that prior?
Speaker 1: You know, it's, it's funny because she would never really say it in those words.  And, and I think you also have to be in a space where you would observe that kind of thing, but I suspect that it's not the first time she had done that.  I've only recently learned that she had a very short-lived marriage, you know, way after my grandfather [Henry Lemons] had passed away.  And she decided after maybe about a month or two that, you know he just wasn't the one, and went and had it annulled, you know.  And that's something like people, they don't talk about that, but I know that it happened, you know.  And, again, she can make up her mind in two months--a man she married--and say, you know what, this is not what I thought it was going to be, and I'm out of here.
Speaker 2: And make the move (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 2: --make that actual shift.  And then, you said her mother could pass.  Could you just repeat her name?  We spoke about it off camera.
Speaker 1: You know, I don't remember my grandmother, great-grandmother's last name, but her first name was Alice [ph.], um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, fantastic.
Story_ID: 571611
Speaker 1: So, let's talk a little bit more about your mother, Joann [Joann Lemons Greenwood].  How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother is the nurturer in every respect.  I have such great respect for her as a mother, now that I'm a mother, because she had three kids in diapers all at the same time.  My youngest sister, Gina [Gina Greenwood Gayle], who is now forty-two, came along eighteen months after my twin brothers [Ronald Greenwood and Donald Greenwood].  My brothers were twins who are now forty-four.  So, you know, the fact that she had these three kids in diapers, and there was me, and there was my brother [Vaughn Greenwood].  There were five of us and she juggled it and, and, you know, it made it look easy.  You know, I had a great respect for what she was able to do.  So, my mom never went to college, but she had a lot of wisdom, and she was a stay-at-home mom at various intervals in my growing up.  And there was a time when, I guess, I was a, maybe I was in high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.], when I really didn't have--I, I think I, I lo- I questioned why she was staying at home because I was, you know, in high school.  I graduate in 1977, so this is where, where you could, you know, make the bacon, bring it home, and fry it up in a pan, time.  And so, there was my mother just making bacon in the pan, but not earning it.  And so, I used to remember, and I've never, never, never would voice that, but just kind of feel like, "Don't she want more for her life?  What is she doing?  Is she watching soap operas?"  And, you know, just because of the way I was being raised by her, and what I was being exposed to with the expectation that I would go on to college and, and have this great career.  And so, when I look back on it, however, my mom made lots of sacrifices for my success.  For example, she stayed home, and took care of the house because I never had to wash clothes, I never cleaned, I never washed dishes.  I never did anything when it came to household chores.  My mother's perspective was my job was to go school, make great grades, and get into college.  That's all she wanted for me.  And so, she would refuse really to allow me to do anything else that would stand in the way of that focus.  And she was so supportive of me all throughout school.  I can remember in high school, and certainly in college, having tests.  And I lived at home while I was in college at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and would do my homework at the dining room table.  And my mom would quiz me in subjects that she couldn't even pronounce the subject but, you know, she quizzed me, and what you need, and then she could even overhear me saying that I had a project to do.  This is like in--I remember a science fair contest in, in junior high school [Rabaut Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], and I was going to do my report on drugs.  And I came home the next day.  She'd been down to the health and drug administration [Food and Drug Administration], and she had pamphlets and all kind of things, you know, just anything to encourage that.  And the other thing that's really so, so special to me is that my mom would never, ever go to bed and leave me at that dining room table.  So, I mean, I was pretty conscientious as a student, so I could, I could stay at the table studying for a test until 3, 4:00 in the morning.  She would not get up from that rocking chair in the living room.  She'd sit right there.  I'd say, "Ma, why don't you go to bed?"  "Oh, I just want to read the paper a little bit longer."  "It's 2:00 in the morning."  She, you know, and I'm watching her nod, but she would not get up from that chair, and make me feel, like I had been abandoned, or I was in this thing alone.  She was right there.  So, I mean, she has been an inspiration for, for me and just, you know, encouraging of everything that I do.
Story_ID: 571612
Speaker 1: So let's talk about, a little bit about your father.  What's your father's name, and where was he born and--?
Speaker 2: My father is Carl Greenwood, and he is a proud native Washingtonian.  And there are not many people who are actually from Washington, D.C., but he is.  He was raised, again, rather modestly, but he worked for our family business [Greenwood Transfer Moving and Storage, Inc., Washington, D.C.] from the time he was probably ten.  My grandfather [Benjamin Greenwood] started a moving and storage furniture company, and my grandfather did that, and my father worked for him.  My dad is just a real, solid black man.  Again, I mean, I just don't think they make them like that all the time, that's for sure, but, you know, my parents are married now fifty-three years, you know.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well, just dependable, present, completely present in the life of his family, hardworking.  He was always kind of the comic relief in the family as well, you know, he, he calls me crazy fool.  I call him crazy fool, you know, and it's just that kind of thing.  And they always say that you grow up and, and marry, find--look for a husband as who's your father.  And I was like, well, I sure hope so because, you know, he, he's incredible in that way.  He's also--my parents, both, they parented differently.  My mom [Joann Lemons Greenwood], as I told you, would be the one to go out and just support.  She'd bring everything in, good job, encourage you--nice, nicey, nicey.  My dad, he would pretend like nothing was good enough.  If I brought a report card home that had all A's and a B, he'd look at it and he'd go, "What happened right here?"  And inside, you're going like (sighs), "You don't appreciate--," you know, all that's going through you because what happened right here, you know.  And so, you're thinking, okay, he doesn't get you, or he doesn't see how hard you tried, or what have you, and you could be pouting about that.  And then, the next day, you recognize or realize that he went out and made, like twenty copies of your report card, and mailed them to everybody in the family.  That's the kind of thing he would do, you know, so his way was to kind of say, "Not quite," but he would be extremely proud.  When I opened my first bed and breakfast, and he was just like, "I don't know, I don't know what makes you think people, like come up there, and stay in that big old haunted house," and he'd shake his head and all of that.  But, again, you know, he went and took a picture and made T-shirts, and put the pictures on the T-shirts, and passed them out to everybody.  So, he did it differently, but they both were very, very much involved in the raising of, of me and my siblings, and completely supportive of what we did.
Story_ID: 571613
Speaker 1: Did your father [Carl Greenwood] ever tell you any tales about his upbringing, or about his starting to work at Greenwood Moving and Storage [Greenwood Transfer Moving and Storage, Inc., Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: You know, my father has a rhyme for everything.  Again, he is an old geezer with, you know.  I remember, you know, if you could ask him for some money, and he'd, he'd say, "What do you think?  Money grows on tree," you know.  And he would say, "I'm so poor, I can't pay, get to the welfare," or whatever.  He had all these things, you know, my backbone this, and he'd do his whole thing.  But in terms of his own upbringing, he just talked a lot about his father [Benjamin Greenwood].  And I think the message was always, "God bless a child who has his own."  That was always where he was coming from.
Speaker 1: So, did you know your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I never met my grandfather, but I feel like I've always known him in my soul.  I think that I'm probably most like my grandfather who I've never met.  You know, my grandfather was, was also raised as a poor boy, and but, as I always say, make it happen, he made it happen.  And so, he, he opened a little corner grocery store in Southeast Washington [D.C.] and, you know, at a time when discrimination and racism ran rampant.  And the grocer, who had a store down the street from his, petitioned the food wholesaler not to deliver my grandfather's groceries in the same truck with the groceries that were coming to his store.  And the food wholesaler kept my papa off.  And, you know, my grandfather was the kind of man who didn't sit back and, you know, whine, or complain or, or give up.  His way was to, "Okay, how can I find a way to get my own groceries?  Okay, is that, if that's the way it is, then I guess I'll have to figure out how I'm going to save up enough money, buy my own truck, pick up my own groceries," and that's what he did.  And so when he wasn't using that truck to pick up groceries, he thought, well, what else can I use my truck for?  And at that time--this is like in the early 1920s--the trucks were still being pulled by horses.  And so, he decided that he would start to move trash and furniture for other businesses, and for even residential people who were moving from one place to another.  And that gave birth to Greenwood's Transfer Moving and Storage company, which is, had been our family business.  And that business became so successful that it actually became one of the top one hundred businesses on Black Enterprise's list of top companies and that was in the '70s [1970s].  And so, you know, he found a way, and he would not take no for an answer.  He would make it happen.
Speaker 1: And do you have any sense of his parents?  I mean, where did he come from that he, that he had this, make it happen kind of an attitude?
Speaker 2: You know, unfortunately, I, I don't know much about his parents.  And I, I feel like I could, I can, I sense that he was the golden child of his parents.  He may have been the only child of his parents--I'm not sure.  My grandmother, Catherine [Catherine Greenwood], who he married, had said that his parents didn't think that she was good enough for him.  So, that leaves me to believe that they thought that, you know, the sun just rose and, and set around him.  And I think, though, when parents kind of give that to their kids, the kids do sometime, somehow how feel like, you know, they're capable of conquering anything.  And I think, you know, my grandfather had that feeling.  And I think my parents gave me that feeling.
Story_ID: 571614
Speaker 1: How early in your life did you learn that your [paternal] grandfather [Benjamin Greenwood] had this business?  Was this something that you knew from childhood, or did you discover it along the way?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew from as early as I can remember that my family had a business, because my father [Carl Greenwood] always worked in that business.  And the moving and storage company was a branded business, if you will, because the trucks had a big Greenwood Transfer [Greenwood Transfer Moving and Storage, Inc., Washington, D.C.] name on the side of the truck, and, and the men wore the uniform that had Greenwood Transfer and the men--including my dad.  So, it, I was quite aware that my name was out there in this business world.  And my--the company had a contract with the department of education in Washington, D.C.  And so that meant that the trucks would pull up in front of, you know, my schools, from elementary school [Barnard Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] right up to high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.].  And I'd always come running to see if it was my dad who was on the truck, or who was on the truck.  Was it my uncle that I know who was coming, you know?  And people would say, "Oh, is that your family?" you know, they'd point, and you had a sense of pride about that.  It was like, "Yeah, those are my people.  We do that," you know.  And so, I was always aware of the business, and I knew that my grandfather had started it, but I didn't really know the magnitude of what he had done as early as the 1920s, what he had accomplished, you know, on the bottom line, being on Black Enterprise's list of top 100 businesses.  I didn't have any sense of that because all I knew was that my father hauled furniture for a living.
Speaker 1: And did you know that your grandfather had started with this corner store, and the story about the truck, and so forth (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I, I, I, I started learning more of the historical perspective of the business when I discovered how successful it had become.  And then, it piqued my interest, and the only way I discovered that because, again, my father--when my grandfather died before I was born, so I didn't really know him to, to get the story firsthand.  I just knew that just, it was a business that had my name on it, and that my dad had a job, and that he moved furniture.  So, for me, it was very, a very modest kind of, this thing to do.  I mean, I had friends whose fathers were doctors and lawyers, so I mean, my dad moved furniture.  And so, I kind of accepted that, and it was not that I was ashamed by it, but I didn't understand the back story that gave me a sense of what a great accomplishment the family had made.  So, basically, what happened was--
Story_ID: 571615
Speaker 1: So I really considered my dad's job a rather modest one, and didn't really understand the magnitude of this company for a very long time, for all of my growing up for sure because my--well, my grandfather died before I was born.  He left each of his children an equal share in the business.  Now, my daddy is a very safe, conservative man, and so he took his share, and he sold it to my aunt [Helen Greenwood Allen].  And he took that money, and he bought the house that my parents brought me home to the hospital to, where they still live today.  And so, he--that, for his money, was a much wiser investment.  He was done.  So, in effect, my father did simply have a job, because he didn't really have any ownership in the company.  And because of that, we were raised, again, very modestly on a moving man's income, especially the times when my mother [Joann Lemons Greenwood] didn't do some kind of odd job to help supplement, so there was no way for me to know.  But then I came home to visit my family, and I was looking for my college diploma.  I wanted to hang it in my office.  And I went rummaging through a drawer where my mother would keep, you know, the, all the graduation programs, people's obituaries, you know, that drawer, everybody has one in their house.  And I'm going through there, and I come across a yellowing, faded Washington Post newspaper [The Washington Post].  And on the front of the newspaper, there's a story with a big headline that says "Oldest Black-Owned Business Grew with Effort."  And there, under the big headline, was a little picture of my grandfather standing in front of one of the trucks.  And I looked, I was like, what--oldest black, oh, didn't know that.  And I read further, and then I start to see the numbers.  And the Black Enterprise list, you know, and I am off the hook at that point, going, "Why don't, why didn't I know this?"
Speaker 2: Was there any sense of a difference between your household and perhaps your aunt's [Helen Greenwood Allen], who's owning Greenwood Moving and Storage [Greenwood Transfer Moving and Storage, Inc., Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: What was happening over there?
Speaker 1: I mean, clearly, my grand- my aunt, who purchased my father's [Carl Greenwood] share, and then he, he--she purchased my uncle's [Reginald Greenwood] share when he passed away--my father's brother.  She purchased his share, and she became the president and CEO of the company 'cause she owned the, she owned the company basically at that point.  And you can see the rewards that, that she was reaping.  She lived in a very spacious home in, in the subur- suburbs of Maryland.  She had an in ground swimming pool.  She always drove the latest car.  She had a million furs.  She had--we used, we used to call her Alexis Carrington Colby, you know, and that was during the days of 'Dallas.'  So, she was very grand, she was grand anyway.  She would have been, whether she had money or not.  And she would wear these necklaces and earrings that we would say, you know, she just took the chandelier down, and threw her around her neck.  You know, that kind of thing, so, and she enjoyed, you know, showing her, her success, and wearing it.  So, yeah, I mean it was clear that, yeah, okay, this is what happens when you own, and this is what happens when you have a job.  And, and those are messages that I started to receive.  I was like, "Oh, I want what happens when you own, not what happens when you have a job."  And so, you know, so I, I did know that.  I knew enough to know that she was the one that was holding the cards and, you know, but, but when I learned more about what it took for my grandfather [Benjamin Greenwood] to have this vision, the kind of tenacity, the kind of stick-to-it-tiveness, the, the kind of just, you know, make it happen attitude.  That's when it really ignited in me this, this, this sense that you can do this.  You can do whatever it is you want to do.  And those were words that my mama [Joann Lemons Greenwood] had always said, you know, you know, baby, you can be anything you want.  But when I read my grandfather's story right there in black and white on a yellowed newspaper, The Washington Post front page, it just completely solidified, validated all that she had been trying to let me know from the time that I could walk.  So, his story has been a powerful inspiration.  And then, even when, you know, I'm doubting myself, or someone is doubting me, as my father did initially, when I said I wanted to open a bed and breakfast in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn [New York], and he would say, "What makes you think that's going to work?  What makes you think you can do this?"  And I'd had a one-word answer for him, and it was, "Papa, Papa makes me think so."
Story_ID: 571616
Speaker 1: Did you know your [paternal] grandmother, Catherine [Catherine Greenwood]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew my grandmother, Catherine, and she passed away when I was an adult.  And, yeah, she was a quiet woman, so I really didn't get a lot of stories from her.  You know, it's just, I don't know, I, I wish I, I, I had taken the opportunity to press and to, to understand her more and learn her more.  You know, what, what I think also happened growing up, and I think it happens in families all the time--my, my older brother, and I think he would agree, he is only a year older than I am, Vaughn [Vaughn Greenwood].  And when Vaughn was born, he was really the second child of my parents [Joann Lemons Greenwood and Carl Greenwood].  Their first child died very young, maybe after ten days, you know, of life, and that happened back then.  And I think they called the blue birth or whatever they called it back then, but they were so excited when Vaughn came along, and he clearly was the, you know, the favorite child.  And that extended beyond just our immediate family as well.  I mean, so my Aunt Helen [Helen Greenwood Allen], who is the one who actually bought Greenwood Transfer [Greenwood Transfer Moving and Storage, Inc., Washington, D.C.] and, and ran it, and my grandmother, paternal, they--I mean, it was about Vaughn.  So, I, I didn't get a lot of light there.  And I don't say I didn't get love, but I certainly didn't get--I wasn't the one that was, you know, pampered, or brought over for the sleepovers or take, getting the big gifts or whatever.  So, and my mother was very conscious of that, and she started saying things like, "Well, if you, if you can't take both of them, you can't take none of them," you know, and she would say things like that, or I remember a trip that my mother and I took to New York [New York].  I must have been about eight or ten, and, you know, my aunt had, had collected the favorite nieces and nephews, and took them to Atlantic City [New Jersey], or they went some place, and I wasn't one of those.  And my mother, you know, said, okay, you know, so she's, "You and me, we're gonna go to New York."  And I remember coming to New York, and getting on the Circle Line [Circle Line Sightseeing Cruises, New York, New York], and I have a picture, I think, I don't know where it is, but holding a big balloon on the Circle Line with my mother.  And I remember going to the Piccadilly, Piccadilly buffet [ph.], and, you know, and, and feeling like, you know, I was special, too.  And it was very important for my mother to, to give me that.
Speaker 1: What does your mother do during those periods when she wasn't homemaking, or she wasn't exclusively at home?
Speaker 2: My mother had a, was a nurse, like an LPN [licensed practical nurse] nurse, not a registered nurse.  She did that.  Then, she worked--her last job was doing microfilm, taking company documents and, and, and creating microfilm out of the documents.
Story_ID: 571617
Speaker 1: So can we talk about your siblings?  Could you name them for us?
Speaker 2: My oldest brother is Vaughn [Vaughn Greenwood].  He is forty-nine, and we're a year apart.  And growing up, everybody thought we were twins, we look almost identical.  And after me came the twins, Ronald [Ronald Greenwood] and Donald [Donald Greenwood] (laughter).  They are now forty-four, and they are amazing, amazing young men.  I still see them as my little brothers even though they're grown and have their own kids, but they've always been, to me, incredible, incredible men.  And so, they, I think, have really followed in my father's [Carl Greenwood] footsteps.  And my younger sister, Gina [Gina Greenwood Gayle], is forty-two, and she is a physical therapist, and she has two kids.
Story_ID: 571618
Speaker 1: Now, when you were kids, were you all relatively close or how did that work?
Speaker 2: We were, we were close.  I would say that growing up, my brother [Vaughn Greenwood] and I had a very challenging relationship when we were younger.  I think because we were born so close to each other that, and he was just the apple of everybody's eye, that maybe when I came along, that was difficult for him to, to share any of that.  And I think my brother also probably knew that he was gay at a very young age, and was kind of wrestling with that and, and but I was the girl.  And so that, that was not easy, and, you know, I didn't understand that he was gay, and so, I didn't understand why he wanted to just play with my friends.  It's like, "Get your own friends," and so, you know, there was a lot of tension around that.  And I think once he came out, and was who he is, we became extremely tight, as we are to this day, but it was difficult until he fully embraced who he was for him to, for he and I to have the kind of close relationship that we now, now have.  And I mean, when I tell you, it was crazy.  I, I can remember, you know, roller skates upside the head--somebody going to the hospital crazy.
Speaker 1: Running with knives.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was crazy, you know, "You better not go to sleep tonight.  If I were you, I'd keep my eyes open tonight," crazy, so, that wasn't, yeah, it wasn't, it wasn't always easy.  My brothers came along, Ronald [Ronald Greenwood] and Donald [Donald Greenwood], they were each other's best friends as they, they continue to be.  I was definitely the big sister.  I handled that role very well and I was very protective of them.  I wanted--I had great expectations of them.  I became the mother in a sense, you know.  I made them play school at which times I could, you know, go over their homework and just, you know, told them that you're going to college.  I, I was the one that talked to them about girls, and how you treat them, and what you don't do, what you do, do, you know, just always, like, and they will tell you, just like I was on them.  And I think that's why now I look at them and go, I was only what--five years old, not even five years older than you--four years older than you, but we definitely had that I was a big sister relationship.  Then my sister [Gina Greenwood Gayle] came along, and I think at that point, I was kind of into my life, so we didn't have a, a kind of real closeness as sisters growing up because of the age difference.  So it wasn't like she confided in me, I confided in her, 'cause we were too spread apart, age-wise.  But, you know, we, we were very close, a close family, extremely close.  I mean, my husband [Glenn Pogue], when he met my family and understood our family dynamics, he was like, you guys were like, you know--what did he used to call us--not--like the Partridge family.  He was like, you guys were like the Partridge family.  And we were.  I mean, we put on, you know, talent shows for our parents [Joann Lemons Greenwood and Carl Greenwood].  And, you know, everybody had to have a birthday and, you know, with, with the hats and the candles, and everything.  That's the kind of family we were.  And we were very involved in the community as a family, involved in the church as a family, so we were very close-knit.
Story_ID: 571619
Speaker 1: What would you say is your earliest memory?
Speaker 2: Of?
Speaker 1: Growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory--of just anything?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Goodness.  I don't know what the earliest memory is.  I think if I were to think about in different categories like, you know, what, what was it, was the first time I think I had a crush on a boy, or what was the first time I, you know, was afraid, or when was I--I could probably think of those specific instances.  But the very first thing I can remember ever--got--I, I can't even begin to think of what that might be.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When was the first time that you felt, or as a kid, did you have any entrepreneurial leanings?  Did you--when was the first time you felt that you needed to have a lemonade sale?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know what?  I think, as a kid, more so than feeling, like it was clear that I was going to own something.  I think it was very clear that I was going to be a leader, so I can remember very early on, examples of just being the leader.  I was just always the leader.  It's like, if, if somebody, if, if my girlfriends and I were conspiring to have a sleepover, and somebody had to go and negotiate on that behalf, I would be the person.  So (unclear), "Let Monique [HistoryMaker Monique Greenwood] ask," you know.  I remember we were trying to form a block association on our block, and I was a teenager.  I was in junior high school [Rabaut Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] and I, I just went with my mother [Joann Lemons Greenwood].  And the next thing you knew, I was the president of the block association, so all, you know, the, the little old ladies who would watch me and see if I'm coming home when I was supposed to or whatever.  I was leading them in the block association.  So, I think, for as long as I can remember, and I would be uncomfortable not in a leadership role (laughter).
Speaker 1: When you were not in a leadership role--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--
Speaker 1: --it did not make you--
Speaker 2: --I, I would be uncomfortable.
Speaker 1: And did you take that same leadership role at home?  I mean, you did with your brothers [Ronald Greenwood and Donald Greenwood], but what about before your brothers came along when it was yourself and Vaughn [Vaughn Greenwood] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean, always, always.  I mean, my brother, you know, is older than me chronologically, but I was always older than him emotionally.  I, I always felt like I was, sometimes I felt like a parent to my parents.  And my parents would go, where did this child come from?  And, you know, because of that, I was, I had more freedom as a young person that any of my other friends ever had.  I mean, I can never remember having a curfew.  I like, think back on some of the things that I did as a young person.  If my daughter [Glynn Pogue] tried that, it would just, I would just lose it.  I mean, we, my girlfriends and I--I, I was not a, I, I was very serious about my education, but I was, I was not a square kid by any stretch of the imagination.  So, my girlfriends and I, we would party with Chuck Brown and the Soul Searchers, who's still hot with, that's a whole D.C. [Washington, D.C.] thing.  You'd have to be from D.C. to understand, but we would, we would do that, and go to clubs when we were in high school.  And I started driving when I was sixteen.  I was the only one in my set who could drive, and who had access to a car.  And so, I would drive my daddy's [Carl Greenwood] car and we'd go party and we'd be in high school.  And we'd hang out until the sun would come up.  And I'd come back home, and my father would be standing on the, on the stoop waiting for me to get out of the car, so he could get into it to go to work, you know, things like that, you know.  And I, I don't know where that came from.  My mother just never gave, they just didn't give me those kind of rules, and I think they knew that I'd be responsible and that was that.
Story_ID: 571620
Speaker 1: So how early do you think that you gained this sense of the importance of long-term thinking?
Speaker 2: I was always a planner, you know.  I always understood consequences for your actions, both positive and negative.  I could see that if you save some money, you would be the one with the most money on the class trip.  I mean, I could always understand planning.  And so, you know, I, I don't think there was a time in my life when I didn't kind of go, "Okay, if I do this now, what would happen later?"  Just always kind of connecting, you know, what happens as a result of what happened.
Speaker 1: And you said, you were, you took on a parental role almost with your parents [Joann Lemons Greenwood and Carl Greenwood].  Do you have an example of how--I mean, the block association is a good example, but do you have an example of, at home how perhaps you led the way?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I think, early in my life, I thought I wanted to be a broadcaster and to bring you the news at six p.m.  And I would oftentimes, like read the newspaper and then come back, and give a broadcast of the news to my parents, and be very clear about, okay, what this means is, and you know, try to break it down for them.  I think later on, I became very much involved as I am now, in trying to help them plan for their finances.  I think one of the things that happens very often in, certainly in black families, is that we don't prepare for the inevitable, when a parent dies, when a parent gets sick.  And so, I'm constantly like, "Okay, you know, what's going on with the will?  Do you have that together, you know, where's the paperwork for this, you know, maybe you ought to look at doing a, a reverse mortgage."  You'd, you know, so we're, you know, constantly talking about those things even though, oftentimes, at least my mom doesn't want to hear them, you know.  So, I have to be very careful how I bring up some of those topics that I think are important for them to think about.
Story_ID: 571621
Speaker 1: Now you said that your husband [Glenn Pogue] described your family as the Partridge family.  What holidays did you celebrate, and when you celebrated, how did you do it?  Did everyone come?  Who did the cooking?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just give us a little bit of that flavor.
Speaker 2: We were, we celebrated every holiday, first of all.  You know, every Thanksgiving, everybody had to be there.  Every Christmas, we were all--everybody, everybody's birthday got celebrated, and this continues to this day, you know.  And so, when my husband and I married, and we had a daughter [Glynn Pogue], it was like, I mean, every, every year, I've never missed a Christmas with my family.  And as a result of that, there's only been a few Christmases that we've ever spent in our own home.  And that, for my husband, was always a, you know, unfortunate.  He would say, you know, "Well, this child should wake up in her own house, and come down the steps in her pajamas and, you know, have the tree in her house, and believe that Santa [Santa Claus] came to her house."  And I'm like, "No, we're going to just tell her that we sent, we sent a letter to Santa, and told her--him that she's gonna be in Washington.  We're going to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]."  So it was very much important for us to be together as a family.  It still is, and I was the only one who moved outside of D.C.  So, initially, I'd get a little, you know, perturbed when something had happened and I wasn't there, you know.  I said, "Why didn't y'all--?"  "Well, we didn't think you were going to come down from New York [New York]," you know.  But they, they still do that to this day--get together for everybody's birthday, or what have you.  And what I do now, as a Christmas gift to my, the brothers who are twins, who have wonderful wives, who I would have loved to have had just as my--I consider them my actual sisters, not my sister-in-laws.  And I give them a gift certificate where each one takes one of our houses in Cape May, New Jersey, one of the inns, and then, they can bring their families down, so it becomes almost like a little mini-family reunion of their families.  So, it's mostly the, the sisters-in-laws' families, but then, we're there kind of 'cause we're there and, you know, and so, the family has extended.  And family is so important that I can remember that when my brother, Ronald [Ronald Greenwood], got married to Kim [Kimberly Baber-Greenwood], we loved Kim.  We embraced her immediately.  Well, but this was going to break the closeness between Ronald and Donald [Donald Greenwood] because they were in- they still are inseparable.  I've never seen anything like it.  They are clearly and truly each other's best friends.  And my brother cried the night before his brother got married.  He came and woke me up.  We sat on the side of the bed.  I told him it was going to be okay.  Kim, being the wise woman she is, when they bought their house, it was like, "And this is Donald's room."  So he's got, had a bedroom in their house and 'cause, you know, it would not have worked any other way.  And when Donald was--the woman he was dating at the time, he was going to propose to her.  We weren't sure if it was because the brother, other brother had just gotten married or not, but he ended up not marrying her because she was uncomfortable with all this kind of family, family, family.  "Why we got to always be at your family's house?"  You know, she didn't work with that.  His new wife, on the other hand, loves it, gets it.  She lost her parents at a very young age, both her mother and her father.  So, this was so exciting for her to be a part of the family.  So, that's just, you know, how important the family dynamic is.
Story_ID: 571622
Speaker 1: And what was the house that you grew up in?  You said your parents [Joann Lemons Greenwood and Carl Greenwood] still live in, in it.  Can you describe it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We, we grew up in Northwest, Washington [D.C.] in a little row house, three bedrooms, seven people, one bathroom.  You can do the math (laughter).  So, it was--I, I didn't sleep in a bed by myself until I was twenty-one.  And the bed that I shared with my sister [Gina Greenwood Gayle] was never bigger than a full size bed.  And we played games like, you know, and it wasn't really funny at the time, but, you know, it, we called chop, chop, chop, right.  So, if your arm was, or your hand or your foot was on this, we'd just go through, we'd go, chop, chop, chop, you know.  And it was like, get on your side.  And, you know, that's the way it was.  My twin brothers [Ronald Greenwood and Donald Greenwood] had their own room.  And then, my other brother [Vaughn Greenwood] had a room that wasn't really a room.  We took it back, we took one room and split it in half, so my brother had a little tiny room, but it was his own room.  He was the oldest, and then my parents' room.  And all seven of us shared the one bathroom.  And they still live there to this day.  It still looks like it looked (laughter), when I lived there (laughter).  And I've been gone over twenty years, way over twenty years, but, you know, it's the same, you know.  They took the plastic off the sofas finally.  But it, you know, is definitely your mama's house.
Story_ID: 571623
Speaker 1: Where did y'all attend church?
Speaker 2: We were raised in the family church, Mount Gilead Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.], and that's where my mom [Joann Lemons Greenwood] had gone, and her mother [Virginia Lemons] had gone.  And then, I became active in the church about four blocks from the house through--they had a Vacation Bible School that I went to.  And they had a kind of, like a youth ministry that we put on plays, and I started getting involved in that.  And my parents would come to see me perform in the play or whatever it was, and that kind of started pulling them into the church.  So, we ended up going to becoming members of this church, which was a United Methodist Church, Petworth Methodist Church [Petworth United Methodist Church, Washington, D.C.].  And what happened at Petworth was an interesting thing because when we first started going, I, I was probably eight or ten.  It, you know, it was during a time of white flight, so we're right in urban Washington, D.C., and it had been a white church.  But then, as those white residents started to move to the suburbs, you had black families starting to come, but not in droves because black families are committed to their church.  They would travel two towns over to go to their home church, so a lot of the new families that had come into the neighborhood were not coming to that church 'cause they already had church homes.  Meanwhile the white residents, who were members there, were leaving, and so, this has been the struggle of the church that my parents still attend to this day.  It is a beautiful huge edifice which has, on any given Sunday, on a good Sunday, there are maybe twelve people sitting there.  And it always saddens my heart when I go back 'cause I always go to church when I come home with my, with my family, and it just saddens my heart because I can remember when there were lots of people there.  And I can remember when I was in the youth choir, the young adult choir, we had, you know, at least twenty-five voices, and now, there's this, like one man playing the piano.  So, you know, there's been many times throughout my life as I've been in New York [New York] that I kind of go, "What can I do?  How can I come back and--?"  You know, and then you kind of realize you, you, but you can't, but you want to.  And I sit there and I go, well, we can do this, and what kind of door-to-door outreach can we do?  And can we, and that's kind of you know, so I could make another project, or another job for myself as I tend to do on a daily basis, but, yeah, so that was the family church.
Story_ID: 571624
Speaker 1: It's my understanding that you started writing fairly young, and one place that you wrote was for your church newspaper, and you wrote about fashion there.  Is this the same church [Petworth United Methodist Church, Washington, D.C.] where you did that writing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, you know, I really, I didn't grow up aspiring to be a writer or a print journalist.  I wanted to be on television, and I look at my daughter [Glynn Pogue] now, and I go, okay, she is so obsessed with celebrite and, you know, being out there, but I really, I, I, I, the fashion piece was always there for me.  And that came largely from Alexis Carrington Colby, my Aunt Helen [Helen Greenwood Allen].  So, my Aunt Helen used to do fashion shows at the church, in different churches, community centers, and she loved fashion and she, you know, she was very fly, and so, she put me in the fashion shows, and I was probably twelve.  And everybody said, oh, that child is going to be a model.  Well, that was 'cause I was tall and skinny back then, and so, you know, so fashion became a passion of mine early on.  And, you know, I was experimental, so in high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.], in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you know, people would be like, what, let's see what she has on today because I don't care what it was, if it was in style, I had it.  When, when platform shoes were in style, I wore the platforms, even though I was already taller than all the boys in high school, I had my platforms, I had whatever it was, the spiky hair, I was in style.  That was important to me, and so, therefore, like I was interested in fashion, and journalism, but more broadcast.  And so, I was thinking, well, how can I marry the two?  And I find that that's kind of been the story of my life where I have many interests, and because I can't do everything, I try to find synergies to bring those things together.  And so, I was told early on that, that broadcasters just read.  And so, they don't think, and so, I thought, hm, I don't want to just read.  And they said, that, or you're more marketable if you know how to ask the right questions.  And you can actually write your stories and, and then you could still read them if you want to, and that whole thing.  So, that's how I kind of got steered into print journalism.  And, but even when I got into print journalism, I said, "Well, the thing I want to read about is fashion," and I just had, always been very focused.  And so, when I decided I was going to write about fashion, I decided to write about fashion for anybody and anything where it could live.  And so if I was writing for the church newspaper, which I did--in fact, I created it.  I wrote the, I wrote fashion.  I wrote about the fashionable hats that women were wearing to church on Sunday morning.  When I did an internship for the [U.S.] Department of Defense, I was writing for the Stars and Stripes, which is a military newspaper, and I wrote about fashion.
Speaker 1: And were you writing about how military fashion fits into--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --perhaps the mainstream?
Speaker 2: --yes.  I wrote about how, how military fashion was invading civilian wardrobes because you had camouflage and khakis and fatigues, and all of that was hot, and I talked about that.  I talked about how a woman, who's in the military, who has to, obviously, wear a uniform, can still have individuality, even while in uniform.  I wrote about how black women especially could wear the head gear that they had to wear, and still wear Afro puffs and Afros when that was in style.  So, those were the kind of stories that I wrote about, so any opportunity, I kind of brought that forward.
Story_ID: 571625
Speaker 1: And at home, and at Aunt Helen's [Helen Greenwood Allen], perhaps, what periodicals were you looking at?  What television shows are you watching?  What newscasters are you encountering?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  So, I really loved J.C. Hayward in the Washington, D.C. market, she was on the news.  And she is still on the news, and she was on the news when I was in junior high school [Rabaut Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], so I mean you generally don't see that kind of longevity for female broadcast news people.  You see men.  You see them gray, you see them bald, you see them bulge, but you don't see women do that.  They kind of get cast aside when the expiration date (laughter) comes up.  But J.C. Hayward has always been on there.  She had her fabulous wigs, she had a face made up, and so, yeah, I watched her.  Later in life, it was Sue Simmons.  I loved Sue Simmons in D.C., and in terms of magazines, I really loved fashion magazines 'cause, again, it was all about fashion for me.  So, I loved Vogue.  I loved Essence, not so much for the fashion, but for the beauty, and how I saw myself in the pages of Essence magazine.  And then I really thought I was cute because I would get--I think it's called L'Officiel or whatever.  It would be in French, so you couldn't read anything, but, you know, you can see the pictures, and it was, like very chic that I had, you know, this French fashion magazine.  And I had to, we'd have to buy at one particular store that carried European periodicals.
Story_ID: 571626
Speaker 1: In your present life, are there any sights or sounds or sensations that take you right back home?  You obviously spend a lot of time at home, but are there things that queue for you feeling like you're a kid again?
Speaker 2: I don't think, in my life now, that I come across a lot of things that completely bring back home because, again, I've never left home.  So, you know, what I--all I have to do is go home to my parents' [Joann Lemons Greenwood and Carl Greenwood] house, and see my bedroom and go, okay, this is it, you know.  It's just all so fresh for me, it really is.  You know, I, I, I'm always excited to see things.  Like, I was in a coffee house the other day and she has, the owner has, like these old jars filled with the candies that I grew up with.  So, you know, I love that when I see the, the candy necklaces.  And I remember how I used to eat those little candy necklaces.  And, and, and she had Mary Janes and a bunch of the squirrel nuts, and all the candies that I grew up with.  And I'm also sometimes amazed when some of the music that I grew up with is now being reintroduced in rap, or what have you, and my daughter [Glynn Pogue] singing that.  And I, I, would say to her, "What do you know about that?"  You know, I also find that there's a language, there's a D.C. [Washington, D.C.] kind of cadence that, you know, comes up, and I go, "You must be from D.C.," you know.  And I find it funny, you know, even though, you know, you have to be careful because it's like--somebody says, "Did you grow up in Southeast [Washington, D.C.]?"  And I go, and I hear it, I go, like, yeah, S-O-U-F, Southeast, yep.  That's how we just spoke, you know, so, but, overall, I'm always reminded of my, of my youth because every time I go back home, I'm right there.  And even when I go home now to D.C. to visit, and I have my own home there, which is my bed and breakfast in D.C. [Akwaaba D.C., Washington, D.C.].  I never sleep at the bed and breakfast.  I stay at my parents' house and, and they'll say, you know, "When you coming home?"   You know, I could be down there working at the B and B, but my mother will call and say, "When are you coming home?"  And I just kind of chuckle and, you know, I'll say, "I'll be home in about, you know, an hour or two."  And so, and it's also funny, too, when I'm in town, just the, the fact that I'm in D.C., my mother will call, she'll say, "I didn't hear from you today."  When I'm in New York [New York]--she hasn't heard from me in a week, maybe even two.  But if I'm in D.C., and she's already seen me, she's like, "Where you been?  Why I haven't heard from you today."  I'm like okay (laughter), so it takes you right back to that place, to your place.
Story_ID: 571627
Speaker 1: Where'd you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to Barnard Elementary School [Washington, D.C.].  It was about five blocks from our house, and I remember my parents [Joann Lemons Greenwood and Carl Greenwood], my mom, walking me to school in kindergarten.  I also remember, I actually remember my first day of kindergarten.  It's funny.  You don't think you remember these things, but I couldn't wait to go to school.  I think that comes from having an older sibling.  My brother [Vaughn Greenwood] would cry.  I would go with my mother as a four-year-old.  I'd walk with my mother to walk my brother to school, and he would cry and carry on 'cause he was just so close to my mom.  He didn't want to stay in the classroom.  And I remember at four going, "What is wrong with him, what is wrong with him?"  And not being--I could, could not wait to go to school, couldn't wait, and because I had an older brother who knew the Pledge of Allegiance and all that stuff.  By that time I got there, again, you know, having that competence when a young person has it, I walked in and I was like, I know my Pledge of Allegiance.  I already know, you know.  I was a big girl, so I, I loved, I loved school from the day I stepped in, I still love school today.
Speaker 1: And what was your favorite part about elementary school, you know, what were your favorite, what, what was your interest and, at that point, had you already decided that you were going to be a newscaster, or did you have any sense of what you were going to do as an elementary school person?
Speaker 2: In elementary school, I wanted to be a nurse for a couple of reasons.  One, my mother, I thought she was like a full-fledged nurse, you know, she didn't--I guess she was an LPN [licensed practical nurse] or whatever.  She did nurse-like stuff.  So, I was looking at her.  I wanted to be a nurse.  But most importantly, I was looking at [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll.  I was so, so inspired by this beautiful black woman on television [in 'Julia'] who lived in this great apartment, and she was a nurse.  So, I wanted to be a nurse.  And I remember my, my mom, my parents getting me, me for Christmas--I had a blue cape just like Julia's [Julia Baker] and I had the nurse hat.  I had the medical kit--the whole thing.  So early, my earliest recollection was wanting to be a nurse.  And then, later because I loved school so much, I wanted to be a teacher.  So, I would make my, my younger, my younger siblings [Ronald Greenwood, Donald Greenwood, and Gina Greenwood Gayle] suffer through my classroom instruction at the dining room table.
Speaker 1: Did you have, did you have elementary school teachers, who you remember, who influenced you in any particular way?
Speaker 2: Well, I, again, kindergarten was so fresh for me because I was so excited to get there, and I was so ready to be there, and I had the meanest teacher in the school, Ms. Robinson [ph.].  And I think Ms. Robinson--I don't think Ms. Robinson liked me very much.  I think she thought I was just way too precocious, and I just remember her having long nails.  And one day, taking those nails and taking them, and telling me, you will, (makes sounds), and like hitting me in my chest like this, you know.  And, and I remember going home and telling my mother about it and, you know, being very upset about it.  I, I remember a teacher, Ms. Clark [ph.], in my second grade, gentle, warm teacher, who was just, you know, she--my brother and I both loved this teacher.  She lived around the corner from us in our neighborhood, so maybe she took it, even more special interest in us.  But what I, what was significant about Ms. Clark was that she understood how each child learned, and she kind of, I don't know, had this sense of, you know, who you were, even though you hadn't become that person yet.  And my brother, she said, he's very artistic, and she encouraged him to, you know, to keep drawing and all of his art skills.  And, and for me, I think she pegged me--she's like, "You're a leader, you know.  You should be on the student council," you know, and she could see that, you know.  And a lot of times, teachers don't take that time now to really kind of get the kid, and, and encourage that kid to grow into who they can become.
Story_ID: 571628
Speaker 1: Sounded like you had an anecdote from elementary school [Barnard Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] that you were going to share with us.
Speaker 2: You know, I didn't really have an anecdote from elementary school, but I was talking about, you know, leadership, and that Ms. Clark [ph.] saw that in me.  But when I saw it in myself and decided that, okay, so, step out, be the leader.  The earliest point that I can remember was in junior high school, and I decided that I was going to run for class president.  And, again, my mother [Joann Lemons Greenwood], being the ever supporter, when I decided, I came home.  She had those, like campaign hats with the red, white, and blue stripes.  She had confetti, she had all this stuff, you know, posters, everything, you know, and I'm going to run for class president.  And, you know, when, when you're in junior high school, it's all about popularity.  And what happened was the cutest boy decided he was going to run for class president.  I knew I had it in the bag until he declared his, his candidacy.  And Mark Ingram [ph.], I mean, nobody could deny that Mark Ingram was definitely the cutest boy in the school.  And I thought, oh my god, now I got to run against Mark Ingram.  So, I decided that I was going to be selective about whom my campaign manager would be.  So, I chose kind of the, the toughest girl in school that, you know, everybody's kind of scared of her, you know.  And I, I asked her--she's going to be my campaign manager, and I figured she would like, bully everybody into voting for me.  And what was her name?  I remember her name now--was it Jackie [ph.]?  I don't remember her name, but I chose her to be my campaign manager.  And, you know, this is all within, happening within a week, you know, it's not a long, drawn-out thing (laughter).  And so, you know, she's telling people, vote for me, and the whole kind of thing.  And I'm still feeling kind of good about it.  But then on the day that we had to give our campaign speeches, and they were going to go right back to their classrooms and vote after that, again, my mom had these hats.  And everybody is supposed to wear these hats, and she had this confetti, and when I finished my speech, everybody is supposed to throw the confetti up.  Mark spoke before me and after Mark spoke, my campaign manager--everybody else took my confetti, and threw the confetti on Mark Ingram (laughter).  And I remember just feeling devastated. It was like (sighs).  And I lost, and that was an important lesson for me because I don't think I had ever felt like a loser before.  And I go--well, you can just lay it out the best you can.  You can give it your best effort, and not always going to win.  And I didn't feel defeated by it because, actually, in addition to being cute, I thought Mark Ingram was smart, so I was okay that Mark Ingram became the president of the class.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Rabaut Junior High School [Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 571629
Speaker 1: And at that point, were you aware--what was your career outlook at Rabaut Junior High School [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: At Rabaut, it was definitely all about fashion.  It's all about fashion 'cause this is when I was dealing with a little fashion shows with my [paternal] auntie [Helen Greenwood Allen].  And I was hanging with a group of girls, and we used to just could not tell us that we couldn't dress.  We lived for what you're wearing tomorrow, you know.
Speaker 1: And did you perhaps coordinate those outfits with one another (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We sometimes did, we sometimes did, but it was more not to look dress alike 'cause we thought that was corny, but, you know, it was like, what was, what was our attitude?  We liked to dress sophisticated, so, you know, in junior high school and high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.], it was about, you know, what kind of pumps, and what kind of bag you're going to wear with that, and, you know, what kind of designer label.  Are you going to wear your glasses on your--or are you going to wear the glasses up on your head, or are you going to put, you know, that kind of stuff, you know?
Speaker 1: And did you have a job?  How did you support your fashionista lifestyle?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, first of all, again, when I talked about my mother [Joann Lemons Greenwood] being supportive, she was just supportive.  And I can remember having an outfit--gosh, I can now think about elementary school [Barnard Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], a couple of fashion issues that happened for me--one was the class picture, sixth grade class picture.  I wore a sizzler dress.  The sizzler dresses used to button down the front, and then they had hot pants underneath.  And I remember just trying to time it just perfectly, but when the photographer would click the button and I would do this, so that you could see this, the hot pants, because I knew that it would not be acceptable to have my leg out with the hot pants.  So, I was waiting to see when he was going to touch that button, so I could flash my hot pants.  So, I remember that being an issue.  I also remember having a brown dress with a yellow and white checkered necktie, wide necktie.  And this was--what was the name of that television show--and the woman would say, "Sock it to me, sock it to me, sock it to me?"  It was a comedy show.  Oh, I don't remember the name of it, in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Not 'What's Happening!!'
Speaker 2: No.  'Laugh-In' ['Rowan and Martin's Laugh-In'] 'Laugh-In.'  And I think it was Twiggy [sic. Judy Carne], actually, it was Twiggy.  I think she was on 'Laugh-In.'  I loved Twiggy.  I mean, Twiggy was like the model and the whole thing, you know.  And now, she's on what, 'America's Next Top Model,' but I grew up with Twiggy.  I had a Twiggy lunchbox, all of that.  And I had this outfit, and the, and the, and the tie said, sock it to me, sock it to me, sock it to me.  And I remember them calling my mother, saying, "Did you see what your child has on today?"  And she was like, "Yeah."  And they were like, "That, that sock it to me, sock it to me, sock it to me, tie is inappropriate."  And I think my mother really--I guess she was just, "Oh, like, well, she, that's what she wanted to wear kind of thing."  She didn't make, she made no big deal about it at all.  But I remember the teacher being very disturbed that I was walking around with the, sock it to me, sock it to me, sock it to me tie on.  But, see, and so in junior high school, it was all about fashion for me.  And oh, highlight and so--
Speaker 1: And did you expect that you were going to be a fashion--
Speaker 2: I thought, you know, I believed the hype for a minute that I'd be a fashion model 'cause I was skinny and tall.  And I'd been working since I was fourteen.  And every single dime I earned went to buying the latest, whatever the style was.  And so, I mean, but fashion was so important to me that even when--I think one of the earlier jobs I had, I worked at Roy Rogers.  And, as you know, you have to wear the corny cowboy get-up, and I remember going, and, and the Roy Rogers was right near my school.  Oh god, I was like, okay, they're going to see me in here.  And I, but I tried to be stylish with my Roy Rogers costume as well.  But, at the same time, my attitude has always been, if you're going to do it, do it.  So, I would always win Employee of the Month, which worked well because that meant a cash bonus--I think it was like fifty dollars, you would get.  I would win it all--every month, and that would go to clothes, of course.  But while I was doing my job, and I'd still be, and this is how I feel, you're going to do it, do it, so I can remember being a cashier at Roy Rogers, and I would be very proud.  I'd stand up and I'd say, "Howdy, partner, whatcha gonna have today?"  And they'd tell me, and I'd say, "You're going to have that here, or on the range?"  And I was totally in that mode.  And they, you know, my bosses loved it.  My friends would laugh.  I'm like, look, I, I work at Roy Rogers.  That's what I do, and that's what I'm going to do.
Story_ID: 571630
Speaker 1: Did you have any particular teachers who influenced you in the junior high level?
Speaker 2: I think in junior high school [Rabaut Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], I can't think of any particular teacher who influenced me or inspired me.  At that point, it was all about peers and, you know, I had my, my girls.  And, you know, it was all about, you know, what we thought of each other, not what the teacher thought of us.
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Wilson High School [Woodrow Wilson High School] in Washington, D.C., and it was not my assigned high school.  So, I think I went through high school always nervous if they were going to put me out or not.  And that was one of my motivations also for doing well unless I get--but as long as I do well, they're not going to put me out.
Speaker 1: So, did you choose Wilson?
Speaker 2: I absolutely chose Wilson.  I was supposed to go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how and why?
Speaker 2: I was supposed to go to Roosevelt High School [Theodore Roosevelt Senior High School, Washington, D.C.].  That was my zone school.  That's the school that I could walk to.  But I thought that the kids at Roosevelt were way too tough for me, that they were just way too--I was kind.  I was not a goody two-shoes, but, yeah, I wanted, I, I, I don't know anything about smoking reefer in the bathroom.  And that was where, I was scared to death.  I, I believe the ads that were playing on television about this is your egg on drug, this is your brain on drugs, with the egg, and the whole thing.  That stuff scared--and it was a big drug culture back then, and, you know, I was very, very afraid of that.  And if somebody smoked reefer to me, that was like they shot heroin.  That's how extreme I was about it.  And, you know, Roosevelt had a reputation, and I was like, "I cannot go there."  And I think my parents [Joann Lemons Greenwood and Carl Greenwood] would have been fine with me going there 'cause I'd gone to all the other area schools.  I was like, "I cannot go there," right?  So, I was like, you know, and I heard that Wilson was the best school in the city, but, again, you didn't test in.  You had to live in, in the zip code.  And Wilson was up near Chevy Chase, Maryland, which is probably the, one of the most affluent neighborhoods in D.C.  And, you know, these kids were money--this is where the diplomats would send their kids.  And I was like, "That's where I want to go."  And I had to figure out how do I get to go there.  And so, we had to look at what zip codes.  Well, some--a, a man that was a friend of my moth- my [maternal] grandmother's [Virginia Lemons], who now, I guess, is probably a boyfriend.  It is, you know, everybody think, you don't know what's going on, you know.  I was like, who was that man?  But now, as I think that, that was a boyfriend, and he lived in the zip code to go to Wilson.  And like all the black kids who went to Wilson because it's a very integrated school, and knowing they had their zip code, right?  All the black kids lived on, in that zip code on what they used to call, what they, it was--they called black, oh, the Gold Coast [Washington, D.C.], the black Gold Coast.  This is like 16th Street, you know, and all the black kids lived there that went to Wilson.  So, this guy that my grandmother knew, and maybe dated, lived on the black Gold Coast.  So, we used his address as my address, and that's how I got to go to Wilson.  And it was, it was, it was good for me to go to Wilson.  I loved it there, and I came into my own at Wilson.
Story_ID: 571631
Speaker 1: How so?  What did you love about Wilson [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: You know, I loved about Wilson 'cause it was challenging.  I met different kinds of people.  It was my first exposure really to people outside the race, even though I will say at Wilson, even though you had--it was diverse.  It was still very segregated, so you definitely had, you know, the section of the schoolyard where the white kids hung out, and the section where the black kids hung out.  So all of my friends were the black, the cool black kids, not just the black kids, but the cool black kids.  That's who I hung out with, so even though the other people were there, like I don't know who they were.  I, I still don't know who they were.
Speaker 1: And D.C. [Washington, D.C.], as a whole, as you were growing up, was quite segregated, would you say?
Speaker 2: It was, yeah.  D.C. was called Chocolate City, so it was very black.  So, my whole exposure was extremely black.  I went to black schools.  I lived in a black neighborhood.  I went to a black church [Petworth United Methodist Church, Washington, D.C.].  It was black, black, black.  And then, I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And when I got to Howard University, and people started talking about racism, and how black people were treated, I was like, "What, what's the problem?  I never had any of that happen."  I mean, I really was oblivious to any of that.  My world was so insular.  I, I didn't know what they were talking about, really.
Speaker 1: And it didn't affect you totally at Wilson because you--so they had your space (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were just segregated.  I--those kids were there, but you know, nobody paid attention to each other.  The groups didn't really cross, you know, and that was it.  And it wasn't until I came--when I came to New York [New York] after grad- and then I'm at Howard, right--all black.  Then I come to New York, and I work in the fashion, journalism world.  And now, I started realizing what, you know, that I just didn't have any sense of another larger culture--did no sense at all.  I'm working with, you know, the Schwartzes and the Steiners, and the, this, that, and the other, and somebody goes, and, "She's so Jewish."  I'm like, "What do you, what's Jewish?"  I mean, literally, I'm like, what do you mean?  "Rachel is Jewish."  I said, "Rachel is Jewish.  How do you know?  How can you tell?"  And them looking at me, like I'm crazy.  "Don't you see that hair?  Don't you see that nose?  Don't you see--?"  I'm like, "Okay, I have to be honest with you all."  And I would, these are my white co-workers.  I said, "I have to be honest with you.  All of y'all are just white.  I, I, I don't know any different--you're just white, from where I come from.  I don't know this Jewish thing or--," this, that, but, obviously, in the Garment District [New York, New York], Jewish being Jewish was a, you know, it's a reality and the significance, you know.  So, I had to learn a lot when I came to New York, and entered the real world, if, if you will.  And I think what got me through it early on is I always found myself in very foreign environments, you know, whereas before, I'm always in my, in my, in my lane, so to speak.  And I come to New York, and nobody looks like me.  You know, there's nobody young, there's nobody black, there's nobody female, and there's me, you know.  And I can remember early on, kind of feeling like, wow, wow, you know, ooh, I felt uncomfortable.  I realized I was at a dinner, and I never said one word, you know, I just felt like I didn't fit in.  It's like, where do I enter this picture, and it just feel like, oh, you know.  And, finally, I decided, okay, you know what?  You enter where you are, and once I came to that reality, and I could sit a table with folks who had very different experiences than I do, and would share those experiences, and have those commonalities.  I would reveal that it wasn't my experience.  I didn't have that in common, but, hey, guess what--did y'all like gospel music?  And I could go and tell them a little bit about my life.  And then, I would find they're receptive to that.  They--you're interesting to them.  They don't know as much as I don't know, so we can learn together.  And once I could adopt that mindset, I navigated any, any space that I went into with ease.
Story_ID: 571632
Speaker 1: You said you came into your own at Wilson [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.].  What kind of activities were you participating in?  Where was your academic focus?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean at Wilson, I, I was completely focused on academics, but I, but I was also focused on being cool and hip and down.  And I think I came into my own, because I finessed that.  I was able to do both.  And as I talked to my daughter [Glynn Pogue], who's now, you know, a junior in high school, I go, "I don't want you to be corny.  I want you to be liked, but I want you to get your job done, too, you know, and you could do that."  You know, so that's who I was.  And I can remember, I graduated, and let me just think--I think I was salutatorian, you know, from high school.  And I was, you know, student council something, secretary or whatever, but, you know, out there, front center.  And I just, I remember people being shocked, and they would say, "Her?"  You know, just like, "She's a party girl--her?"  You know, and it was the same way in, in, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], in college, you know.  People were like, "Huh?"  You know, "She graduated what--summa cum laude--huh?"  You know, because I would live in both worlds, you know.  So, I think that's when I recognized that, you know, you can, yeah, you can live in both worlds.  I think that happened for me in high school, and that's kind of where I try to stay right now.
Story_ID: 571633
Speaker 1: So, you know, in high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.], part of being cool was, you know, we had to dress a certain way, and we partied.  And we danced, and I was, I was a big dancer.  I could do every new dance that came out.  I loved music, but I have to be honest with you.  I was also always, always thrifty, if you will.  So, whatever I--the music I heard, it was on the radio.  I had friends who spent all their money on records.  I didn't understand that.  I'm going, just turn the radio on.  So, I also found the radio and music distracting.  I still do.  I get real focused on something, so if I am writing or doing homework or what have you, if the music is--I can't do it with music, 'cause now I'm singing, and I can't, yeah, I can't do both.  I'm, I'm focused on the words of the song and all that, so, no, the, the music has to turn off, so I never spent money on records.  I, I just thought that was, didn't make any sense when you can hear for free on the radio.  I can remember, in my entire life, I've bought two records.  I guess I'm telling my age--calling them records.  But the first record I ever purchased, and this is crazy, was Neil Sedaka, 'Breakin' Up Is Hard To Do.'  I don't know where I heard it.  I just love the song, and I went and bought the record 'cause that wasn't one they were going to play on the radio stations that I listen to.  We were very much into go go.  Go go was what Chuck Brown and the Soul Searchers were all about, and anybody who wanted to be Chuck Brown was doing go go.  And that's what we listened to at the clubs.  And, you know, Chuck Brown and those bands, during that time, would start with a beat, and that beat would play for about an hour.  And then, he'd make up words that go along.  So, you know, I remember, like in the club, somebody had lost their keys, and they'd come up and whisper to him, "Chuck, can you announce that somebody lost their keys?"  That became a song that ran for least forty-five minutes, "Somebody lost their keys, y'all; somebody lost their keys.  Somebody lost their keys, y'all; somebody lost their keys.  You're going go back home and (unclear)," and it turns into a whole thing.  And we're dancing all night to the fact that somebody has lost their keys (laughter).
Speaker 2: And where are you?  Are you at Chocolate City, I mean--
Speaker 1: We're at the, we're, we're in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at the Maverick Room.  We're at--the Maverick Room was a big place, and then different clubs that came around, but, yeah, we were, we were out.
Speaker 2: Just for the pleasure of someone who was in the same scene--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --they, they want to hear about the Maverick club.  And in your household, you mentioned gospel was important to you.  Is that something you listened to at home?
Speaker 1: Gospel was the only thing that I thought I could really sing.  So I, I don't know why I thought I could sing gospel even, but no, music didn't really play much in our house.  We were real TV people.  We watched a lot--the TV was--first thing you come home, you turn TV on.  We were definitely the TV generation.  But we went to church [Petworth United Methodist Church, Washington, D.C.] on Sundays, and we always sang in the choir.  And I loved gospel music, and pretended like I could sing it, you know.  So, that's, that's where the gospel comes from.
Story_ID: 571634
Speaker 1: So while you're in high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.], have you decided that you want to go into publishing?  Has anyone told you yet that that's going to be a more powerful position than just being a newscaster?  What is your vision at that point about what your career is going to be?
Speaker 2: In high school, I think I'm going to be a broadcast journalist and read the news.  And maybe on the side, you know, do something with fashion.  I started to get a little bit disenchanted with fashion because I got a job when I was in high school working at a retail store in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.], a very exclusive one.  And I thought I was going to just--I thought, oh, I had scored big time 'cause I'm, I love, love fashion, and Georgetown shop, and I'm going to be there.  I'm going to be a salesperson.  And that job lasted all of two days when the owner and I mutually decided that it wasn't going to work.  And that was because they had very few customers coming through, but when the customers came in, they spent big, and the price tags were high.  So it was a very selective clientele.  I was bored to tears, so you're standing around waiting for the customer to come in.  And she would say, "Well, you know what, practice learning the inventory, you know, put together some outfits, so that when the customer comes in, you can show them what goes with what."  And I thought that was the silliest thing in the world.  I thought like, those Garanimals, like I don't need to practice this.  I'd rather be more spontaneous.  If she tries on this skirt, I could quickly find the right blouse.  And, and then there, you know, there were, there were mundane chores like, you know, picking lint off the clothes.  And I was like, this is ridiculous, so it was not exciting to me at all.  And so, I was leaning more towards the broadcast journalism piece.  And, and everybody--I mean, I think my parents [Joann Lemons Greenwood and Carl Greenwood] were just--and my grandmother [Virginia Lemons], my grandmother, the one who's going to turn a hundred, she, too, they had, they were all invested in seeing me on television.  My grandmother said, "Okay, if that child's going to be on TV, she going to need some braces."  And, you know, the idea of braces was just kind of like a luxury, like how much does that cost kind of thing.  And I remember my grandmother scraped and scraped and scraped.  She says, okay, we're going to the dentist.  That girl is going to get her braces.  And so, I got braces in high school.  I went to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] wearing braces.  I wore them--I think I almost graduated college wearing braces.  And, you know, that was because I was going to be on the news.
Story_ID: 571635
Speaker 1: How did you choose Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I didn't choose Howard, but I'm glad I ended up there.  Howard was like, going from junior high school to high school for me.  It was right down the street (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Across the street.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, it was the last place I envisioned myself going.  Now, remember, I am the journalist, and I am the fashion diva, which means I need to be in New York [New York].  I always wanted to be in New York, and I wanted to be at Columbia University [New York, New York], and it was the only school I applied to.  It has the best journalism program.  I'd be in New York.  I was going to go, and I was going to learn to be a fashion editor, you know.  If I wasn't going to do broadcast, that's what I was going to do.  And got accepted to Columbia.  My folks said, "Well, we just don't have enough money to send you there."  Got a little partial scholarship.  You're going to halfway go to Columbia, or you're going to go to Columbia, or you're not going to Columbia at all.  So, Columbia didn't happen.  And it was at the last minute when it didn't happen.  It was like, "Well, where, where can you go?  Well, you might as well go to Howard."  And it wasn't even a big deal.  It was like, you could go to Howard.  It was just like, well, guess I got to go to Howard, you know.  It was like, I guess I got to go to the little community school, you know.  I didn't have the respect for Howard.  I didn't even really know of Howard's legacy, and I just felt like it was just that, that school down the street, you know.
Speaker 1: And no one in your family, it sounds like, had been to Howard or--
Speaker 2: Nobody in my family had been to college.  So, for them, it was like any school.  Go wherever.  You're going to school.  As long as you go to college, you know, so, no, it's not that they knew Howard's legacy, and, you know, were like, oh, yes, we're going to have a Howard grad in our family.  It wasn't that at all.  It was like, you're, you're going to somebody's college, and why don't you go on down there, and see if you can get in?  And I, I thought like I--it, it probably was like, getting admitted to Howard a couple of weeks before classes started kind of thing.  And this, the, the, the, the pitiful part of it was I should have been able to get a full scholarship to go to Howard, but because I was last minute signing, signing up for Howard, they gave me no money.  But that was okay.  I had won a lot of scholarships coming out of high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.].  I'd won a scholarship from the Chevy Chase Woman's Club [Woman's Club of Chevy Chase, Maryland].  And one of my highlights was because Nina Hyde, she was the fashion editor at The Washington Post, just revered in the fashion world, and she wrote for The Washington Post, and she was in the Chevy Chase Woman's Club.  And, again, these were women--we didn't know anything about this life, you know.  And I remember they had a tea to present me with their scholarship, and my mom [Joann Lemons Greenwood] and I were going.  And I was so uptight about what we're going to wear.  "Ma, whatcha you going to wear," you know, we're going--these ladies, these ladies from Chevy Chase [Maryland], you know, it's a tea.  Nina Hyde is going to be there.  This was like, you know, I probably didn't sleep for three days worrying about that.  But, you know, I got that scholarship and, and several other scholarships.  And it wasn't expensive to go to Howard at that time and, and we made it through.  And after I got to Howard, and got through the first year, and did well academically, and then got involved in, in the campus life.  I became student council secretary.  I became an editor for The Hilltop, the newspaper there.  And all these things came with money.  They gave you a stipend if you were a magazine editor for the, for The Hilltop.  They gave you a stipend if you were in student government.  I got the other scholar- I got, I got a full scholarship my sophomore year, the second time.  I had so much money as a college student that it wasn't funny.  I mean, tons of money.  I remember buying my parents a dining room set for Christmas.  I was so excited.  I stored in my neighbor's garage.  And that night when they went to sleep, Christmas Eve, we set the whole thing up, and they came downstairs the next morning.  They had a whole dining room set.  I was nineteen.  They were like, what, you know.  So, and, and then, Howard just became amazing to me.
Story_ID: 571636
Speaker 1: It was tough the first year, because I felt like I was straddling two lives.  I still had my home girls from the block, but yet I was a college student at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and I really couldn't embrace either fully.
Speaker 2: So, none of your home girls went to Howard with you?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: There was no Wilson [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.]--what about the people from Wilson?  Did anybody sort of--Howard was a whole new world?
Speaker 1: My friends, no.  My friends in our little circle, while the little fashionistas--it was me, Kim Carter, and Jackie Contee [Jacqueline Contee].  They are still my dear friends to this day.  We were all set on coming to New York [New York], okay.  There were no other options for us.  Kim ended up going to, like Strea [ph.], like a little business thing, learning stenography.  And I don't know what Jackie did immediately.  We all ended up in New York as roommates, but it took time.  By the time I came to New York was four years later after graduating from Howard.  They came the same time, but they were coming to go to enter college at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], right.  So we came--I was already out of college, coming to work at Fairchild Publications [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media].  And they were coming to go to school for fashion, so we were all still on that track, you know, how do we make this fashion thing happen for us?  Yeah, I'm sorry, I can't remember where we were.
Speaker 2: You're fine.  We were--you were saying Howard was a new world, and so, at the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah--
Speaker 2: --initial stages, you were straddling.
Speaker 1: --yeah.  So, my good friend, right, my good friends were not at Howard.  And so, you know, there I was, and all these people from all over the place, and they're excited about being there.  I'm going reluctantly.  I couldn't wait to leave campus and come home, and be on the block, you know, so I wasn't even--it's--I couldn't really fully embrace how initially.  And then, my first, like good friend that I met at Howard, was Benilde Little.  She is a well-known author, and I met her.  We didn't like each other initially.  We sized each other up because she thought she was all that.  She thought I thought I was all that.  And, of course, we're looking at who got on what, and the whole kind of thing.  And then, finally, you know, I don't know how we started talking.  And we were like, "Okay, she's cool, you know, she's cool."  So now, I got Benilde Little as a friend, and then, I had Lynne Scott.  Lynne Scott was from Hampton, Virginia, and very studious.  I liked Lynne for a different reason.  Benilde was like, you know, all that, you know, the veneer, and smart, though, but definitely, the veneer.  And, and Lynne was just like, she was the one--it's like, if somebody had a higher grade than me, I'd look over--it was Lynne Scott, you know.  And if somebody got, you know, the only person who got an A, I looked over, it was Lynne Scott.  So, Lynne and I became more competitive academically.  And Benilde and I were competitive, kind of fashion-wise, but somehow we all came together.  And then, we said, we're going--it then became, we became what we called Three the Hard Way.  So, it's like we were unstoppable, undeniable, in any respect.  So, we were stylish, and we were smart, and we were leaders, and we could do it all.  And so, we were going to run the newspaper [The Hilltop], we're going to run the student council, and we did.  We all had offices in student government.  We all had editorships on the newspaper.  And that's kind of how we went through college to be the hard way.  And nobody was going to pledge a sorority.  We were going to be Me Phi Me and we were going to be our own women, and we had this whole attitude about ourselves.  And then, of course, Lynne pledged AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] graduate chapter, and so we had to give her a hard time about that (laughter).
Story_ID: 571637
Speaker 1: So you're running Three the Hard Way.  You're running Howard's University [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus.  As we all know, there is no party like an HU party.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And how do you go from Howard to Fairchild?  How do you make that transition, and how do you choose Fairchild Publications [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media] as where you're going to make your first move?
Speaker 2: When I first left Howard, I was looking for jobs, you know, the summer before graduation.  I actually got offered a job as Nina Hyde's assistant and, for me, this was like it.  I, I--this was it.  This was, you know, I always read The Washington Post.  She was the fashion editor.  She was the guru, and I was going to be her assistant and I was thrilled.  I mean, that was it.  And I told her--we had gone for lunch--I'll never forget right there, like the National Press Club building [National Press Building, Washington, D.C.], a fancy restaurant, and I told her that I'd also been offered a, a program.  This was, it was a minority training program at Fairchild Publications.  And she said, "Oh, that's where I got my start."  She goes, "That's where everybody in the industry gets their start."  She goes, "I tell you want, you really need to go to New York [New York] and work at Fairchild Publications.  As much as I'd love to have you as my assistant, that's what you need to do."  And I was really torn because I mean, it was The Washington Post, I mean, it still was The Washington Post newspaper where it says, you know, having been trained as a journalist at Howard University, that also was the creme de la creme.  And I could be at home, and all that stuff was going through my head.  But I took her advice, and I took the job at Fairchild Publications.  Now, I hadn't heard of (air quotes) Fairchild Publications.  They came, and they were at a communications job fair at Howard University.  They had a recruiter there.  And I went, and sat at their booth, and I was amazed because they had all of these publications devoted just to fashion.  They had one for shoes.  They had one for home fashions, one for sports fashions, one for golf fashions, one for men's fashions, one for ladies' fashions.  And I, I never even heard of that before.  I had never even really been exposed to trade publications.  I only knew the magazines that I could find on the newsstand.  So, when I started to understand that, well, these were the publications that those publications look at because these are the publications that document the business of the industry, and what's going to happen before it happens.  This is the publication that those stores read to find out what they're going to put in the stores before we, as consumers, go and shop.  So, it was like, oh, wow, so then I became very impressed with that, and realized that Nina Hyde was right, that I would actually learn this industry, be in New York City, and be at Fairchild, and what a great opportunity.  At the same time, I was being offered a minority training program and, you know, that wasn't good for my little ego at that time.  It's like, "I just graduated Howard University, top of my class.  My degree is in journalism; my minor is in fashion, and you want me to be a minority trainee?  I know what I need to know," you know.  So, I'm--all of this is going through my head, but I'm like, okay, suppress, suppress that, and go ahead and take advantage of this opportunity.  The training program was supposed to last for one year.  My first assignments were to write obituaries about people who died in the fashion industry.  Of course, you know, I was none too thrilled, but I did what I had to do.  I tried to add a little flair to that, you know.  I think I was a very sensitive interviewer because I understood that I was talking to people who had just experienced a loss.  And, you know, so I really, really did my best as a cub reporter covering the obituary beat. But then, I was ready for something bigger than that, you know.  And so, I decided, you know what, I'm going to write an article on my own time, and I'll turn it in to them.  I'll tell them if they don't like it, fine, give it back, I'm not offended, but I'm going to show them what I can really do.  And so, I decided to write an article on the importance of the black consumer to the fashion industry, and it was an article that I thought I was uniquely qualified to write.  I had lived this life all my life, fashion and spending my money up on it.  And, and why, and why was that?  What's the psychology behind why we, as black people, like to look good?  Why, why is that so important?  You find the richest, wealthiest white people wear the bummiest clothes, and the poorest black people wear the most expensive clothes.  What was that about, you know?  And how were we impacting what was actually being shown on the runway?  How is it that it's the mailroom guys, the messengers on bikes that really kind of became the inspiration for the high fashion look that was on the runways?  And so that--all of that I wanted to delve into.  And so, I started working on this story, and when I finished it, I sure enough turned it into my editors and said, "Listen, this is something I was working on.  If you like it, great, use it; if not, give it back.  I won't be offended, but I would like your feedback 'cause I want to grow, and I want to learn, and I want to do--," now, and I, and the whole thing.  And they looked at the article, they loved it, they ran it.  It ran--it won an award for the newspaper.  And three months into my year-long, minority training program, I was taken off, and made associate fashion editor.
Story_ID: 571638
Speaker 1: I was working at Daily News Record, which is the daily trade publication for men's fashions.  And my first assignment as a associate fashion editor was to cover men's underwear, socks, and accessories.  So, that wasn't sexy either, but at the same time, again, how do you kind of bring to it something that it hadn't been before?  And I remember doing fashion layouts where there'd be a whole story.  I remember doing a story on accessories.  It was like, it was a mystery, some kind of a crime had been committed--a theft that happened.  And I remember putting all the jewels in the safe, and I remember the, the guy that's the suspect was at a party, and he worked his way in 'cause he looked so sharp, and he was wearing this.  And I would describe the clothes that the model had on.  This is my way of talking about the new hat, and the new cuff links, and the belt and the whole kind of thing, and he made off with that, too.  And he, and he packed everything up and stashed in a so and so piece of luggage.  And I can get into that, in that company's new product for the luggage line.  So, I had so much fun with it, always looking at, you know, how do you individualize it, put your stamp on it, make it something that has never been before, but still make it make sense, you know.  That's how I would challenge myself constantly with the stories that I developed.  And, and this kind of progressed from there.
Story_ID: 571639
Speaker 1: Then, I had my first opportunity to have my own business within a business, so I was an intrapreneur before I was an entrepreneur because I helped develop a new magazine for Fairchild Publications [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media] for the children's fashion industry called Children's Business.
Speaker 2: Now, how did you identify that children's market, and how did you sell it to your higher-ups to make them aware that clearly, they understand trade magazine?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You know, the idea of doing a magazine for the children's fashion industry wasn't my idea.  The business concept, the validity of the concept came from a publisher at Fairchild, who had been over the sports publication, and she was trying to have a baby.  And all her friends were having babies, so she was very plugged into that.  And she goes, "Wait a second, something's happening here.  There's a mini-baby boom.  Every single major designer is now introducing a children's designer line."  And those are designed for Baby Boomers themselves, so you had people like Tommy Hilfiger and Calvin Klein.  They were all having kids--Ralph Lauren--so they were creating little miniature versions of themselves through the wardrobes.  And so, you know, she was clearly tapped into what was happening, so it was her, her concept, Sarah Raphael [ph.]--I think was her name--Sarah.  And it was her idea to, to do Children's Business, but she was kind of the business marketing brain.  She needed the creative talent, and so, she tapped me.  Really, you don't know who's ever watching you 'cause I didn't really know her very well at all.  Now we were in the ladies' room one day, and she said, "What do you think about blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, you know, I've been watching what you do.  What do you think about blah, blah, blah, blah?  I think it could be great.  We could do," da, da, da, da.  So, we started talking, so we became a team.  And I started developing the idea like a pilot, like what this magazine could look like, what it could be.  And, and then, the company said, "Oh, okay, this is a go.  We're going to go with this."  And I remember when they decided that.  I assumed that I just would be the editor.  I'd done this mockup and whatever.  And then, they decided they were going to hire John, John Birmingham.  And John Birmingham had been an editor of mine at Daily News Record, a features editor, a wonderful man, smart, great editor.  And it was only because they were hiring John that I was okay for taking the number two position.  In fact, I thought this was the best way to do this 'cause I'd never been the editor of anything.  I never ran the staff or any of that.  And John had, and he knew how to do it well, and he was the kind of person who I knew was generous with his knowledge.  And I knew that working under him in this number two capacity, I would learn everything I needed to learn to be absolutely ready when the opportunity became mine.  And so that's what happened.  I became the managing editor for Children's Business.  John was the editor-in-chief.  We worked tirelessly on getting the magazine off the ground.  It was successful from the start.  And when John decided to move on, I became editor-in-chief of Children's Business.  And I had really felt, like I had given birth to this product, and I was very, very proud of it.  And even when I was at Fairchild and doing Children's Business, I still hadn't had a child of my own.  And there were learning curves there because it wasn't just children's fashion, which I could handle, but now it became bassinets, crib, crate, crib, cribs, and cradles.  And I'm like what, you know, and prams, and strollers, and umbrella strollers, and I was like (shakes head), carriages, and what is all that?  I had no clue.
Story_ID: 571640
Speaker 1: And are you also considering products for, you know, consume- like, not like Consumer Reports, but is it essentially you're trying to provide as much information about the variety or the quality?
Speaker 2: Again, we're talking about the products.  And we were covering children's apparel, their toys, their footwear, their entertainment, and their furnishings.  So, across the board, and that was new for, for the publications at Fairchild [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media] because they were very niche-oriented, and we were trying to do across the board umbrella publication for all things children's.  And what we did not do any kind of quality test or anything like that to kind of put our stamp on the item because, again, it was for the retailers (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Movements in the industry.
Speaker 2: It was, yeah, it was the retailers who were reading our publications, and not the parents themselves.  But because but, but the difference was about Children's Business is that we made Children's Business look like a consumer magazine.  And then, we found that we had people, who were subscribing, who were not in the industry at all.  And that led to the idea of doing a spinoff, children's fashion magazine on the newsstand for customers.  So that became our next project because the trade publication was so slick that it, it, the parents would read it and not know that they were reading a, a business publication.
Speaker 1: And did you at all influence the look at the more traditional trade publications with your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with your new slick look at--
Speaker 2: --we totally broke the mold, in terms of what we did with Children's Business as a trade publication.  Again, nothing about it spoke to being a trade publication.  The fact that we were a magazine versus a newspaper helped, you know.  We came out monthly and not daily, like Women's Wear Daily and Daily News Record.  And we want better quality stock paper and we were in four-color and, you know, I had a column.  I had my monthly editor's column, so everything that I knew from consumer publications, I put into a trade publication, still being mindful of who my end reader was, and the business owner who either made or sold children's products and apparel.
Speaker 1: And so that probably was a more comfortable atmosphere.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I loved it and, and it, you know, it, it got me into some other categories outside of just garments, you know.  I loved learning about home furnishings because it was, even though it's for the nursery, it still was, you know, an entree into that market in that world.  And so, it was great, and I, at the same time, what I was able to do, and it wasn't intentional, but there were, there were several--not several, but a few other minority reporters at different publications throughout Fairchild who, quite honestly, were kind of like, kind of stuck, you know, really talented, hadn't been given the opportunity to move to the next level within the company.  And, quite honestly, when I became the editor-in-chief, I was like, I hand-picked those people.  I said, "This person has been passed over.  This person is bright.  This person had more to offer than what they do."  And I actually had almost an all-black staff, and it wasn't an intentional thing, but that's what it was.  And, you know, I think nobody was going to come to me and say, "What are you doing?"  How are they going to say that because we put out a great product?  But, you know, everybody on my staff, they because my best friends--Lynda Johnson and Tracy Mitchell [Tracy Mitchell-Brown], they became my right, and my left hand, and we ran Children's Business--three black women.  So, that was all so very, very significant.
Story_ID: 571641
Speaker 1: How long were you at Fairchild Publications [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media]--about fifteen years?
Speaker 2: Geez, I guess I was at Fairchild--I came there straight after college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and I finished college in 1981.  And I worked at Fairchild up until the time that I went to Essence magazine and that, let me see, I'm so bad with dates--maybe 1995?
Speaker 1: Which is when you make the shift to Essence?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now--
Speaker 2: So, I was there a long time.  I had many jobs while I was at Essence--at Fairchild Publication.  They were extremely supportive of me, both professionally and personally.  I would, I was on many different councils.  Fairchild Publications ended up being acquired by several different companies.  It became a Cap Cities/ABC publication [Capital Cities/ABC Video Publishing, Inc.], which then became a Disney [The Disney Publishing Group; Disney Publishing Worldwide] publication.  So, we all these, you know, different bigger companies gobbling it up.  And every time that happened, I was able to have a role in the larger company.  I served on a committee--what did they call that?  The diversity committee, I think.  And, and our goal was to really be a check and balance system for the larger corporation at that time, Cap Cities/ABC, to make sure that at least black folks were in the pipeline, or minorities were in the pipeline for upper management.  And, you know, and, and to really question executives who had hiring power to say, what effort did you make to identify a person of color for this job?  How many people did you interview, and how many were black, or, or Asian, or, or Hispanic?  You know, and, and, and the company was willing to attach that to that executive's paycheck, you know, when it came bonus time.  So, it's like, don't tell us you couldn't find, go look. Where did you look?  Did you go to the Howard University communications college fair, you know?  And, okay, well, you had six minority trainees for a year, and now a year later, only one is still there.  What happened in that year that you can't retain?  You know, these were the questions that we were, we were there to ask.  And we asked the difficult questions, and we tried to work with them across the board to identify other talented people that could come into it, you know.  And one of the things that we put together at Fairchild while I was there, I, I encouraged them to put together like, a mentorship program.  So, we took every African American reporter at whatever level they were at, and we paired them with a senior executive, and that was going to be their mentor.  We had to, you know, make that happen.  It wasn't a question of the, the reporter going up and knocking on somebody's door.  That's difficult, that's hard to do.  And we paired them and say, you know, this is the person, we'd say, and we gave guidelines.  You are to meet with them once a month.  You are to, you know, and, and it was great.  Even at Fairchild with all of my growth, I never really knew--I was like, wow, somebody believes in me here, and I, I started trying to identify, like who is that?  Who is that saying, you need to talk to her, you know, 'cause I didn't really have an identified mentor, but once we did the buddy system, I did become a mentee of a woman named Susan Hasson, and she was on the business side, and just bright, bright, bright, and moving up quickly.  And, you know, some people thought she was really tough, but we had such an amazing rapport, and she held up her the end of the bargain.  And we'd go out too much, and we talked or whatever, and she helped me strategize.  You ought to think about this.  And I haven't talked to her in a really long time, but she was quite an incredible woman.  I think that she understood my place in a foreign place because she had a daughter who was deaf, and I think just feeling like the outsider, and how do you find your way was something that she was sensitive to.
Story_ID: 571642
Speaker 1: Did you start the Go On Girl! Book Club at Fairchild [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, let's talk about that a little bit.  That started very small with just you and a couple of your friends?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So, as I was saying, when I became editor at Children's Business, I hired these amazing black women who worked in other areas of the company, but hadn't really gotten the light that they deserved.  And that was Lynda Johnson and Tracy Mitchell [Tracy Mitchell-Brown], so they became on my staff.  And we would oftentimes have lunch together, lunch as we worked 'cause, you know, we, we--it was like a staff of five.  We worked really hard and over lunch, they would occasionally start talking about a book.  And it--or books they were reading, and it turned out that one time the two of them were reading the same book, unbeknownst to each other, so they're going back and forth, wasn't is that great?  Did you get to the part?  And they're having this whole discussion.  I'm sitting there looking left out.  And I realized that I really wasn't reading for pleasure, even though it was something I enjoyed doing.  I didn't make the time to do it, because, and I, I told them, I'm always reading your copy.  I'm reading your--edit, edit your copy.  I don't have time to sit around and read, and but they were so into this book.  And I was so piqued by it.  And I say, what is this book?  And I wrote it down, and the book was Steven Corbin's 'No Easy Place to Be.'  And it was--I, I just thought, wow, that sounds great, and I went and bought the book.  And I tried to read it fast, so I could catch up, and start the conversations with them over lunch.  And so, as we did that, we had so much fun around this.  We said, you know what, why don't we form a book club?  And so, it was like, okay, well, you bring three people, I'll bring three people, you bring three people.  Tracy, we'll have it at your house and what, what date was good?  And how about next Saturday, whatever, so started very loosely, very informally.  We each invited a couple of friends.  We went to Tracy's house.  She made some banana bread and some tea.  And we started talking about what, how we're going to make this book club, and what we're going to do, and what kind of books do we want to read.  And, so, very loosely, we said that we wanted to read books by and about African Americans.  We said we wanted to read broadly, so we didn't want it to be genre specific.  We wanted to read science fiction.  We wanted to read autobiographies.  We wanted to read fiction, non-fiction--just across the board.  And so, we started doing that.  And then, as the women in the group started to become mobile and move to different cities, they missed the sisterhood.  And that's when it really became, sometimes it was more about what, what we're eating, and what we're talking about, after we talked about the books.  That was more significant than talking about the book, so it was just our time.  That's what it was really about.  It was like, our time.  And so, as folks started to move around, they missed that.  And so, they would want to organize something similar to it where they were.  And she still wanted to be a Go On Girl!, so it was like, okay, so you're going to be the Go On Girl! D.C. chapter [Washington, D.C.], which became our second chapter, which I have roots in, too.  So, we say, oh, my sister-in-law wants to join, blah, blah, blah, so we put together a group over there.  And this thing just started snowballing.  So, we had chapters all across the country, like thirty-two, thirty-two chapters.  And we became the nation's largest group of African American readers--book clubs.  And we got a lot publicity because this is pre-Oprah's Book Club, and this is really at the height of kind of, you know, that this black book boom after [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillan's success with, with her, with her book, 'Waiting to Exhale,' and so everything has kind of snowballed.
Speaker 1: So, with that organization, is it organic for you to write a guide, to lead others perhaps, to expand from that thirty-two?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, as we started to become this, this entity, and we felt like, we knew how to do it, and everybody kind of wanted to start forming book clubs, it became a very, a very fashionable, just very popular to do.  We got approached as the founders--Tracy, Lynda and I--to, to write a guide for other groups that wanted to form.  And so, we got approached by an agent, who had already been approached by a publisher.  So, it just kind of came to us, and we already had the deal, and it's like okay, write down what you did, write down how you do it.  And so, the three of us then, we wrote our first book.  Each of us--neither of us had, none of us had ever published a book before and, you know, we were very strategic about who would do what parts.  And Tracy, who is probably the most driven reader, the real reader, she did the, the anthologies or the--she would pull out segments from different books by genre.  She did that.  And Lynda did most of the, the history kind of stuff of book clubs, and how they evolved and all of that.  And I did the kind of this is how you do it, set it up this way, how many people can be in it, rotate meetings, have a consistent meeting date, you know, the kind of nuts and bolts of, of making it work.  And we put this book together called the 'Go On Girl! Guide to Reading Groups' ['Go on Girl!: Book Club Guide for Reading Groups,'  Monique Greenwood, Tracy Mitchell-Brown and Lynda Johnson], and it did very well as a book cl-, as a book.  And so, we went from being book readers to book authors.
Story_ID: 571643
Speaker 1: Then, I wrote my second book, 'Having What Matters: The Black Woman's Guide to Creating the Life You Really Want' [Monique Greenwood].  And that, too, kind of just came to me.  At the time, I was editor-in-chief at Essence, and--was I editor, or maybe I was executive editor?  And the, the, the editor at the publishing house at the time wanted a book that would be a follow-up to Helen Gurley Brown, who was the former editor-in-chief of Cosmopolitan, had done a book called 'Having It All.'  And so, they wanted a 'Having It All' for black women, right?  So, they told me to read her book, kind of dissect that, and then recreate that, speaking to black women.  And, you know, I read the book and I went through it.  Now, remember, Helen Gurley Brown's book predated my book by like, twenty years.  And as I read it, I just thought, this is not where we are right now as a culture, like it's to me, it's just not about having it all.  It's about having what matters is about, having the option of choosing, but understanding that a choice has to be made because it's not really possible to have it all.  But if you have what matters, then you have a rich life.  And so, as I put together my book proposal, it definitely deviated from the model.  And when my agent took it back to the editor at the publishing house, and she was like, "Well, this isn't what I was talking about."  I said, "Well, that's what I believe, but women want to hear, this is where we are right now.  We are not into, you know, how many purses can you get in your collection?  How many men can you date?  And how, what can you do to get to the top?"  This is not it, you know, we're defining success in a totally different way.  It's a much more holistic way.  It talks about, you know, having peace of mind.  It talks about leaving the world a better place.  It talks about having financial security.  It talks about having a loving spouse.  It talks about having great girlfriends.  It talks about having great health, and great style, all of those things, you know.  And so, I was so devastated when my agent called me and said, "Well, you know what, she just felt like it wasn't what she asked for.  It's not what she's looking for."  And I was just devastated.  I said, "How could this be?"  And I said, "So we don't have a book deal?"  She goes, "We, we don't, but, you know, I'm going to take it around.  I really believe in it.  I'm going to shop it around to several other publishing houses.  I'm going to take you out because once they meet you, they'll see how passionate you are about what you're talking about, and we're going to sell this book."  And I was like, "Okay."  So that's what happened.  We went around.  We did the dog and pony show, whatever it's called.  And, and then, she put on an auction, and then it went up to bid.  And so it, they became as a bidding war--different publishing houses bidding to publish the book.  And we ended up getting an offer that was twice the money that the original publisher was willing to spend, and that would allow me to write the book that I knew black women wanted to read.  It was a book I knew they wanted to read 'cause it was a book I needed to read, you know.  And writing the book was life-changing for me and, and it proved to be life-changing for those who read it, so it worked out (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we know it was life-changing for you.
Story_ID: 571644
Speaker 1: But I've got to also shift, and ask you about your husband and where you met him.  So, maybe we can sort of bring those things together, so that when you ch- you make that--now it's Virginia [Greenwood's maternal grandmother, Virginia Lemons] who makes the reconstruction of her life, is it not?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, you know, when you have that Virginia moment, when you're writing 'Having What Matters' ['Having What Matters: The Black Woman's Guide to Creating the Life You Really Want,' Monique Greenwood] we want to know where Glenn Pogue fits in.
Speaker 2: Well, I was already married to Glenn--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when I wrote the book, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly.  But I'm saying, let's back up a bit and talk about how you met him and--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --how that developed--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --so, so that later, now that you're at Essence, and married and writing this book.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, okay.  So, I met Glenn Douglas Pogue twenty-one years ago.  And at the time that I met Glenn, I was pretty in love with a guy that was from Washington, D.C. that knew me back when, when I was, you know, that girl at, at Wilson High School [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.], who loved to dress and loved to party.  And, surprise, she also is smart.  And it was--you know, I was crazy about Steve, Steve Hill [Steven Hill].  You know, there's always that little flame from way back then.  And Steve and I became really good friends at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] because I had a perception of him that was opposite of who he is, and he had one of me that was quite different as well.  So, when we both saw each other on Howard's campus, we were both surprised and shocked because we had only seen each other in the clubs.  And Steve was studying architecture, and I was struggling in math.  And he was good at it, and he started to tutor me in math, and we became, like really good friends, just friends.  And then, I decided it should be more, and that was a disaster.  And so we went through college the last two years not even speaking 'cause it was just like we tried something that didn't work, and it shouldn't have tried--been tried.  And then, you know, fast forward maybe, I don't know, many years, and I run into Steve in California again, so, we say, we're going to try something again.  And so, he's coming to New York [New York] for my birthday.  We're only dating at that point maybe long distance for about three months, and he's going to come to New York for my birthday.  Well, now I'm reminded of why it didn't work with Steve the first time (laughter).  Steve doesn't show up for my birthday, and he doesn't call, and I'm devastated.  And my girlfriend, Kristie [ph.] is like, "C'mon," she--we worked together at Fairchild [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media], and she was like, "We're going to go out.  C'mon, come out with me tonight.  The Dow twins [Norman Dow and Harold Dow] are having a party at the Palladium [New York, New York].  Let's go after work tonight."  And I'm like, "I'm not really in the mood."  And I'm still holding out hope that Steve's going to show up like a week late.  And so, she convinces me to go with her to the Palladium.  And we go there, and I'm reluctant at first, but now, I'm having a good time.  I love to dance, so we're having a great time partying.  And this guy is like, circling me, and every time I look, I feel, I feel him there, but he's not saying anything.  I'm like, "Is this?"  You know, so finally, he asked me to dance.  So, I danced with Glenn, we're having a great time dancing.  His friend, Guy [ph.], who he's there with, comes and dances with us, so the three of us are dancing.  But they're like, vibing off of each other so, and they're dancing wild.  I mean, they're jumping up and down, and all that.  I'm in the middle going like this, and I'm thinking maybe I should just back out, and let y'all do your thing, you know.  And so, we're dancing and dancing, having a good time.  And then afterwards, he goes, he says something. "Can I talk to you for a minute?"  I said, "You can buy me a drink now that you've danced me to death."  Now, I don't drink.  I never have, so I ordered a Coke [Coca-Cola], and I'm talking to him.  We're having a good time.  I'm drinking my Coke, and I'm not paying attention, and I pick up somebody else's drink that's a real drink.  And I take my big gulp of what I think is Coke, and it's probably rum and Coke, and the next thing you know, I'm spraying all over him.  I'm like, "Oh my god," you know, and he's like, "Okay."  (Laughter) But we're having a good time together.  And then, Guy, his friend's girlfriend shows up unexpectedly, and I think Guy's not supposed to be there.  So they decide that Guy goes, "Look, man, I got to go."  He goes, "Man, I'm just, I'm just, you know, it's just, I'm just--" you know.  So he tells me he's got to go.  I said, "Look, I can drop you off."  We'd already determined and discovered that he lives around the corner from me.  I said, "I can drop you off."  So he goes back to his friend, Guy.  "You're--man, she's taking me home."  He's, uh--I'm like, "I had not said that at all.  I said I'll drop you home.  You live around the corner."  So he stays longer.  We're having a great time.  And then we leave, Kristie, my friend, and Glenn.  And we're coming across the Manhattan Bridge back to Brooklyn [New York] in my car.  And he goes, "Oh my god."  I go, "What?"  He goes, "I left my keys in my man's car," and he was totally lost.  He goes like, "No, because--" and he goes through this whole story.  "My pants were too tight and they were bulging, and I put them under the car seat," blah, blah.  I'm like, "Okay, relax."  He goes, "But I can't get in.  I can't call my, can't call my landlord, I can't get in."  I go, "Okay, you can sleep on my couch, all right, but I want you to write down your mother's name, her phone number, and I'm going to give it to you, Kristie.  If you don't hear from me tomorrow morning, you know where to start looking."
Story_ID: 571645
Speaker 1: So, you get Glenn's [Greenwood's husband, Glenn Pogue] mother's telephone number, and what happens?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you know, he's, he's like, "I can't believe you, are you for real?"  I said, "Deadly serious here."  And he goes like, "Maybe you're the crazy person.  Maybe I should get your mother's number," you know.  And he's joking.  And he comes over, and then we stay up almost all night long just talking, just, just talking, talking, talking, talking.  And I'm not even, I don't really think, I don't--he's not making any moves, so I'm not thinking that he likes me that way.  I was thinking, "Oh, this is a great guy.  He lives around the corner.  We can hang out," you know, so there's nothing sexual in any way.  And so, you know, I told him he could sleep on my sofa.  I go get the blankets and the pillows and I get them all tucked in on the sofa, whatever.  And he started calling me mommy, like, "Thank you, mommy," and the whole kind of thing.  And then, the next morning, I wake up, and I come in there to wake him up.  And he wakes up all startled and, you know, how you wake up in a place you don't know where you are?  And he's like completely just thrown.  He's like, "Okay, all right, all right good meeting you.  All right, take care."  He's like running out my door.  He leaves, and then he leaves behind a note that he writes me.  He's left this note that he's apparently written in the dark at night.  And, you know, and it's just like Glenn, because he's writing it in black, and then, I guess the pen runs out.  He wrote that, and my pen is illing, and he starts with a blue pen, you know, and he goes on.  And at the end of the letter, he goes, I thought I got a jump start or something just meeting you, your energy, just talking to you.  And, and he goes, I'd like to see some of you, but the, with the, with the checkbox, more of you with the checkbox, and a lot of you with a checkbox.  And he said, you'll let me know or something.  And, you know, I thought it was really cute, and the letter has now been published in a book called 'A Love No Less' ['A Love No Less: Two Centuries of African American Love Letters,' Pamela Newkirk], which is a book of, of love letters that dates back to pre-slavery, and this is a more contemporary, albeit, you know, funny kind of love letter, but it's the one he left for me.  And he asked me out on, on that Sunday.  I think it was a Thursday night that we met.  And, again, I'm still kind of holding out hope that Steve [Greenwood's ex-boyfriend, Steven Hill], somehow, is going to show up.  So, I tell him, "I'm not sure. I may have to work."  And I'm like hedging my bets, and then when I come to the realization Steve's not going to show up, I called him up and say, "Okay, we can go out."  And I'll just never forget our first date.  He lived around the corner, like I said.  And he told me that he drove--he said, "Did you ever see that little M--?"  He had an MG [MG Car Company Limited], he said, "Did you ever see a little blue MG with the black convertible top?"  And, and I go, "Oh, yeah."  "Yeah, that's, that's me, that's my car right there."  I say, "Oh, okay."  So now we're going out, a beautiful summer day in June, and he goes, "You ready?"  He comes to pick me up.  I go, "Okay, yeah, where's your car?"  And he turns, I mean, a shade of purple, and he's like, "I told you."  I was like, "Told me what?"  He goes, "No, my, my, my sticker expired, the--" duh, duh, duh.  He's--it just throws him.  Now, he's just like, nervous the whole date, 'cause it's like--I'm like (gesture), but I'm not judging him on his car at this--he told me about the car.  I just thought, we're going to get in the car.  We get on the subway, everything is cool.  And we go down to the South Street Seaport [New York, New York], and we are literally window shopping together.  I'm shopping, and he's okay with that.  I'm like, "Wow, this guy, just met this guy, he's like, okay with me shopping.  This is a real good."  And, and then he said, "How about tomorrow night?  Let's get together tomorrow night."  I'm like, "Okay," I'm like, "Okay."  He, he goes, "Yeah, the JVC Jazz Festival [Newport Jazz Festival] is Teena Marie's, this, so this one is a boat cruise."  And I don't know anything about any of these artists.  Again, I told you, I never bought music.  Music was okay, but I didn't live by music.  I didn't know any of these people, and that one week of our dating, we went to a concert every night, a different artist, a different genre of music that I've never known before.  And that was what was so exciting about Glenn to me, that he was kind of exposing me to a whole another life.  I didn't know he was a--had been in the [U.S.] Navy, he had lived all over.  And I just thought, wow, he is so, he's such a Rena- Renaissance man.  I found that very attractive.  And next thing you know, I guess we're going together, and he lived around the corner.  And that was so silly because there were times we'd be talking on the phone and he'd go, "Whatcha doing?"  I'd go, "Whatcha doing?"  And then, he'd come running around the corner like, a horse galloping down the middle of the street literally.  And I used to start, I used to go, "Why are you so--little kooky?"  I mean, he would do things like, the first week that we were dating.  He'd call me, and we like, literally, maybe twenty-two messages on my answering machine in one day.  I go, "This guy is like crazy."  And he goes, by, by the twentieth message, he goes, "Okay, by now, you should think that I'm crazy, but I'm not.  I know what I'm doing.  I'm eating up all the, all the answering machine."  He said that when the answering machine with their tapes, he said, "I'm eat- eating it all up, so nobody else can call, and leave a message.  I know exactly--I'm not crazy."  He's like, "I'm crazy like a fox," you know, and just stuff like that.  I was like, wow, very different from, you know, the guy I dated previously.  He was, like, a lawyer, and very stiff and very starched and, you know.  I was like, "Wow, this guy is fun."  That was it.  I was like, fun.
Story_ID: 571646
Speaker 1: And I remember I was going on a trip.  I was at Fairchild [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media] at the time at the magazine [Children's Business], and I was going over to cover the collections in Europe.  I was going to Paris [France], and he [Greenwood's husband, Glenn Pogue] was like, "Oh, I'd love to hang out."  We'd been dating about two and a half months now.  I was like, "Okay," so he decided, "I'm going to Paris with you."  I'm like, "Okay," so he comes to Paris with me.  I'm doing my thing during the day.  I come back.  He's stretched out across the bed with the newspaper, the local newspaper, circling jobs.  He goes, "You know what?  I like it here.  I think I may stay.  The concierge said he could hook me up."  And I was saying, they're going like, "This guy's for real?  He's, he's like, not going to go back.  He's going to like, live in Paris now.  I thought he had, I thought we were starting a relationship."  It was crazy.  And I said to myself right there.  I got, okay, okay.  Enjoy the ride with this guy.  Don't worry about getting to the final destination 'cause he's not the one.  He's, you know, he's--can do anything at the drop of a hat, you know.  And I'm the one, as I said, planned and orderly, and at this age, you're going to get married, and then going to have a kid.  By this age, you're going to retire.  And he's going like, in the span--in the space of a day, he's decided he not going to go back home.  He's going to just live in Paris, and the concierge is going to hook him up with a job.  I'm like, I never knew anybody like that, you know, so it was exciting, but scary.  And I said, okay, don't get caught up because, you know, this guy is like, you know, he's out to have a good time.  He's not the one, you know.  And I continued to date him with that framework, that I, I had set for myself, again, the planner in me, the goal-oriented person that I am.  I had to have a house by age thirty.  That was, that was, that was one of my goals; that was one of the things on my to-do lists.  I didn't know how hard and difficult that would be living in New York [New York].  Living in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], you can make that happen.  Living in New York, that was a bigger, bigger challenge for me.  And so, I started looking at houses.  And even before I had the down payment, I'd go to the open houses.  And I researched, and I'd go to the first townhome buyers' workshop, just really focus on it.  And I overheard him talking to a friend one day go, yeah, I'm talking to this chick and, you know, she trying to buy a house.  I don't know, I might invest in with her.  And I said, there, there it was again.  I was like, okay.  So, I told him, I says, excuse me, I, I, I'm sorry, but I overheard your conversation, and I don't need an investment partner.  If you want to buy a house with me so that we can have a yard for our kids to play in, that's cool, but I don't need a partner to buy a house.  And so, what we talking about?  He's like, oh, I don't know, okay, okay, cool, I hear you.  And then, it's like over, it's like, okay, let's move on from that, you know, that was done.  And then, I went to Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts] graduate school of business on a program.  It's called Program for Developing Managers.  And, again, through Fairchild, through Cap Cities/ABC [Capital Cities/ABC Video Publishing, Inc.], I'd been identified to go through this program.  And it was for--I think we were there for about eight weeks--very intense.  You can't come home, you're focused, and you get this, like mini-M.B.A. in this condensed period of time.  And so, I was there in Boston [Massachusetts], and he was still in Brooklyn [New York].  And when I came back, that's when he said, maybe we should hook up.
Speaker 2: This (unclear).
Speaker 1: You know, so the, "Absence makes the heart grow fonder," thing kind of worked in my case.  And it's probably the only thing that would make him go, "Oh, this is what life would be like without her."  And that's when we decided we'd get married.
Story_ID: 571647
Speaker 1: So, where did you get married?
Speaker 2: We got married in Washington, D.C. at Petworth Church [Petworth United Methodist Church], the family church.  And we had our reception at the student center at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], so kind of went back to what I knew.
Speaker 1: Wow.  And earlier, your relationship, you start visiting bed and breakfasts?
Speaker 2: You know, Glenn [Glenn Pogue] was, again, just adventurous, game for doing anything and everything.  And, you know, actually when we got married, he didn't want to have a big wedding, but we ended up having three hundred people at our wedding.  And he had a ball.  I mean, he loved every minute of it.  It was a blur--it's a blur to me.  I can't, you know, 'cause I was so preoccupied with the details and the organization of it, and he was just having a ball (laughter).  Yeah, it was--everybody wanted to crash our wedding.  At the time, Glenn had been doing 'The Cosby Show,' and that's the difference between Glenn and I.  You know what?  I work so hard for everything I accomplish.  It doesn't come easy for me.  Glenn, he has dumb luck.  He decides one day, "I want to be an actor."  Next thing you know, he's on 'The Cosby Show,' the number one show on television.  I mean, this crazy stuff like that, "I want to be an artist."  Next thing you know--
Speaker 1: Who did he play on 'The Cosby Show'?
Speaker 2: He played, he played the boyfriend of the girl that Theo [Theo Huxtable] had a thing for.  His character's name was Dan.  And, you know, he, he, he didn't show up often, but he'd show up a couple of times.  And, but, but the crazy thing is, you know, that Glenn was like thirty-one, you know, on 'The Cosby Show,' supposedly the friend of Theo, who was in high school.
Speaker 1: So it was Theo's friend.  It wasn't just, it was the--
Speaker 2: Well, it was a set, but the main thing was he was dating the girl that Theo had a thing for.  So, in fact, the girl was LaChanze, who went on to win the Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] for the 'The Color Purple,' in, in, in the episode ["The Lost Weekend"] that they were in together.  But, yeah, I mean, so that was the thing.  Glenn, because he was funny and light-hearted, and just whatever, spirited, here he was.  They all thought that he was, you know, maybe twenty, and he was like thirty-one.  And when, when it was all set and done, he told them that he was married, he had a kid [Glynn Pogue] and all.  They could not believe it, you know, but at the time he was on 'The Cosby Show,' he's from a small town.  Everybody there thought he was a celebrity, you know.  I was in New York [New York].  Everybody thought, "Oh, we got to get there."  And let's not forget, it was on Howard's campus, so every hungry student wanted to crash the reception as well, so (laughter), it was like, you know, people everywhere.  But yeah, it was, it's always, it's always a journey with Glenn, you know.  You never know yet what's going to happen.  But, for me, what was critical and key in meeting him and feeling like, you know, I could have a life with him, was that he was so competent, and sure of himself, and unintimidated by me or anything I may do, or completely secure in who he is.  And so, people to this day, call him Mr. Greenwood and he's Mr. Pogue, and he'll answer to that.  He don't care about correcting them.  It's like, "Whatever, I know who I am, I know," you know.
Speaker 1: And you said initially that people look for their fathers.  Did you see any of your father [Carl Greenwood]?
Speaker 2: Completely, completely.  My father, the life of the party, you know, always joking, but solid, you know.  Glenn's parents also stayed married until his father passed away.  And, you know, Glenn is--he loses it if he, if he can't get to work.  He's like, I got to work, you know, so his work ethic, his sense of responsibility and duty, his zest for life--all of that is completely like my dad.
Story_ID: 571648
Speaker 1: So let's talk a little bit about you being at Essence, because I'm, I'm anxious to hear about how you then changed your life.  You're at Fairchild.  How do you decide to make the shift and go to Essence magazine?
Speaker 2: It was really hard to leave Fairchild Publications [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media] for a couple of reasons.  One, it was a comfort zone.  I'd been there for so long.  They'd been so encouraging of my growth.  I had no reason to believe that I would end up being stagnant there or anything like that.  It was just a great place to be, and I had, I was working with my friends and, you know, all of that was, was great.  But the allure of Essence was just so strong for me because this is a publication that did, that did appear on my coffee table as I was growing up.  You know, it is the magazine they proclaim to be beautiful.  It is the magazine that I go, wow, you know.  And now, the opportunity to go to Essence, it was, it was difficult to do, because it was, it wasn't even a lateral move.  It was a step down in the sense that I was running the magazine at Fairchild, and I was going to Essence as the style director.
Speaker 1: So, where did the opportunity come from?
Speaker 2: The opportunity came many times, several times rather.  I had been called from Essence by Essence editors or human resources to come in, and interview for a job many times.  And, you know, a couple of times, I'd gone for the interviews, and I just thought they can't match the salary or, you know, the, the responsibility didn't sound challenging or whatever.  It just didn't feel right for me.  And so, then came the day that [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor published her first book, 'In the Spirit' ['In the Spirit: The Inspirational Writings,' Susan L. Taylor].  And I think it was her first book [sic.]--or was it the second one?  Well, she had a new book release, and some, a couple of local black bookstores here in Brooklyn [New York] wanted to host her for a book reading and signing.  And they knew that their shops were too small to accommodate the numbers of people they thought they would attract for this reading.  And so, they called me up and said, you know, "We'd like to host Susan for her book reading and signing.  We need a bigger venue.  Can we have that at Akwaaba Mansion [Brooklyn, New York]?"  Now, at that point, I had already my bed and breakfast, which was also my home.  And so I said, "Sure," so we opened the doors to this book event with Susan Taylor.  So Susan, who I had only met very briefly in the industry, but never really had an exchange with, came for this book signing.  It was in January.  She tells the story that she was dog-tired, didn't want to be here 'cause, you know, you had committed, so she was coming, but it was snowing.  It was late, it was a mess, you know, and she came.  And she did the book signing.  And then, afterwards, I said to her, you know, "Can I give you a tour of, of the inn?"  And she, she said, she, you know, she's, reluctantly agreed to do it again.  She's tired--the whole thing.  It's like the last thing she wanted to do is traipse up three flights of stairs looking at this old house, but, you know, she did, graciously.  And I showed her around, and when she got to the top of the, of the, of the, of the last step, and how she looked at me, she says, "We need you at Essence.  Your vision, what you have done, the elegance, combined with the Afrocentricity," and she went du du du du du du du du duda, and she knew of my history at Fairchild and fashion.  And she goes, "We need a style director.  You're it, you're the one."  And I was like, "Okay."  And really, I didn't give it a lot--I mean, I was flattered, but I thought, I'm not going to Essence to be the style director.  I'm, I'm running a magazine [Children's Business] here, you know, and I'm, so, okay, you know, okay.  And so, she called me up, found me doing my Christmas holiday break in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at my mama's [Joann Lemons Greenwood] house.  We're talking.  My mama, real impressed, 'cause you know, Essence, you know, the other publications, her (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I've heard of that.
Speaker 2: --yeah, right, that's right.  And the other publication, she can't find those on the newsstand, and show off to her girlfriends or whatever.  So, she's like, oh, you know, she was very impressed.  And I'm thinking, you know, well, you know, she goes, "What's it going to take?"  You know, and I named my price.  And she goes, "Wow, that's going to be hard.  I, you know, what, I'm not going to give up.  I'm going to see what we can do.  I'll get back to you."  She called me up and said, "I got it, I got it, you're coming," you know.  And so, that was it.
Story_ID: 571649
Speaker 1: I resigned from Fairchild [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media], where I had built my career, and felt very secure, and had a wonderful, wonderful run, and decide to leave, and take a lower-ranking position.  However, on a bigger publication that I had a closer sensibility to, and a passion for, and ended up going to Essence magazine as style director.  And in my gut, you know, I was very torn, not because--I thought I was making the right move, but at that point in my life, fashion no longer played this major starring role.  In fact, it took a big back seat because now, I was understanding that we should not wear our wealth on our backs.  I mean, I understood, you know, what we had done, and what I had done, and what I didn't intend to do anymore.  You know, I loved, loved, you know, Gucci, but I was going to put my Benjamins in brick, so I'd already start looking at real estate as an investment, as security, as legacy building, all of that.  And it wasn't about flashy design or clothes.  Yet I was going to go and become style director of the magazine that sister said, you know, this is the one that said, "Sisters are sassy," you know.  And I'm like, ooh, how do I do that?  'Cause I, I, I wasn't even thinking about wearing designer clothes or looking that part.  Half the time, I was ragged-looking because I was running, trying to, you know, work five different, six jobs, and make it happen.  So, it was very challenging to go to Essence as the style director.  And I did that job--I'm going to say for about a year--and then went on to become the lifestyle editor, which has to be by far my, my favorite job that I've ever had.  Because as lifestyle editor for Essence magazine, it meant that I was responsible for the home pages, which at that point, became my new passion instead of, you know, dressing myself.  I like to dress my home, and it was food, it was travel, it was parenting.  I had a kid [Glynn Pogue] at that point.  It was just everything that I was interested in, and I got to be the lifestyle editor, and we grew that section.  And I recreated it, and I was having a great time.  And then, the executive editor, the number two person, left.  And I was actually on a press junket at, because I was the travel editor, and when I got the call, said, "Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] wants you to come back right away.  She needs to talk to you."  And then, somebody else called me, said, "Did you hear that So and So left?" and duh duh duh duh duh.  I'm like, "Oh, God, is this what she wants to talk about?"  And I was excited because it meant moving up, yes, but I was loving what I was doing as lifestyle editor.  Went back and she made me executive editor number two, and, and that was great, rose to that.  And I thought, wow, you know, and then she started talking about her taking a different position at the magazine, and not wanting to have to do the day-to-day anymore, and all of that.  And I was at that point, feeling like I had my bed and breakfast [Akwaaba Mansion, Brooklyn, New York].  I had my restaurant [Akwaaba Cafe, Brooklyn, New York].  I had my husband [Glenn Pogue], I had my kid.  I had the book I was writing.  I had all this stuff going on.  And I was thinking, you know what?  It's actually time now to make a decision about what I can do, and what I can't do--just a question of capacity.  Yet, here came the opportunity now to be editor-in-chief.  And, you know, in your gut you kind of go, wow, I don't know if the timing is right, but then you go, but wow, what a luscious opportunity, and you feel like you can't pass it up.  And so, I didn't, so I became editor-in-chief of Essence, and had a great time, how to recreating it, making it fresher for the younger reader.  That was really my challenge.  And I did that for about, almost two years as editor-in-chief of Essence, while still running my B and B, and my restaurant and, you know, writing my book, and juggling all of those many different things.
Speaker 2: And was that stressful running the B and B, in particular, where you're doing it very hands-on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I--my, my general nature is to kind of multitask and juggle many things.  I kind of don't work well with being bored and, you know, kind of mundane.  So, you know, it wasn't necessarily stressful, but what it meant was that everything got done--but me.  So, there were times, especially when I felt very jealous of my bed and breakfast guests because I live in the inn.  And my guests would sitting by my fireplace sipping my tea, getting ready to go soak in my Jacuzzi.  And I had a really bad attitude about that 'cause they were doing for themselves what I really needed to do for me.  So I was the one who never showed up on my own list of things to do.  So, that was a sacrifice, and that was wearing thin.  And so, that's when I came to that critical decision that I needed a life shift, and that something had to give.  And, at that point, I weighed everything.  I was like, what was going to give?  You know, my marriage wasn't going to give.  My dedication to raising my daughter wasn't going to give.  I felt like, I couldn't walk away from my own businesses because, again, this was the thing that I could pass on to my daughter.  I couldn't leave her a job, you know, but I could certainly leave her this legacy.  And so, then it became clear that the only thing that I could sacrifice would be my job at Essence.  And I really tried a long time to silence that voice when it was telling me, it was time to go, and that I had to finally listen to it, and make that decision.
Story_ID: 571650
Speaker 1: Well, I wanted to shift into talking a little bit about your bed and breakfasts [Akwaaba Bed and Breakfast Inns] that are your passion, and your property interests in general.  So, why don't we start by my asking you, how did you come to live in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York], and why is it so important to you, this place?
Speaker 2: Well, I mentioned that I was dead set on owning a home by age thirty.  At the time, I was living in a, in an apartment in Fort Greene [Brooklyn, New York].  And it was already gentrified to the extent that I couldn't afford to buy a house there.  And somebody mentioned that Bedford-Stuyvesant, another subway stop over, and then, they have an annual house tour, and I went on the house tour in Bedford-Stuyvesant, and I just fell in love.  I fell in love with the brownstones.  I fell in love with the brown people who lived in the brownstones, and I thought this is a community.  I want to be a part of this.  And so, that was my introduction to Bedford-Stuyvesant, and I start looking at homes in Bed-Stuy.
Speaker 1: And where was Bed-Stuy, economically, emotionally, and sociologically when you got here (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think that when I got here twenty years ago to Bedford-Stuyvesant, on the surface, and certainly in the media, and in the minds of those who did not live here or come here, this was not a place you wanted to be.  You know, crime rates were up.  Yes, there was severe poverty in many pockets of the, of the neighborhood, you know.  So, it was a scary place for a lot of people.  But those people didn't really know that Bedford-Stuyvesant I had come to discover.  From the day I came here on the house tour, I saw, you know, working class families who were strivers.  I saw kids going to school.  I saw elders going to church.  I saw neighbors looking out for each other.  I saw stately homes that were well-preserved, that people took pride in.  I saw everything that makes a wonderful community, and so I was convinced from the day I actually took a real look at Bedford-Stuyvesant, that this is where I wanted to be.  And what I was clear about was that it was a neighborhood on the verge, which meant that, you know, you couldn't just come, and just live here, that you had to be a part of making it what it had the, the ability to become.  And so, you know, from the moment I got here, I knew I was coming with sleeves rolled up, and then, I was going to get involved in the community board, that I was getting involved, and anything and everything that would make Bedford-Stuyvesant reach its full potential.  And so, from day one, I, I became an active resident of Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Speaker 1: And so, was you--did you move into a house that you purchased here, or was the man-, the mansion that you put your first bed and breakfast in your first purchase?
Speaker 2: No, we--my husband [Glenn Pogue] and I were engaged at that point, and we bought our first house two blocks away from the bed and breakfast house.  So, we owned the brownstone on Macon Street, which we only just sold a year ago.  And we moved there, and we, you know, again, trying to make it happen, I remember going to my parents [Joann Lemons Greenwood and Carl Greenwood] who, of course, at this point, owned the house that they still live in that I was raised in.  And I, you know, tried to teach them then that, you know, you have what's called equity in your home, and you can pull the equity out, and you can lend it to us, to put down payment on our house, and we could pay you back (unclear).  My daddy was just like, looking at me, like I had lost my mind.  He, he goes, "You want me to lose my house, so you can get your house?  Unh-uh."  And I was like, "No, no, no, you're not going to lose it."  And there was no explaining it.  It was, this was not going to happen, you know.  And, you know, my brothers chipped in what they could, and so did Glenn's family, and we made it happen.  We bought the first brownstone.  We moved in there, and it's three floors, two-family brownstone.  And we lived in the top apartment, and we let our tenants live on the lower duplex, so they lived in more of our house than we lived in.  But, you know, that wasn't hard for me to do 'cause I understand delayed gratification.  And I thought we can rent out the bigger space, and that their rent money would go to pay the mortgage.  And then, we started saving.  We can buy the next house.  And so, that was always kind of the way I was thinking, and that's what we did.  Then, we finally did move downstairs when we had our daughter [Glynn Pogue], so we could live in the entire house.  We were a growing family.  And we lived there for three years before we actually moved into, and built Akwaaba Mansion [Brooklyn, New York], the bed and breakfast.
Story_ID: 571651
Speaker 1: We [Greenwood and Glenn Pogue], early in our marriage, we went and stayed at our first bed and breakfast [Buttonwood Manor Bed and Breakfast; Akwaaba at Buttonwood Manor], which was in Cape May, New Jersey, and we went down with a couple of friends.  And we went down during the Christmas holiday season just before going to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] to spend the holidays with my family.  And it was such, just a picturesque Christmas village.  I mean, it was just like the old-fashioned village with the caroling through the streets, and the Christmas parade and, you know, this, everything, the tree lighting in the little park, and all of that.  It was so idyllic, and we kind of started to make that kind of a holiday ritual where we would go and, and usher in the holidays in Cape May before going to D.C.  And I discovered that it was a beach resort.  In fact, the oldest seaside resort in the country--Cape May is.  I only discovered that when I turned forty, and went there for my birthday by myself.  You know, I had planned this big forty, fortieth birthday bash, got overwhelmed with the prospects of putting together a party, and decided I was going to have a party, but I was going to only be the one invited--just me.  And I went to Cape May, and I was stressed out at that point, and that's when I checked myself into somebody else's bed and breakfast, and sipped somebody else's tea, and soaked in somebody else's Jacuzzi at the Jersey Shore [New Jersey].  And that's when I had my little ah-ha moment, that I needed to come back, and quit my job at Essence.  So that visit at Cape May was life-changing and, and that's when I discovered it, and decided, okay, change your life.
Speaker 2: Put it all into the family business (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 571652
Speaker 1: So you start off with the bed and breakfast, and how did they expand?  And I've also got it here how you decide to do this retail strip in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York] because you're actually impacting the community there, in addition to having your first bed and breakfast there?
Speaker 2: So, now, we've [Greenwood and her husband, Glenn Pogue] discovered B and Bs, and how much we enjoy staying at them.  We're living in our nice brownstone on Macon Street.  We're raising our toddler [Glynn Pogue].  And then, I go, wait a second, you know, B and Bs really combine all of my personal passions.  I love architecture.  I believe in real estate as the best financial investment.  I love decorating and entertaining, and all of those things.  And I go, wow, I actually would enjoy doing a B and B myself.  And then, I discover this mansion down the street from my house and I think this would be a perfect bed and breakfast.
Story_ID: 571653
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I, I come to realize how only a bed and breakfast would combine all of my personal passions.  And I ride down my street two blocks up, and I see a house that I've sent--seen all the time, but this time with new eyes.  I go, "Wow that would be a perfect bed and breakfast."  And this house was the house that all the kids in the neighborhood called the haunted house, and you never saw any signs of life.  And so I started leaving notes on the door saying, "If you're interested in selling your home, please call, please call."  And I would leave these notes on the door for, like a year, and no one ever calls.  And, finally, one day, I saw a very unassuming gentleman standing in the yard.  And I jumped out of my car, I was so excited, and said, "Do you know anything about this house?"  And he says, "I know a lot about this house."  And he says, "This is my family's home."  And I said, "What?  Have you been getting my notes?"  He goes, "Yours and everybody else's," you know.  I said, "Well, you know, I really, really love this house, and I would love to have it," and told him what I wanted to do.  He said to me, "Well, you need to talk to the real estate agent."  And just as he said that, the real estate agent was walking up the street.  I took it as an omen.  I go to the real estate agent.  His office is around the corner, and he goes, "Well, you need to come in.  We can talk about it in the morning."  I said, "What time do you open?  I will be there when you open your doors."  He said 9:00, I was there at 9:00, went there.  "How much is it?"  I said, "Okay, ready, where's the contract?  Let's do it."  And, yeah, called my husband (laughter), I said, "Glenn [Glenn Pogue]," (laughter) and, you know, he's like, "Well, we just finished working on this house."  I said, "Well, this is going to be great and--," you know.  And he, he went for it.  You know, again, very--Glenn's like, "Where, where we going?  Just tell me where we're going," easy about stuff for the most part.  So, that's how we came to acquire this place [Akwaaba Mansion, Brooklyn, New York].  Took us about nine months to create it as a bed and breakfast.  And the strategy at that time was really--there were no hotels in Brooklyn [New York].  And Brooklyn, if it were a city into itself, would be the fourth largest city in the country--no hotels.  I kept thinking, this is a no-brainer.  We're only going to have four guest rooms--surely, we can fill four guest rooms.  And my thought, initially, was that we would house the family and friends of people coming to visit their, their loved ones in this neighborhood, and I thought I would also reach out to the churches because it's like one on every corner.  And we could, you know, let the busy body at the church know that we're here, and when folks coming for funerals or for weddings, they would tell them we're here.  We can house their, their people, and I would also reach out to the funeral homes and, and give that same message.  And that's what I thought we'd say.  What I quickly discovered was that the people, who were actually, were not the family and friends of the people who lived here, but the people who lived here.  So our first guests were people who lived right here in New York, or came across the bridge or through the tunnel.  And they were in towns, and they were just looking to get away without having to go away.  Living and working in New York, you know, they just need the high touch and the high tech, high stress world, and so that's who we cater to.  People came for their birthdays.  They came for their anniversaries.  They came to propose.  They came for girlfriend weekends, and that's, that was our customer base.  It still is a big part of our customer base.  However, now that Brooklyn itself has become so popular, a lot of Europeans like to come to Brooklyn 'cause it's the new hot place to be.  They want to go to Williamsburg and they want to go Greenpoint, and they want to go to Park Slope.  And some even want to discover Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant] right here.  And so, we get a lot of folks from Europe and they, obviously, are coming a distance, so they're planning in advance, and they're staying a longer period of time.  So a lot of our local people can't really get in anymore 'cause they're doing it spontaneously, going, "Ha, let's go over there.  That'd be a fun thing to do as a date this weekend."  It's not going to happen because we've been booked--we're booked like a month and half out.  And so we are seeing a shift in, you know, the people who actually come, and what they're coming for.
Story_ID: 571654
Speaker 1: What's the specialness of a, of a bed and breakfast experience versus staying in a hotel?
Speaker 2: When you stay in a bed and breakfast, first of all, you're staying in someone's home, so it's a much more intimate experience.  You notice every little detail because that is--someone has created this as a home.  They've made it very livable, very special.  It's not cookie-cutter.  Your host, the innkeeper, knows that place well, not just their home, that neighborhood.  So, we can definitely tell you, "Well, you know what, I know you love the smell of the (unclear) here--have coming from the Italian restaurant next door, but don't go there because that's more like Chef Boyardee Italian.  You want to go to this restaurant."  You know, so you get that firsthand.  We know the history of our homes.  Mostly, bed and breakfasts are historic structures, so they have a lot of life that's been lived in those homes that you can share with your guests.  Architecturally, they're certainly more interesting than staying in a, in a big box hotel.  And it's really the experience that comes with that relationship between the guest and the innkeeper.  At Akwaaba [Akwaaba Bed and Breakfast Inns], however, I think what makes it even more special is the exchange that happens amongst the guests.  And, you know, we still find that a large majority of our guests are people of color who oftentimes work in environments that don't reflect who they are.  And so to be able to come on vacation, and being a place where people get you, where nobody is like, questioning your hair, or looking crazy, or trying to figure anything out, where you find yourself validated in the artwork that's on the wall, it just becomes a whole another experience.  I'm telling you--my guests get real comfortable at the breakfast table, and sometimes they sit there for three or four hours.  And, and it's, and, and even with the diversity that we now get at the inn, people know where they're coming, so they're coming because they would love to have grits for the first time in their lives.  They're coming because they love the idea that it's jazz music that's playing in the background, and they're looking to that experience, so it's, it's special.
Story_ID: 571655
Speaker 1: How, once you've had this bed and breakfast [Akwaaba Mansion, Brooklyn, New York], how did you decide that you were going to have many bed and breakfasts?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know what?  This bed and breakfast is, is really special to me because it was our first.  At the same time, you know, there are some things we do here--for example, we don't have televisions in our guest rooms.  And I agonized about that 'cause I know people like TV.  I grew up in a TV home, but not having televisions in the rooms means that the guests talk to each other.  They rediscover each other, and that's a wonderful thing.  We have every convenience that a hotel has.  All of our guest rooms have private baths.  We go one step further--they all have Jacuzzi tubs for two, so it becomes a very romantic experience.  Or if you're coming alone, it's where, where you can pamper yourself, so it has all of those things.  And, and, and the person who's going to know your name when you arrive and ask you, "How was your day?"  And really want to know the answer to that question.  We decided to expand and, and the way we were able to do that, or the reason why I decided to do that is it was really a long-term vision.  Again, I'm the planner, and one of the things that I always knew is that I wanted to retire by age fifty.  I mean, anybody who has known me for any length of time will know that I always, have always said that.  And part of that comes from the fact that I watched my parents [Joann Lemons Greenwood and Carl Greenwood], and my husband's parents, work until they couldn't work anymore.  And then, when they, you know, have their freedom, so to speak, they don't have their health.  And so, it's just, I didn't want to fall into that situation.  I wanted work to be an option.  You know, if I chose to work, fine, but if I didn't choose to work, I'd done all the work I needed to do, to not to have to work anymore.  So, that was a real goal for me.  And so, as I looked at what retirement would look like, I felt like, wouldn't it be great to have a different home in a different city that I love for each season of the year, and that became the vision.  It became how I was able to get the buy-in for my husband [Glenn Pogue], who actually worked with me at the first bed and breakfast here.  But when I left the magazine [Essence] and decided to expand the bed and breakfast concept to other locations, that was his cue that he wanted to go back to work 'cause he, you know, he left his job at ABC, as a broadcast engineer, not when our daughter [Glynn Pogue] was born, but when I became editor-in-chief of the magazine 'cause he understood--we both did--that, that commitment would be great, that it would mean travel, that it would mean long hours.  And we just didn't want to sacrifice our daughter in that way.  So, he left his job, and basically became a stay-at-home dad.  And in so doing, he was able to now take guests at the bed and breakfast on a, on a daily basis whereas before, we were very selective about the guests that we took during the week 'cause we both had our day jobs, and we realized that if we took somebody during the week, we wanted them to be business travelers who would be gone the same time we would be gone.  And if they called and they were having an anniversary, and it was a Tuesday and they wanted to show up, we would tell them we were booked even if we weren't, because we knew we knew we couldn't give that guest the kind of attention we would want to give them.  But the business travel worked fine for us.  But now that he had come home when I became editor of the magazine, we could take everybody, and we did, any time, all the time.  And so, he really kind of carried the bed and breakfast for quite a while.  But when I came home from the magazine, he was like, "Okay, I'm out of here."  And he really missed the camaraderie that came from working outside of the home.  And so he no longer really works in the bed and breakfast, but he's very supportive of me.  And, you know, we--once I said to him, "If I asked you to do something for me for the bed and breakfast--," 'cause he was fond of saying, "I don't work for Akwaaba [Akwaaba Bed and Breakfast Inns], I already worked today, I'm off," you know.  I would get that a lot, and I would ask--I tried to lean on him a lot, probably too much, given that he doesn't work for the bed and breakfast.  But I, once I said to him, "If I ask you to do something for Akwaaba, I'm asking you not to do it for Akwaaba, I'm asking you to do it for your wife.  Can you do that?"  That became it.  Now, he will, he'll do it.  He's still, you know, he'll still grumble a little bit, but he's more apt to kind of fall in line and help me out.
Speaker 1: How did you choose that name, Akwaaba?
Speaker 2: I was looking for a word that had relevance to what we do, and Akwaaba means welcome.  I also wanted a word that had cultural significance, so it means welcome in a language spoken in Ghana, West Africa.  And I also wanted a word that started with an A, so we'd be first in every list, so Akwaaba fit all of those requirements (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fantastic.
Story_ID: 571656
Speaker 1: You said that your husband [Glenn Pogue] is willing to help vis-a-vis, helping his wife, as opposed to perhaps the business [Akwaaba Bed and Breakfast Inns] as it were, since he was doing that for such a long time.  Can you talk a little bit about your relationship, and how you have that kind of balance where you're supporting each other in this way, that you've--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, he knows how passionate I am about the bed and breakfast, and he knows what the end goal is, and he likes the end goal.  He likes the idea of having a different house in a different city for each season of the year.  Sometimes he'll lose focus along the way of what it takes to get there, you know, and sometimes, I'll break it down to him.  Even if it's something, we have rental properties, and I say, "The lights need to be changed in the hallway," and I get the big sigh.  I go, "Okay, you change that light bulb, and at the end of the month, we're going to get some rental checks, and they're going to add to about eight thousand dollars.  Could you change the light bulb?"  You know, and it, you know, perspective, because he's traditional, like I say.  You know, he's wild, crazy, have a good time, but he's like my dad [Carl Greenwood] again, you know, your work, he went to work already.  He got there at 8:00 and he left at 4:00, he is off.  I don't operate like that.  I work every day, all day, you know, but he's like, "I did my time," so to speak.  So you know, he, he is supportive of me and what I do.  And at, at some point, I had to realize, you know, was I really being supportive of him, and what he wanted to do?  And it came to me when I was on book tour with my book ['Having What Matters: The Black Woman's Guide to Creating the Life You Really Want,' Monique Greenwood].  And I, and, and I was, you know, fielding questions from the readers who had gathered.  And one woman said, "Well, it's so clear that you're living your passion.  Is your husband living his?"  And I was just like a deer.  I was like, where'd that come from, you know?  And I never stopped to think about it, you know.  All I knew was, okay, he came home because I became editor-in-chief of Essence, and he went back to work when I started running the--and I still lean on him in the evenings.  He comes home from work, and he has to work again, you know, and this is his complaint.  I'm not hearing that.  And then, I'm going, gosh, is he, is he living his passion?  And then, I had to remember--excuse me one second.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: We were talking about whether your husband was living his passion and his support for you.  And you're hearing that from an observer--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --which really woke you up.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You know, it reminded me that my husband, after being married, having a kid [Glynn Pogue], running businesses, having a job, he also went back to school to study film at Hunter College [New York, New York].  And he graduated from college with a film degree when, you know, we were already running this business.  We had our jobs.  We had our kid.  To be able to do that, to squeeze that in on top of everything else meant you had to be passionate about it.  Yet I hadn't seen him do anything with his film degree.  So, I asked him the question, and I think it stumped him, too.  "Are you living your passion?  What about the film thing that you were so interested in?"  And he gave, "Yeah, but when am I going to have time?"  And then, he was very explosive actually.  "Between this and that, I--," (unclear).  I'm saying, wow.  He had suppressed this, and he's not very happy about that, you know.  So, then I said to him, "Here's what I think you need to do.  I think you need to take a sabbatical.  I think you need to pretend like we don't have these businesses.  You don't have a wife, you don't have a kid.  You have no other responsibilities other than to pursue this film thing."  And, you know, it was, we were closed at our beach location at the time.  I said, "Why don't you go down there for like two months, three months, and do your thing when it comes to film?  And, you know, make it happen."  And so, he was, he was like, "Really?"  I'm like, "Yeah, yeah, you need to do that." I said, "You need to do it for you, but I, also for, selfishly I need you to do it, too, because I don't want you to wake up one day and say that, you know, yours was a dream deferred because of mine."  And so, he, you know, said he was going to go on this particular day, and it didn't happen.  And then he said he was going this particular day, and it didn't happen.  And he kept putting it off, and putting it off.  And he, "Well, you need me to help.  Don't you have a wedding to do and it--."  I'm like, "Wait a second, I told you to act like, none of the stuff exists.  Nothing exists, but you and the piece of paper, or the typewriter, or whatever you're going to write.  There's a wonderful brilliant screenplay on."  And, you know, he kept making excuses.  And then, finally, he said, "You know what, I'm really afraid because this is, aww, this is really daunting.  This is overwhelming, this is scary."  I said, "Yeah, it is."  I said, "Because you're going to find out, do you really want this, or okay, you used to want it, but you don't care about it anymore?"  I said, "I know it's scary 'cause there are no obstacles.  There are no excuses.  It's you and your will.  What will you do?"  And so, you know, once he acknowledged it, and I think gave voice to it, and said, "Okay, I'm afraid," you know, "but I'm going to go."  And he went.  And it was difficult for me because I, I really, you know, I wanted to call and say, "How is it coming?"  I was like, nope, nope, don't do that 'cause it's not about pressure.  It's not about, you know, living up to what I want you to do, or anything like that.  So, to this day, I really don't know whether he wrote anything or not and, you know, I was just, when I spoke to him, I said, "How you doing?"  You know, but no, no progress reports, you know.  I, I didn't want to put that on him.  And, you know, so I can now say that with all he's done to support my vision, he had the opportunity, too, and he did with it, or didn't do with it, what he wanted.
Speaker 2: He wanted to do.
Story_ID: 571657
Speaker 1: So, before I ask you about challenges with your bed and breakfasts, if you could just give us an overview of where the different locations are.
Speaker 2: So, the first bed and breakfast, Akwaaba Mansion, is in Brooklyn, New York, and that was thirteen years ago that we started the Akwaaba Mansion.  And in that vision of, you know, a different house, in a different city, our love for each season of the year, Cape May became the second destination, Cape May, New Jersey, the Jersey Shore.  Again, that's where I had this epiphany of, you know, what life I wanted to live, and I felt very connected to Cape May.  I think the water is healing, having a beach place, especially in the summer, my favorite season, all makes sense to me.  So, that's where the second one is.  The third one [Akwaaba D.C.] is in my hometown of Washington, D.C.  Obviously, a comfort level there as my parents [Joann Lemons Greenwood and Carl Greenwood] age, and wanted to spend more time with them there.  I, you know, work would allow me to, to get there and have the pleasure of their company as well, so we're in DuPont Circle in Washington, D.C.  And then, the fourth one [Akwaaba in the Bayou, New Orleans, Louisiana], that we needed a place for the winter.  And my husband [Glenn Pogue] said, "Well, let's be somewhere, where it's warm, when it's cold every place else."  And we considered Florida, and we considered New Orleans [Louisiana].  We didn't have family or really a relationship with either, either of those places.  However, during my tenure at Essence, I would go to New Orleans annually during the 4th of July weekend for the Essence Music Festival.  So I felt like, I had some familiarity with New Orleans, and so, that's where we chose to do New Orleans.  And we've opened in that order.  We've opened a new bed and breakfast, which was our fifth, and we didn't intend to have five 'cause there are only four seasons and, you know, it was supposed to be done at four.  So, the fifth [Akwaaba at Buttonwood Manor, Cape May, New Jersey] one is kind of a cheat, but it works because it's still in Cape May.  It is actually across the street from Akwaaba by the Sea [Cape May, New Jersey], our, our first in, in that town.
Story_ID: 571658
Speaker 1: How many guests can you take?  You know, what's your capacity?
Speaker 2: Well, each, with each property, we've added more rooms.  The New York property [Akwaaba Mansion, Brooklyn, New York], obviously, we fell in love with the house and the idea first, before we looked at it from the bottom line figure of what makes sense.  And New York [New York] is our primary residence, so while the New York bed and breakfast is the biggest square footage-wise, it's the smallest in the number of guest rooms, because we are kind of greedy with the space for ourselves, and we have the top two floors.  So we only have four guest rooms here in the Brooklyn [New York] location, which means that on average, we're sleeping eight people a night.  There are typically two people to a room.  However, now that we've added the new locations, they all have eight guest rooms, with the exception of the Akwaaba by the Sea, the first inn in Cape May [New Jersey].  It has five guest rooms, but several of those are suites that sleep more than two people.  So, all in all, we have--I think there are thirty-four guest rooms with all of the inn combined.  And, you know, we could be sleeping in, in, if we're fully booked in all the inns, and I've not done that math, but I'm going to guestimate.  And we're fully booked in all the inns, we could be sleeping close to a hundred people a night.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And similar to the two floors that you have here, you have private quarters in all of those?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, the, New York actually is the least ideal for our personal privacy because we live on the top floor of the bed and breakfast in New York.  And so, we have to pass through the guest area and the common areas, whereas the other locations either have garden entrances with--that are private entrances, or they have separate cottages that are on the grounds of the inn, but not in the actual inn.  So, in each of the locations, we do have two-bedroom accommodations in each inn.  So, in retirement, with this whole vision, you know, now that, you know, we're clear that this is like my passion, and sometimes it's my husband's [Glenn Pogue] pain, I think that living in the New York inn will be the only tricky location.  And so, we actually have other rental properties in New York, and we probably won't live in the New York inn when we retire.  We will probably take an apartment in one of our other properties down the street--
Speaker 1: Somewhere close by.
Speaker 2: --so that we're real close by.  In fact, we're right now, we're clearing out the basement in the bed and breakfast here in Brooklyn.  And we're going back and forth now about do we make that a space that the guests will use, or is that going to be just our space, because we're totally inspired to do kind of a wine cellar and wine-tasting room, a gym, a home theatre, and kind of a bar/loungey kind of thing 'cause it's a huge space.  And so, we're like, "Okay, do we let the guests use this, or is this kind of our little hang-out, you know?"  So, we'll, we'll have to decide.  Of course, the innkeeper in me goes, "Of course, the guests should use that."  And, of course, my husband, the private person that he is, "No, it should be just us."
Speaker 1: Well, that's what I wondered.  I mean, do you have overlap?  Have you, have you ever sacrificed space that was supposed to be yours, and then, now it's become guest space?
Speaker 2: You know, no, we, we haven't because I think that's the quickest way to burn out in this business.  If you don't have something that is at least comparable to what your guests have, then you'll always feel jealous of your guests.  And so, no, it's been important for us to carve out personal space that, that's just ours that, that we're happy with.  I think, you know, it, it has been a challenge at var- challenge at various times, for my husband and my daughter [Glynn Pogue] living in the inn, you know, 'cause my husband will go play golf.  And he'll come home with his golf clubs, and not understand why I'm having a fit that he left them sitting in the hallway.  And he'll say things like, "Well, they know we live here."  I'm like, "Well, they're not coming here 'cause we live here, okay.  They don't want anything that reminds them of the place they just left, so it's got to be storybook when they walk in the door."  You know, so we, we go back and forth about that.  You know, my daughter was three when we started this business.   And so, clearly, she's had to learn to use her inside voice and, you know, when you wake up, don't yell for mommy, and can you not run, and can you, you know, and I've been obsessive at times.  I, you know, I used to have a rule, no flushing the toilet after 11:00, crazy stuff like that.  So I've relaxed some of those kinds of things, but I am always looking out for the comfort of my, of my guests.
Story_ID: 571659
Speaker 1: Now let's talk a little bit about down the street.  If you could tell us about your retail strip that's here in Bed-, Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York], and why you put what you have there, there.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm really, I'm really Bed-Stuy-centric.  I love this community and I want my guests to love it.  I want my neighbors to love it.  Everybody has to love it.  And when we put the bed and breakfast here [Akwaaba Mansion, Brooklyn, New York], one of the things we quickly discovered was that we really didn't have many options for our guests, or for ourselves, when it came to having a great meal in the neighborhood that you could walk to.  And so, we, we bought a building down the street that had been a mixed-use building with a hardware store on the bottom, and residential apartments above it.  And we set out to open a restaurant, which we called the Akwaaba Cafe [Brooklyn, New York].  We knew nothing about the food industry, other than we liked to eat food.  We just didn't know, but we knew that it was necessary.  It was needed in our neighborhood, so we kind of struck out on faith and we, we built out this beautiful space and created Akwaaba Cafe.  It was extremely successful initially.  We were known for our all-you-can-eat Sunday brunch.  We found, as we started to expand the bed and breakfast, and as my husband [Glenn Pogue] went back to work, it was just too challenging to maintain the kind of standards that we wanted to have with something that was branded as Akwaaba.  And so, I thought, if we can't do this right, we're not going to do this.  And a lot of times, I mean, the patrons who came didn't see that it wasn't being done right.  When I say done right, it's kind of like, you know, if somebody told me, we only made a hundred dollars last night, I would believe that 'cause I didn't have any checks and balances in place to know differently, you know, things like that, you know.  And we were also probably a little bit ahead of the curve in terms of fine dining in Bedford-Stuyvesant.  We did, you know, tablecloth tables, and we had live jazz, and we did outdoor seating.  And, and, and we made it beautiful with candle lights.  And, and so many people thought they couldn't come unless they were dressed up, or, you know what, I'm going to go to that place when it's my birthday.  I'm like, I need you to come tonight for dinner, and tomorrow for, for breakfast, okay, not just once a year for your birthday.  So, you know, there, there was not, and probably still isn't, a large kind of dining culture in our community.  This is a very family-based neighborhood and, you know, people come home, and they cook, and they sit down, and they have break- dinner as a family at the table.  They're not going out.  We're now attracting a lot of younger, single people, and they're used to dining out.  However, they're also working in Manhattan [New York], and they typically do that in the city before they come home.  So, now we have to convince them, come on home, take your shoes off, and then go back out in your neighborhood, you know, so that's the challenge.  So, we ran the restaurant ourselves for about five years.  And then, we kind of did an arrangement with one of our tenants, who said his passion was to do a restaurant.  So, one day, I said, here are the keys, go ahead, do it--let's do it.  Just pay your rent.  You can use, use the Akwaaba brand, do it, make me proud.  Have my table ready when I come to eat, you know, and it worked for a long time.  But then, you know, with any business, you got to continue to reinvest in it, and because he came into it with no restaurant  experience, as we didn't have either, but we also didn't have a landlord to pay.  And he had overhead he had to me.  He needed a cash infusion, and if he didn't do that quickly enough, it wasn't going to work.  So, it became difficult for him to sustain it.  And then, we, we--it became difficult for us to find the right tenant for the space because one of the things that we were clear about was that we wanted the businesses in our space--and that was the first--to be people who lived in the neighborhood who were ready to serve their neighbors.  We didn't want people who lived somewhere in Manhattan or whatever.  They came out here, made their money out here, and then went someplace else with the money.  We wanted those people to be right here in the neighborhood, so that was a very small requirement, but a very big demand--a big thing to meet, because who had experience already running a restaurant.  'Cause we had learned that if we didn't have it, you really couldn't do it.  So, trying to find that person, that unique person, who looked like us, who lived in the neighborhood, who had restaurant experience, and who was ready to--where was that person?  So, that was difficult for us, but we tried, we tried several times.  We have a tenant there now who's, you know, who's, who's holding on and, and doing a restaurant there.  We took our name off it, off of it, however, because we, you know, if we can't really run it, and have any kind of a power to make sure that, you know, it meets our standards, then we don't want our name attached to it.  But, so that, that tenant is there.
Story_ID: 571660
Speaker 1: Then, the building next door to that building came on the market.  It had five commercial spaces.  We became very concerned.  We were not in the position at the time to buy another piece of real estate.  However, we understood that if the wrong person did get the building, and the wrong business opened up in there, it would really dilute, if not kill, everything we had tried to build between the bed and breakfast [Akwaaba Mansion, Brooklyn, New York] and the restaurant [Akwaaba Cafe, Brooklyn, New York].  So we had to find a way to buy this building.  And I tell you, I watched many of those buy a house with no money down from infomercials in the middle of the night trying to figure out how do we make this work?  And we finally made it work by doing an outrageous deal with the seller of the property, where he took back the mortgage at like 18 percent, which was highway robbery.  He only did it for one year.  The building had 162 building violations.  My lawyer, who had always worked with us, would refuse to do the deal.  He said, "If you're going to do this, I'm not going to be a part of it if this is too risky."  And we finally found out that the seller had done this three times to three previous buyers, where he took back the mortgage, knew that they would not be able to cure the violations to get a mortgage from a bank or a reputable organization at a fair rate.  And he would then foreclose on them, and take their--keep their down payment, and whatever improvements they made on the building, and get his building back.  This was his game, but we were not about to let that happen.  And the way we got through is we, we went back to something that we as a people have long done and long forgotten to do.  We started bartering.  We was like, "Okay, your, your daughter is trying to get married?  No problem.  We'll do the wedding at the, at the bed and breakfast.  We need you--you're the plumber, right?  Fix the pipes."  "Okay, what do you need?  Okay.  You love our brunch?  Fine, free brunch for five years.  Okay, let's go, get the electrical working."  And that's how we made the building come to life.  And then, we identified, like I said, people who were like-minded, meaning, wanted to be community builders who, who had the passion and the competency, who lived in the neighborhood [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York], who wanted to build business.  And so, everybody on that strip, and there were like five or six different stores now.  Every single one of them lived within walking distance of their stores, and we opened up in the morning, and we come and we serve our neighbors.  And it's a model for how we can reclaim our communities block by block.
Speaker 2: Amen.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 571661
Speaker 1: You were explaining how you expanded into this new five--now you've got the community-minded (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The businesses.
Speaker 1: --businesses.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your television show, 'The Bed-Stuy Parlor'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, I am really, really passionate, not only to build this community, but to build black communities across the country.  And I feel that that's been my life's purpose is to empower black people in whatever venue, and in whatever way that I can.  So, obviously, through the pages of a magazine like Essence, that was the mission, and that's we were able to do.  But every day, even if I'm here making breakfast for the guests who are staying in my bed and breakfast [Akwaaba Bed and Breakfast Inns], if I can serve them, and feed them beyond just their stomachs, their feet, their souls at the same time, which is my goal, then I feel that I'm doing what I was put on earth here to do.  So, you know, it's, it's been a wonderful journey.  And in with that, you know, there are lots of different organizations and non-profits within this community that I think have the same mission that I do.  And if they do, then I'm willing to serve it any way that I can.  So, I've been very involved in our community board, which is kind of like the local governing body that you get appointed to.  And I think it's important that we understand it's part of our empowerment that we hold our elected officials accountable for representing us and, and our desires and our wishes.  So, that's a lot of ways in which to get involved with the community board through that.  We have an organization called the Brownstoners of Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brownstoners of Bedford-Stuyvesant, Inc.].  They are a civic organization who put on the annual house tour that I came to, and discovered Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York].  So, I love, love these folks because these were the early pioneers.  These were the people who knew that Bedford-Stuyvesant was beautiful before it became on New York Magazine's neighborhoods to stay and or live in.  And they've done it.  I mean, most of the people in this organization, you know, are older than I am.  They raised their kids here, and they were very encouraging and continued to be like, "You can do this.  You can raise your kids here.  You can send your kid to public school.  You can work the public school system.  It can work for you," you know.  And they're constantly saying that, so I, I love that organization as well.  The shops that are on my strip--we call ourselves the Shops of Lewis Avenue.  And I'm inspired by every single one of those shop owners because they all had another life before they decided that they were going to make a change, and build business in our community, and we are extremely supportive of one another's businesses.  We work together cooperatively on marketing, and we understand that our mission is far greater than providing the goods or services that our businesses do.  We see ourselves as business community leaders, and so, in addition to running our businesses, we put on an annual tree lighting ceremony during the holidays.  We give out over 350 toys to the local kids.  We put on a haunted house party here at the mansion [Akwaaba Mansion, Brooklyn, New York] to raise money for that effort.  We do a street soiree, as we call it, and we come out as this spelling bee contest for the kids.  I mean, so we do a lot that goes beyond making money in our businesses here in the neighborhood.  We know that our, you know, responsibility is greater than that.
Story_ID: 571662
Speaker 1: And you consider yourself, as a group, I assume, and, individually, as a good example for other communities around the nation--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --particularly, perhaps particularly black communities?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I mean, we must--I, I think, you know, there was a time when we were after equality and end racism, and all of that kind of stuff, and now, I think it's all about economic empowerment.  And we have got to, as community, learn to circulate our dollars at least seven times in our neighborhood is the way other neighborhoods do.  So, we've got to be conscious about how we spend our dollars.  We have to hold the, the suppliers and the places where we shop accountable for how they, they treat us when we come in the shop.  I don't go into a Chinese restaurant where I have to pass my money through a bulletproof glass.  If you can't touch my hand, I can't eat your food.  That's my attitude about it.  And so, it, it--we can absolutely do that.  If we are not here as small black businesses in our communities, and our young people don't have an opportunity for summer jobs, where do we get our start?  How do we learn what business is all about?  We've got to learn that in our neighborhoods.  Who's going to give us a chance to do that, to make mistakes, to learn?  That's, that's the (unclear) of, of, of the small black business.  And, you know, I've never been more proud than, than being the owner of a, of a business, you know.  People would say, oh, how could you leave Essence magazine?  I mean, that's like, women would kill to have that job.  I said, well, I'm not to going to die to have it.  So, I learn I had to make a change in my life, but I never saw running my own business as a step down.  You know, I always saw being an entrepreneur as being the American idol.  Most people will say, given the chance, they would rather be their own boss.  They would rather carry out their own vision.  Not everybody's equipped to do it, but I think everybody would, would be excited about the opportunity if it presented it-, them, itself, to them.
Story_ID: 571663
Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be when you've, when you are retired at fifty, and relaxing on the beach in Cape May [New Jersey]?  What do you want to have left?
Speaker 2: I want, I want to know that my life has served as an example of making it happen, that, you know, one person can make a difference; that, you know, you have a choice while you're here in this, in this life.  You can, you know, you can make a mark, or you can leave a saying.  I want people to say, "Wow, she made a mark."  I mean, that's important to me.  I want my mama [Joann Lemons Greenwood] to be proud always (laughter).  I want my daughter [Glynn Pogue] to say, you know, "My mom is a role model for me," you know.  I want her to say, you know, "She's mad cool," as she says now.  At the same time, you know, she's, she's, she's, she's got going on, you know, but she still has to be mad cool.  That's important to me, too, that can relate on, on that level, that I'm relatable to everybody on any level.  And when people say that to me, that's the highest compliment they can give me, say, "You are so down to earth."  I'm think, "Well, there's no other--where else would I be?"  You know, that's just the greatest compliment to me because I think everybody is gifted.  Everybody has something to offer, you know, how do we, how do we use those in the community and, and nation building?  How do we use what everybody can bring?
Story_ID: 571664
Speaker 1: And what do you expect with your daughter [Glynn Pogue]?  Do--is she interested in the bed and breakfast [Akwaaba Bed and Breakfast Inns] and the retail businesses you--how do you see your family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what's really interesting, I know.  What's really interesting is we did 'The Montel Williams Show,' which aired a couple of days ago.  And Montel asked her that, said, "What are you going to do with these businesses that your mom has built?  I mean, are you going just like, go to college, and sell them and just, you know, and do your own thing?  What do you think you're going to do?"  And she goes, "This is my legacy," you know.  "I absolutely see myself building on what my mom has built."  And I was like, it--yeah, I was like, "Oh my god, thank you, God."  And again, you know, she doesn't have to do this, but the fact that she understands that, you know, that the path has been kind of charted for her, and that she has those choices.  I mean, that's what it's all about.  And my daughter is, you know, she's definitely my pride and joy.  And I, I, you know, people say, "Well, I bet you spoil her."  I'm like, no, I don't spoil her, but she's indulged.  And she's grateful and appreciable for it, and that's the bottom line for me.  It's like, "Do you understand your blessing?  Do you understand, but if you get that you're blessed, then I'm okay with indulging you any way that I can," you know.  Trying to create a work ethic, though, at the same time, you know, letting her know that what my grandfather [Benjamin Greenwood] said, what my daddy [Carl Greenwood] say, "God bless a child that has his own."  I correct her all the time 'cause she'll say, "Oh no," 'cause, "we have a house.  And we have a house here, and we have a house there."  I say, "Excuse me, you don't have a house anywhere.  You have a room in my house there, and here, and there, because you're going to have to get your own house.  You can't say you have a house.  You don't have a house," you know.  So she'll laugh, but I want her to hear that.  I want her to understand that, you know, that she can build on what we've started, but her expectation--my expectation of her is to go even further.  And then, make it right for my grandbaby, who will then make it right for my great-grandbaby, and that's what it has to be about.  So, you know, but I'm telling, I pushing her.  We just finished working on her resume which is very exciting.  She's fifteen.  She's going to a college fair next week.  And I'm like, okay, you, you know, what's a resume?  And as I put the resume together, I was very impressed with this young woman.  And sometimes, you know, she's got, "Ma, why do I have to do that?"  Like I host a television show for the community that's called 'The Bed-Stuy Parlor,' and we do a youth show every June, I believe it is.  And we always find a role for her in it, you know.  It's like, "You're going to be in this.  You're going to be on this roundtable with these young girls, or you're going to do some interviews with some elders in the neighborhood, and talk to them about what life was like when they were your age in this community."  And she's done some great stories.  And, you know, like I said, sometimes she's like, well, what (unclear) to my--you know, I just look at her, like, "We're not answering that question.  Let's go, let's get it going," you know.  And, and she does it, you know, she comes along with the program.  And I let her know, you know, what, what her responsibility is in, in the larger scheme of things.  She's going to be turning sixteen.  I told her when she turns sixteen that I'm going to give her sixteen hundred dollars, and she's going to meet with our financial planner.  And I need to see what she can do with that sixteen hundred dollars in a year.  See--how are you going to turn that sixteen hundred dollars into something more?  You know, because she's going to have to, she's going to have to manage what we created for her, you know.  And I don't want to have to come back from the grave, and snatch her up somewhere, you know.  So, I got to know that she's equipped (laughter) to do the right thing, you know.  But I don't want her to be a square.  She always said, I said, I--mom, I was not a square.  I always tell her that, you know.  I was like, you can read your 'It Girl' book ['The It Girl,' Cecily von Ziegesar], or she loves the 'Gossip Girl' [Cecily von Ziegesar] and all that stuff, but you know what?  You're going to be a millionaire, and I want you to read, the, what, she read 'Rich Dad, Poor Dad for Teens' ['Rich Dad, Poor Dad for Teens: The Secrets About Money--That You Don't Learn in School!,' Robert T. Kiyosaki]. I'm like, "You've got to know what this is all about, you know, and that's important."
Story_ID: 571665
Speaker 1: One of the things we talked about when I got here were--I attempted to ask you about a number of people who might be role models, or people who you were impressed with.  And you said that you're impressed with local people.  Can you talk about that, and maybe tell us about one or two of them?
Speaker 2: You know what?  I oftentimes get asked that, like who inspires you, and who is a role model for you and all of that.  And when I go back to who I used to do my reports on doing Black History Month in school, you know, that would speak to my earliest kind of named people that I would recognize.  I was always impressed by the, just the sheer nerve, and commitment, and will of Mary McLeod Bethune.  I think she was bad, and a lot of people don't talk about her.  I just think that she was awesome.  And, but as I, as I go through life, obviously, there are people who I come in contact with on a more regular basis.  You know, like a [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor at Essence, you know, who, you know, who I long admired, and then had the opportunity to work with side by side.  But the people who really inspire me are the people who, whose names would not be recognizable to you.  It's the woman who lives around the corner who, you know, she, she raised her kids in the projects.  Now she owns a beautiful, beautiful brownstone.  And in talking to her, I co- I came to understand that, you know, she always had the mentality that you could be in the projects, but the projects don't have to be in you.  And this is a woman who would set the table every night for dinner with fine china for her two sons, and play classical music as they dined together, and talked about the issues of the day in the projects, you know.  And I just love that, you know, it's all a mindset.  It's about who, and how you see yourself.  And there are so many fine and rich examples of those people right here in, in this community called Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York].  And that's why I love it so much.  I always tell people that, you know, my mom [Joann Lemons Greenwood] gave birth to me in Washington, D.C.  I'm getting emotional--I can't believe that (laughter).  My man--my mom gave birth to me in Washington, D.C., but I was born in Bedford-Stuyvesant because I have so many fine examples of intact families where all the kinds of, you know, isms that we see associated with us as a people are not manifested on a daily basis.  No, no.  These are people who--they going to church, and they're sending their kids to school.  And, you know, they're speaking to their neighbors.  And they're picking up after their dog.  And they, this, and they're living a life, you know, and I love that house tour I told you about.  It's coming up now, and I love that 'cause I go into our homes, and I see my people living.  And nothing is more exciting to me than that.  We are living--not going through life, not going through the motions, but living.
Story_ID: 571666
Speaker 1: What is your future vision for Akwaaba Ma- holdings [Akwaaba Bed and Breakfast Inns], you know, before you pass it on to the next person?
Speaker 2: Well, right now, we have the five bed and breakfasts, and I don't see myself launching a sixth inn 'cause that wasn't the plan, and I'm pretty--I stick to my plans.  However, I think that a whole generation of women and men have been inspired to look at inn keeping, and only bed and breakfast inns, that had never even heard of bed and breakfasts before.  And I, I remind them that we really are the original conceivers of that, of that whole notion of staying in someone's home.  And we would never let you stay in our house, and send you off on a empty stomach.  So, we're definitely are going to give you meal before you could get on your way.  And we had to do that.  We had to keep each other when we were not able to stay in hotels that were segregated, as we, as we passed through towns.  We had to do that for each other.  So we kind of invented this whole idea of bed and breakfast.  Yet, as generations passed, we didn't know what it was anymore.  And so, now that we rediscover them, and now that we redefine them because bed and breakfasts typically had been in the countryside, or the rural communities, places where we don't live.  Now, that we've redefined them, and you can find a bed and breakfast in the middle of Chicago [Illinois], or the middle of downtown Atlanta [Georgia].  We're okay with that because we don't want to live up in the mountains.  And I'm being general, I'm making generalizations, but (unclear) typically, we are urban people.  And so, now that the urban inn is popular, we go, "Hey, this is something I can do," 'cause we always knew how to entertain.  We always know how to be hospitable.  We love to decorate with a flourish, so all that makes sense.  And so there is so many people who are interested in this, this as a career at this point.  So I can envision, you know, now that we've perfected the model, making that available for others to replicate, and not having to start from scratch as we did, and coming into the market with an established brand like Akwaaba, which simply speaks to a franchise possibility, because it allowed us to expand to what we've done without actually having to do it because, as I said, I'm knocking on the door of fifty.  And I, I intend to be retired, my former retirement, I will still be the face of the brand and, but it will give me the freedom to now go out, and do some of the other kinds of things, like serve more, more fully on the boards that I serve on, and, and certainly play harder, you know, 'cause my husband [Glenn Pogue] will say, you're too uptight.  You need to relax.  You need to hang out.  We should just have fun.  So I can do that a little bit more once I, you know, am able to kind of turn this over to this completely, wonderful, dedicated team of people that I have that back Akwaaba up each and every day.  And if my daughter's [Glynn Pogue] a part of that team, great.  If she's not a part of that team, let her learn it, so that she can oversee that team.  That's great, too.  The choice will be hers.
Speaker 1: That's fantastic.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: We want to thank you for speaking with us today.  I want to thank you for taking the legacy of your [paternal] grandfather [Benjamin Greenwood], for holding it, and passing it to your daughter.  And we just want to say thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  It's been my pleasure.
