Story_ID: 565951
Speaker 1: Today our subject is Mr. Calvin Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode].  My name is Jacques Lesure and I'm the interviewer, the videographer is Scott Sterns and observing is Adel Hodge [ph.].  Mr. Goode would you please state your full name.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on a second, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Mr. Goode would you please state and spell your name, including your middle name?
Speaker 1: Calvin C. Goode, C-A-L-V-I-N, C. stands for Coolidge, C-O-O-L-I-D-G-E, last name is Goode, G-O-O-D-E.
Speaker 2: And your date of birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 1: January 27, 1927, in Depew, D-E-P-E-W Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: And today's date?
Speaker 1: Today's date is July 12, 2007.
Speaker 2: And where are we currently?
Speaker 1: In the George Washington Carver Museum Culture Center [George Washington Carver Museum and Cultural Center] in the City of Phoenix, Arizona.
Speaker 2: And your current occupation?
Speaker 1: Semi-retired, quite involved with non-profit organizations.
Story_ID: 565952
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we have five questions that we like to ask, that we call People magazine type questions.  And just bear with me please as I present these to you.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly sweet potato pie is a nice one, collard greens is another, and also like beef.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well, I would think maybe spring.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue and brown.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I haven't had much opportunity to take vacations but from time to time we do select some spots in the, in the State of Arizona.
Speaker 1: And is there a favorite phrase or saying that you'd like to share with the audience today?
Speaker 2: God is good.
Story_ID: 565953
Speaker 1: I'd like to start at the beginning now to ask you some questions, I'd like to start with your family, your mother.  Can you tell me what her name was?
Speaker 2: Clara Loring Goode.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: In Arkansas.
Speaker 1: And did she grow up in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: No, later they moved to Oklahoma and that's where she met my dad [Warner Goode].  And then they all came to Arizona in 1927.
Speaker 1: And do you know about her background growing up as a child?
Speaker 2: To a limited degree, mother went only to the sixth grade.  I know she was--came from a large family and I was her third child.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Mother was about five feet, one or two.  A lady who believed in God, a lady who certainly encouraged me along the way in terms of getting a good education, and one that I dearly love--loved.  She is deceased now, she died at the age of ninety.  Before she died she lived right across the street from me on East Jefferson [Street].
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you about her past life as a child growing up, and did she share any stories with you?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm eighty years old now and I've forgotten some of these things that maybe she shared with me, but it seems as though she was a happy child.  And she did help her mother since she was one of the older children in the family.  She had eight children, and as I indicated earlier I was number three.  Mother worked hard, she did field work, she also did some domestic work.
Story_ID: 565954
Speaker 1: Please tell me about your father, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Warner Goode.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: And did he grow up in Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: Yes, until he came to Arizona in 1927.  He was a farmer and it seems as though the hail knocked out the crop there in Oklahoma.  Mother--my mother's [Clara Loring Goode] family had migrated to Arizona earlier, so dad came out in a Model T Ford [Ford Model T] through the White Mountains.  And it seems as though at that time the roads weren't very good, one way, so you saw a car coming then you had to back up sometime to--so to be able to pass.  Dad in Arizona, he did field work.  He also did some concrete work, and his last few years he did road grader in the City of Phoenix [Arizona].  Both were born in 1902, dad died in '80 [1980].  My mother died in '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: And did he share any stories that you can share with us today about his childhood?
Speaker 2: Not that I can really remember except he too grew up in a large family.  There were six boys and six girls.  And certainly he had went to the eighth grade, and he had apparently a good time at home and also with his family.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Dad was six feet tall, very strong man, he certainly did a lot of work in terms of his family.  And I admired him for the fact that he did.  Growing up, we came to Gila Bend [Arizona] he worked only WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration], went out in the woods and got wood, cut it up and brought it up to Phoenix to sell.  So he did a lot of odd jobs in terms of trying to support his family.
Story_ID: 565955
Speaker 1: Now how far can you go back in your ancestry? Can you go back beyond your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Well, in terms of my grandfather on my dad's [Warner Goode] side, he was half German.  And it seems as though a slave took advantage of his mother.  So, I remember my grandfather, he came out too later to Arizona.  He had, you know, white fine hair and my mother was sh- my grandmother was short, looks like she's less than five feet.  And she was certainly a lovable grandmother.
Speaker 1: What were their names?
Speaker 2: Albert [Albert Goode (ph.)] was the name of my grandfather, and Mary [Mary Goode (ph.)] was the name of my grandmother.  They finally settled in Mesa, Arizona.
Speaker 1: Do you have any favorite stories or childhood, childhood things about them growing up?
Speaker 2: We didn't see them too much but certainly I loved both of them, and the time we were around them we appreciated them and they seemed to have appreciated us.
Speaker 1: Now these were your parents or your grandparents on your father's side.  How about your mother's [Clara Loring Goode] side, do you recall her parents?
Speaker 2: I only met--I didn't meet my--their parents but I do remember, as I indicated, they were living in Mesa and grandmother was a very religious person.  And she certainly, even though she had a large family, she imparted love and caring for all of her children.
Story_ID: 565956
Speaker 1: We're gonna go forward into the early years of your life. What is your earliest memory that you can recall for us growing up?
Speaker 2: Probably, four or five.  I, I can remember that they said when I was three years old I had a fight with a rooster.  And the rooster pecked me and knocked out one of my, my teeth.  And grandmother took that rooster and killed it, and made a dish out of it but I didn't eat it.
Story_ID: 565957
Speaker 1: Now, could you list your siblings in order of their birth and include yourself, please?
Speaker 2: Well, my older sister was about four years older than I was and she died at the age of nineteen in Prescott [Arizona].  My brother was two years older and--two years younger than she and two years older than, than I. And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Could you give us their names, please, Mr. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode]?
Speaker 2: Lena [Lena Goode] was the oldest girl, Melvin [Melvin Goode] was the brother's name, and then my name is Calvin.
Story_ID: 565958
Speaker 1: What was life like in the Goode home around holidays and growing up in that family?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly we came from poor surroundings.  Housing wasn't the best and the town in Gila Bend [Arizona] we lived out on the desert, twenty-three miles from town.  And we would go down to Gila Bend and spend- stay with an uncle to go to school--a one room shack, eight grades, one teacher, a potbellied stove.  Certainly, it wasn't the best kind of environment but we were able to survive.
Speaker 1: Do you recall the street that you lived on?
Speaker 2: In Gila Bend they didn't have street names to my knowledge, so no, I don't remember what they called that street.
Speaker 1: What was the community and the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: Well it was across the tracks, across the canal, housing was substandard, jobs that minorities could get were very limited.  So, like a poor child growing up in America.
Speaker 1: Did you have many friends or neighbors that you can recall any of the names, anybody special that stands out in your neighborhood or in your surroundings there outside of your family?
Speaker 2: Well, there were some there in the school.  It seems every two years, every two years we had a different teacher and certainly the--trying to remember the name of the--but anyway, I do remember some of them.
Story_ID: 565959
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about the sights, some of the sights and the sounds or the smell that you can recall growing up in Gila Bend [Arizona]?  What was the surroundings, the actual feeling that you can recall for us?
Speaker 2: Well, the streets were not paved so we did have some dust storms coming through.  I can remember we did go fishing from time to time and certainly there is a fish smell.  But we, we did the best we could under the circumstances.
Story_ID: 565960
Speaker 1: I wanna go a little further down the road and--what elementary school did you attend, the name of the school?
Speaker 2: It was in Gila Bend [Arizona] and it was segregated, and as I said earlier, about being one room, eight grades, one teacher, potbellied stove.  I repeated that before.  No cooling.  Can you imagine Gila Bend back in 19--I graduated from there in 1940.
Speaker 1: You mentioned there were teachers on a rotation every two years or so, can you recall any of the teachers that really influenced you, any one of those teachers, their name?
Speaker 2: Probably the one who influenced me most was Mr. Lloyd D. Dickey [Lloyd Dickey], but he drove from, from Phoenix [Arizona] down to Gila Bend.  And he stayed down there in a little room they built for him, and he would come back up.  And there were times when we lived about three miles off of the highway, so there were times we--dad [Warner Goode] would take us out to the highway and then he would pick us up and take us on down.  And we lived with an uncle there in Gila Bend.  And then on weekends they would come back and get us and--
Speaker 1: What did Miss Dickey [sic.] do or say that influenced you?
Speaker 2: Mr. Dickey took a special interest in me and he just said he thought I was one of his brightest students.  And I tried to apply myself and certainly was able to catch up with my brother [Melvin Goode] who was two years older, and we graduated together.  And I was the valedictorian of the class.  And sometime my middle son [Gerald Goode], we like to kid each other, he would say, "But there were only two people in the class."
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you Mr. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode]?
Speaker 2: I think I was student who applied myself and tried to learn as much as I possibly could.
Speaker 1: And what was your behavior like as a child?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was good.  You know that, my name is Goode.  I think I had good behavior.
Story_ID: 565961
Speaker 1: Now you're in this school [in Gila Bend, Arizona], it's the first through eighth grade, you've been there a while and you're getting close to, to the graduation time. Did you have any aspirations or any things that--or ideas of what you wanted to do with your life at this point?
Speaker 2: I don't recall at that particular time.  My dad [Warner Goode] had visions that I would be a medical doctor, and I toyed with that through high school and college [Phoenix Junior College; Phoenix College, Phoenix, Arizona].  And I finally determined that I couldn't be a doctor so I switched over to business.  But, as I indicated, my mother [Clara Loring Goode] was the one who encouraged me to get as much education as possible.
Story_ID: 565962
Speaker 1: I heard you mention earlier that your family was--your mo- your mother [Clara Loring Goode] was very religious, did your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Church there in Gila Bend [Arizona] was very limited.  Later on they did become Jehovah's Witnesses.
Speaker 1: And as a--as you left, you got ready to leave the Gila Bend school around the eighth grade, should the year was 19--?
Speaker 2: Forty [1940].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty [1940], and from there did you go to high school directly?
Speaker 2: They gave my brother [Melvin Goode] and I a diploma that said we could go to any high school in the state, but there in Gila Bend they had segregation.  School boards had the option of excluding students of African descent, so we couldn't go to the high school there in Gila Bend.  So dad [Warner Goode] moved to Prescott [Arizona].  Prior to that time, my oldest sister, Lena [Lena Goode], had to go to high school and they sent her up to Mesa [Arizona] to attend school and she stayed with grandparents [Mary Goode (ph.) and Albert Goode (ph.)].  But with the two of us with her, then dad felt it wise for us to go to a city that would permit us to go to high school.
Story_ID: 565963
Speaker 1: Gila Bend [Arizona], do you recall any of--or seeing any stories you have of the actual segregation and the attitude in the city when you would you go in?  Outside of school, did you see things that were in there that surprised you or bothered you when you went into town?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly you wonder why our facilities weren't as good as the facilities where the white kids went to school.  But sometimes you just have to accept some of those things.  Certainly the job opportunities, the housing and so forth were, as I indicated, were across the track, across the canal.  Those things did concern me as being on--we--dad [Warner Goode] signed up for WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] and we got some products and some of these clothes where were too big for us.  Certainly, I saw a differences but I knew that I couldn't do much about it.
Speaker 1: In Gila Bend were you ever the victim of any kind of outright blatant segregated things to you personally or to your family?
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember one time when it was said the Ku Klux Klans [KKK] was gonna come through and was gonna burn a cross.  And I can remember some of the men say, well, they were gonna go down and, and watch and see what developed.  Certainly, I don't remember ever going to the movies in Gila Bend.  Certainly, in terms of food we had to take a little wagon and go way across to the white school for lunch and bring the food back.  One of the things I did like was the peaches and the milk at that time.  And there were times I went and brought the wagon over, so we didn't have a cafeteria like they had.  And there were other things I didn't feel that we got--also we talk about equal educational opportunities, I felt that our education I think the teachers did the best they could with what they had to offer.
Story_ID: 565964
Speaker 1: It's 1940, you graduated from Gila Bend, you and your brother [Melvin Goode], and your father [Warner Goode] makes the decision to move to Prescott [Arizona].  Can you tell us about Prescott and that environment?
Speaker 2: Well, there were very few African Americans in Prescott so they let us go to the high school and the grade school.  I can remember in the ninth grade there, it was called Prescott Junior High School [Prescott, Arizona], I thought that one of the teachers was prejudiced and I thought some of her attitude toward me wasn't the best.
Speaker 1: Do you recall her name?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't recall her name.  I also remember there were two students there, one was six foot something and, and another one tall too.  Can you imagine, I was 5'1" and weighed seventy-five pounds as a junior in high school, they were picking on me so the only defense I had was to just stay out of their way.  And sometimes I wish I could see them today so that I can deal with them the way I'd like to deal with them.
Speaker 1: So was Prescott any different than Gila Bend [Arizona] as far as segregation was concerned?
Speaker 2: There were also across this country, I think we all know that civil rights did make some changes but even in Prescott there were certain jobs you could have and certain jobs you could not have.  And there were--well, we lived out from town, again, about three miles from town so we caught the bus and went to the school.
Speaker 1: So you stayed at Prescott High [Prescott High School, Prescott, Arizona] for how long?
Speaker 2: Well, from '40 [1940] to '44 [1944] and then they moved from Prescott down to Arizona [sic. Phoenix, Arizona].
Story_ID: 565965
Speaker 1: But during my junior year [at Prescott High School, Prescott, Arizona] I went out for track and I still, I said I was 5'1" and weighed seventy-five pounds.  And I could run faster than some of the other boys but then you had to have a physical education--physical examination so the doctor examined me and said, "Calvin [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode], you've got a heart condition, you ought not be out for track."  So I had to drop out and I dropped out of school for a year.  And he had predicted that I'd probably live another year but I'm eighty years old now and he's dead and gone and I'm still active.  I just think the Lord blessed me.
Speaker 2: Did you have any symptoms of a heart condition that, that you knew about prior to this examination?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't, I didn't have any inkling so it was a big surprise to me.
Speaker 2: Do you think he just didn't want you on the track team?
Speaker 1: I don't believe that. I think he finally determined that my heart acted a little differently.  Even today at eighty years old you take this examination of your heart, the machine doesn't work quite right on me.  And they say there're differences, sometime they don't.
Story_ID: 565966
Speaker 1: So you took a year out of school and so about 1945 what did you do?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-four [1944] in October I came down to--they thought maybe the climate--Prescott [Arizona] is a mile high city.  And they thought that the climate may be too high, you know, it's a little more difficult to breathe in a higher climate.  So I came down and spent several months with and aunt and uncle and they finally came down and so I came and enrolled in Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona] here.  And I had a great time here at Carver, and graduated in May of '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: Tell us about your experiences at Carver.
Speaker 2: Well, I came down and the students really accepted me and I worked with the newspaper and the teachers were, you know, they did their best.  And we had some good teachers here, concerned people, classes were much smaller.  So all and all I had a great time here at Carver.
Speaker 1: The faculty at Carver, was there anything special or unique about them?
Speaker 2: You mean about the teachers?
Speaker 1: The teachers and the administration.
Speaker 2: Well, I think they were caring and they really wanted us to get a good education.
Speaker 1: Is there one or two that may have influenced you especially?
Speaker 2: Well, the principal, Mr. Robinson [W.A. Robinson] was one of my--he lived right down the street from where I later started living.  Mrs. Hackett [Mattie Hackett] had black history and she taught us black history.  And I was able to learn some of the accomplishments that African Americans have made to this country.  I can remember in a class, social studies class, one of the teachers got up and said, you know, they did the slaves a favor by bringing them from the jungles of Africa to this civilization.  I didn't know how to challenge her being so small in a class of all-white students and I didn't challenge her.  Now, here again, I wish I could see him today and indicate to him his remarks were certainly not--
Speaker 1: Now, that didn't happen at Carver. That happened somewhere else?
Speaker 2: This happened in Prescott [Prescott High School, Prescott, Arizona].
Speaker 1: Prescott?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now so you're--
Speaker 2: But I'm saying that when I came to Carver, Mrs. Hackett taught us black history and how we should be proud of our background and so on.
Speaker 1: So Mrs. Hackett dispelled the myth of--that he had started.
Speaker 2: Yes, I didn't believe what he said because my grandmother had said they had a difficult time in slavery in terms of sometime they worked them all day from sunup to sundown and sometime they didn't have shoes, and the food was inadequate, the housing was inadequate.  So it didn't make sense to me that he, being an educator, ought to be making this kind of statement.
Speaker 1: So, had your grandmother been a slave?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But she knew of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But she knew about slavery.
Speaker 1: So you're at Carver for how many years?
Speaker 2: Came in October and graduated in May of forty--came in October of '44 [1944] and graduated in May of '45 [1945].
Story_ID: 565967
Speaker 1: So now you--the family is all moved now, everybody is together in Phoenix [Arizona].  What was life like for you all in Phoenix at this point?
Speaker 2: Well, I came down for my--started Phoenix College [Phoenix Junior College; Phoenix College, Phoenix, Arizona] and they stayed in Prescott [Arizona], so I had to live with an aunt and uncle for the first year and then the second year, they came on down and we were all together.
Speaker 1: And how--what was your view of Phoenix as opposed to where they had been prior?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly it was a bigger city and here at Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona] we had better opportunities than in the City of Prescott, but both places certainly this concept of equal, equal education opportunity was not a reality.
Speaker 1: So you graduated in 1945?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Then what did Calvin Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode] decide to do during that summer and on?
Speaker 2: Oh, a little work, trying to earn a little money, and then I went on to Phoenix College and took a number of science classes hoping to satisfy my dad [Warner Goode].  And I said, well, maybe I can be a dentist.  Maybe that will satisfy him.  Then I finally determined I can't do either one so then I switched over to business and that's what I got my A.A. degree in.
Speaker 1: So you received your A.A. from Phoenix College?
Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947].
Speaker 1: In 1947.
Speaker 2: Got a hundred dollar scholarship from the Phoenix Women's Club and took that scholarship and went to ASU [Arizona State College; Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] and paid my fees and my books.
Speaker 1: So what was the tuition like at that year?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you can see it's better than thirteen thousand dollars now.
Speaker 1: So after you--now you have a A.A. degree.  Were you the first in your immediate family to have a degree at this point or so (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 565968
Speaker 1: The year is 1949, and you're armed with a, you're armed with a A.A. degree from Phoenix College [Phoenix Junior College; Phoenix College, Phoenix, Arizona].
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-seven [1947].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-seven [1947], you got you're A.A. degree from Phoenix (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: So, what happened between 1947 and 1949?
Speaker 2: I attended--they called it Arizona State College at Tempe [Arizona State College], later it became Arizona State University [Tempe, Arizona].
Speaker 1: So now you're at a much larger facility, larger school now and what was life like on campus for you there?
Speaker 2: Well, I studied hard.  At one time I did have a job on campus, cleaning one of the buildings.  But I applied myself and majored in economics and management.
Speaker 1: What were your social interactions like at the school?  What were they like?
Speaker 2: Not much, I'm not a social animal.
Speaker 1: Even back in high school, I was wondering did you have many extracurricular activities?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, we lived out from town so that made it more difficult.  And then I never learned to dance, can't sing and do any of those things.
Speaker 1: So, you're, you're in school, majoring in economics and what else now, please?
Speaker 2: Management.
Speaker 1: Management.  And is there an aspiration, do you see a particular path that you want to go in at this point?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't sure.  I knew that the job opportunities were probably limited for African Americans at that time and, and invited--I was with the social club out there.  And we invited Mr. Robinson [W.A. Robinson] to come out to talk to the group so he came out.  The first time, I think he had some problems with his car--he was a principal here at Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona].  And the second time he came on out and spoke to the group and then we got to discussing, and he said, "Well, I need someone at Carver."  So he said to me, "Maybe you could be a school accountant and assistant secretary."  So I accepted and came down to work July 1st of '49 [1949], and worked here for five years 'til they closed Carver in 1954.
Speaker 1: So did you have a job actually prior to graduating?
Speaker 2: Yeah, few weeks prior to graduation.
Speaker 1: So what year did you actually graduate from Arizona State?
Speaker 2: It was in May or June of '49 [1949].
Story_ID: 565969
Speaker 1: So right now you've gone through this track, you've gotten a degree in management and economics [from Arizona State College; Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona], and you have a job at your old high school.  The principal has given you this position. Tell us more about that position?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly it involved having a bookstore, prior to that time they had to bring the books over from Phoenix Union [Phoenix Union High School, Phoenix, Arizona].  So we established a bookstore here on campus and it's right where you saw my picture is at was the bookstore.  Secondly, we had athletic teams and I handled all of the finances for the--getting the teachers to work and arranging for the collections of the funds and so on.  We had some clubs on campus so it would deposit into their account and maintain those records.  We had a budget for, for Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona] and Mr. Robinson [W.A. Robinson] delegated that to me, he gave me a lot of latitude in terms of that so I did that.  And all of the financial matters of the school, I was able to do.  We were one of several schools in the district so our records all went to the district office.
Speaker 1: How did you feel, because actually it had only been about five or six years total since you had actually left the school itself?  What was the response from the other students and people who may have known you?
Speaker 2: Well, I was I think--I was twenty-two years old when I came to Carver.  Some say I looked younger than that, but some of the kids, you know, they cooperated with me.  I was pretty firm with them.
Speaker 1: How were the teachers, because they had just taught you not too long ago, technically?
Speaker 2: Well, really, most of the teachers that Mr. Robinson brought to Carver came after I graduated.  I can remember Mrs. Rogers [ph.] who taught English and dean of girls, she was still around.  I had English from her, did quite well in her class.  And then there was Mrs. Soloma Smith [ph.], had class from her.  Trying to remember any of the other teachers who were still around.  Mr. Robinson, as you know, went out and sought teachers with master's degrees even before the high school district required.  He also insisted separate but equal, okay, give me better supplies and equipment then.  Those kind of things, so he really made a difference in the lives of these kids.
Speaker 1: And he was still here at that time, at the school when you came back 'cause he gave you the job.  Now, what was your family thinking because we--you said earlier that your mother [Clara Loring Goode] was very bent on education.  Now, you have achieved a, a great accomplishment, what was, what was she feeling or saying to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think she was proud of me.  She wasn't one to make some of her feelings known, you know, in terms of that but I think she was proud of me.
Speaker 1: And your father [Warner Goode]?
Speaker 2: My father I think accepted it.  His was less--you know how we fathers sometime are not very vocal in terms of giving praise and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: But you still felt that they were happy for you?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Now we're in the early '50s [1950s] and you stayed here, how many years did you say you stayed at Carver?
Speaker 2: Forty-nine [1949] to '54 [1954].
Story_ID: 565970
Speaker 1: Now in that year of '54 [1954], there was a major decision that went down federally and nationally, Brown vs. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], what was the tone like at Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona] when you were here at that point?
Speaker 2: In 1953, there was--a high school district was sued and Judge Struckmeyer [Fred C. Struckmeyer, Jr.] rendered a decision that said segregation is unconstitutional, so that decision was made prior to the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision of '54 [1954].  So the next June 30th, they closed Carver and sent the teachers and the students to other schools in the district.
Speaker 1: And was that all faculty even yourself?
Speaker 2: They treated me a little differently.  I and the secretary, we wondered what they were gonna do with us. They told the teachers we'd send you here, and here and here.  Many of them had department head positions here but they didn't give them those, those kind of positions right away.  Mr. Robinson [W.A. Robinson] was brought up to the district office and to sort of work with integration and that sort of thing.  But in terms of Calvin Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode], we wrote the superintendent a letter and asked what will happen to us.  I thought his letter back to us was inappropriate, and he said, "Well, if we have something for you, we will hire you."  In the case of the secretary, they finally sent her a--now, she was Mr. Robinson's secretary.  They finally sent her to the bookstore at North High [North High School, Phoenix, Arizona] to work, which was a position lower than what she had been used to.  Later on she did become secretary to the board, so she went up the ladder later on.  But in terms of Calvin C. Goode, I raised a question and I got back the feedback from the assistant superintendent and in charge of buildings and grounds, that if he had a job, he wouldn't give it to Goode because of his attitude.  My attitude is, if I needed something here for the kids here at Carver, I wasn't bashful in asking for it and pushing for it.  Then I appealed to the assistant superintendent in charge of business, and he said, "Well, Mr. Goode, you know, sometime people are hired because of the skin color, sometime their hair color, fat or thin and so on."  So there wasn't any help there from me--for me.  And then there was a job that opened up at North High School, same kind of position I was doing here at Carver. And note, I had my degree and five years' experience and so forth.  I applied.  But the principal up there said, no, he didn't want Goode, someone may protest from downtown.  And then they didn't like the idea of Goode supervising white women.  Well, I kept pushing them and finally after seven months I got--came back into the system as a, as a, as assistant property control director.  And that was a strange thing there because the man in charge of it said he wanted me, and because, he said, when his mother died I had sent a note of condolences to him.  But that was Joe Aisle [ph.], we worked together for a number of years.  And then a opportunity came up where I could be a--there was another opportunity at Phoenix Union [Phoenix Union High School, Phoenix, Arizona] and I applied for that, but the man hired I guess his friend.  And later on they wanted me.  And the same way with Carl Hayden [Carl T. Hayden Community High School, Phoenix, Arizona], I worked out there, so they wanted me later on but they didn't want me at first.  So, but anyway, I had thirty years with the high school district.  And then in 1970, I went on the council [Phoenix City Council] in 1972.  We'll get to that later, but I got some pressure from the school board and they changed the job.  And they said I could have a job as a counselor, I got my counseling certificate too and got my master's degree in 1972.
Speaker 1: Let's back up for a moment and we'll come forward and come and revisit that.  But there were seven months of down time between Carver closing and your next position with the school system.  How did you sustain yourself during those seven months?
Speaker 2: I was out of work for a month and Mr. Robinson assisted me in getting a job with the county school superintendent, John H. Barry, so I worked there for that length of time.  And then Mr. Barry got, got elected to the Arizona Cooperation Commission [sic. Arizona Corporation Commission].  So between the two I spent the seven, seven months.
Speaker 1: What do you think was the reason for your difficulty--or the main reason for your difficulty in finding that position inside the school system you had already been in for five years?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I indicated to you the reason they gave me, and I think it showed that they were prejudiced.
Speaker 1: And also do you think that it might have been your forthright nature that was somewhat offensive to white people in charge possibly?
Speaker 2: That may have been, but still if you, you feel that things need to be done then you try to get them done.  I think I was within my rights in terms of pushing for some of these things.
Story_ID: 565971
Speaker 1: So, the decision comes down from the, from the [U.S.] Supreme Court in '54 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  There is a lot going on with the school system.  We're in 1955 and were there any entrepreneurial events that you were doing during that year?  Did you do anything else besides the school system?
Speaker 2: I did, and still do, some income tax on the side during tax season, February 1st through April 15th but that was about it.
Speaker 1: So things are going fairly well for you now; you've kind of got your position together in the school system and you're, and you, you seem to be pretty stable now in, in the school system and being--you're somewhat of a veteran now in the school system.  And in 1960 what happens?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960]. I married Georgia Goode [Georgie Stroud Goode] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now tell us about who--your wife.  You got married in 1964 and what's your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Georgia M. Goode.
Speaker 1: And what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Maiden name was Stroud, S-T-R-O-U-D.
Speaker 1: So where did you meet Miss Stroud?
Speaker 2: I met her in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a bit about the--how that came to be?
Speaker 2: Well, we had a friend who came out west, he thought the job opportunities were better out here.  And he stayed with Mr. Robinson [W.A. Robinson], which was only about several blocks from where I lived, we became friends.  And then he wanted to go back to Atlanta to visit his lady friend, and he wanted someone to help drive.  So I said, "Well, you know, I have not been to Atlanta I'd like to see Atlanta."  So we drove down and he called Georgia and asked her if she would entertain me while I was in the city.  And she said, yes, she didn't have anything planned.  Then I learned later she cancelled a date in order to see me.  But, anyway, (laughter) we, we met.  And that was at Christmastime.
Speaker 1: Now what year would that have been?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959], I guess it was, Christmas.
Speaker 1: So you meet Miss Stroud at that time, she entertains you and back in those days what did that entertaining in those--look like for a single--for two singles back in the '60s [1960s] in Atlanta, or '59 [1959] or '60 [1960] in Atlanta?  What kind of things did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, we talked and we--I'm not sure--she did say she gonna take me to a movie but I don't believe we ever made it to that movie.  But we were there a couple of weeks and we saw each other (unclear) and I liked what I saw.  And then when I got back I said, "Well, would you like to be my wife?"  And she said, "Give me a month to think about it."  And I said, "Okay, you can have a month."  So at the end of the month she wrote me and said, she'd be happy to be my bride.
Speaker 1: So did you back to get her?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1960.
Speaker 1: And what did Miss Stroud's parents have to say about all this, their daughter going across the country.
Speaker 2: Well, her father [Horace Stroud] was deceased, and her mother [Georgia Stroud]--one of, one of the other things I found of interest, her sister lived somewhere else and she wanted to see who this man was that Georgia had said she's gonna marry.  And when she came down then she kind of looked me over and she, she said, "Pull your pants up, let me see your legs."  So I pulled my pants up and she saw my legs and my legs passed inspection (laughter).  But my mother--and then I wrote her mother and she said, "Well, if that's what Georgia wants to do, fine."  Even though I think they both felt that, you know, they had lived together so long that, that being across country--but her mother did come out later and she spent some time with us.
Speaker 1: So you go to Atlanta to get your bride, you bring her back, and what is Miss Goode at this point, what is she involved in, in Phoenix [Arizona] at this point?
Speaker 2: The next few days after she got here, she called by Mr. Swindle [ph.], who was a principal in the Roosevelt School District [Roosevelt Elementary School District], and said, "I understand you're a teacher, I need a teacher."  So he recommended her for employment, I think she had to take a class or two and she start teaching.  And she's taught for forty years, first in the Roosevelt School District and later with GateWay Community College [Phoenix, Arizona] teaching English.  And she indicates that, that was a most rewarding teaching experience.
Story_ID: 565972
Speaker 1: This is 1960 in the, in the '60 [1960], '61 [1961] around that time, are things different in Phoenix [Arizona] and the school board now in the school system?
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966] to a degree.  But, you know, even though the [U.S.] Supreme Court outlawed--passed that decision, Brown vs. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], we still celebrate that and after fifty years.  I served also, this is coming forward--and I still feel that--I served six years on the Phoenix Elementary school board [Governing Board] and Georgia [Goode's wife, Georgie Stroud Goode] also served on the school board too, both Phoenix Union [Phoenix Union High School District] and also the Phoenix Elementary [Phoenix Elementary School District].
Speaker 1: This was in the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: In the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I felt that even though the Supreme Court had spoken, we have--facts seem to indicate that we have more de facto segregation perhaps than we had back then.
Speaker 1: So, husband and wife are both active in the school board and teaching.  Well, she was teaching and were you just teaching still or were you--oh, you weren't teaching, you were in the administrative functions of the school.
Speaker 2: Well, after I left the--I went in assistant property control director and assistant budget director.  In fact, I came down here and spent two years up on the second floor as assistant budget director for the high school district.  And then later, as I said, I got my master's [degree] and a counseling certificate.  And then I became school community worker and for ten years I was trying to keep kids in school and providing them with some of the necessities like books, because you had to buy your books and they became expensive, and clothing and bus tickets, and lunches and those kind of things.  So I did that for ten years later.
Story_ID: 565973
Speaker 1: So now you're--you've been active in the school board, you've worked in administrative parts of the school board, you see how it runs, you see the disparities.  And what happens around 1969 for you toward the end of, end of the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Well, sometime it's hard for me to go back and pinpoint but let me indicated to you, in the Wilson School District [Wilson Elementary School District], my brothers and sisters were going to that school.  They had a little school out on 40th Street, one shack and two teachers.  And, so their district was sued and my parents [Clara Loring Goode and Warner Goode] participated in it.  My brother--teacher beat him and so we took that up as an issue, and working with the council of civic unity [Greater Phoenix Council for Civic Unity], we were able to get that district to integrate.  And they closed out that school, Wilson Ward, we called it.  And moved one teacher and one of them, they let go out to the other plant.  But, so that was something that happened in terms of integration in the City of Phoenix [Arizona].  One of the strange things about--we have thirteen different elementary school districts in the Phoenix area so that--and they're talking about consolidation now but that's present.
Story_ID: 565974
Speaker 1: So, you've had almost now, almost close to twenty years of school--Phoenix [Arizona] school experience, the school system, experience.  We're going into the '70s [1970s] now.  And you worked on different commissions, you worked on the, I think you called it the, the elite commission, you've worked as a, as a worker to, to empower the schools with better, better opportunities.  You've been all across the board now in the administrative part.  Now it's 1971, you also have three children by this time, correct?  Or when were your children born?
Speaker 2: No, '62 [1962], '64 [1964], '66 [1966], all three of them they still live in the valley.
Speaker 1: And their names are?
Speaker 2: Vernon [Vernon Goode], the oldest, Gerald [Gerald Goode], the middle son, and Randy [Randy Goode], the youngest son.  And we have six grandchildren.
Story_ID: 565975
Speaker 1: So, as we say now in 1970, you're, you're a full grown man, three children and a wife [Georgie Stroud Goode], and you've been working on the school board for a while now.  Are your aspirations changing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I, I went on the school board later on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Go back, go 'head.  I was working on my master's at that time and got my master's degree in three years, going summer and night and, and I as I look back, I don't know how I did it and at the same time had a full-time job with Phoenix--Phoenix Union [Phoenix Union High School District] and--
Speaker 1: In what year did you earn your master's degree?
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 1: So, it's the early '70s [1970s] between '70 [1970] and '72 [1972], is there anything that's changing in Calvin Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode] that makes you maybe wanna do something else with your life now?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly, in sixty--'69 [1969] we have what we call the Charter Government Committee and there was a thought that at one time all of the council members lived in one area and were all white male.  So they wanted to--and I do believe in diversity representation of all groups, so they came to me in '69 [1969] and said, "Mr. Goode, we'd like you to run for city council [Phoenix City Council]."  Dr. Morrison Warren had run and they'd elect four years and at that time they were saying two two year terms was sufficient.  Now I think it was designed, designed to keep a weak council, because it takes a while to learn the ropes so to speak.  So, I said, no, I was chairman of the LEAP commission, which is out of the poverty program.  And I said, I've accepted the chairmanship of the LEAP commission, Leadership Education for the Advancement of Phoenix [Leveraging Educational Assistance Partnership], and I don't feel like accepting something and then stepping down.  So they ran another African American, Carl Stewart [ph.], who was for- and Carl Stewart got defeated by, by Ed Cork [ph.].  And then they came back to me later on and, and said in '71 [1971], "Mr. Goode, okay, two years up we want you to run."
Speaker 1: Who were some of these people Mr. Goode, who were these people that were asking you to do this?
Speaker 2: These were what we call the, the charter group.  They came in with the thought of cleaning up Phoenix [Arizona] and so on (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were there any names in particular that, that was really adamant about you doing this?
Speaker 2: Well, the Mayor Driggs [John Driggs] is the one who came and asked me about running.  But Rosenzweig [Harry Rosenzweig, Sr.] and some other folks were the controlling end for the number of people.  So I say, okay.  I said--they gave me some funds and also made me a part of the slate.  There's a lady by the name of Margaret Hance, she was on the slate as councilperson and Calvin Goode.  So there were folks who said, "Mr. Goode, you can't win because you're shy and they said the black population is about 5 percent," and I said, "Well, I believe I can win."  So we put together a campaign and their campaign and we won.  And I went on the council in '72 [1972] and stayed there for twenty-two years, eleven elections, two year terms.
Story_ID: 565976
Speaker 1: So now you've found yourself in the middle of the politics in Phoenix [Arizona].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You've come from the school, school system and now you're in a much different position, one that carries some power and weight.  What, what was your family saying about you now?  Your, your mom [Clara Loring Goode] and dad [Warner Goode], and your wife [Georgie Stroud Goode].
Speaker 2: Well, my wife has always expressed, expressed great admiration and congratulated me, and feeling of--she's been supportive of me.  My mother and father, being Jehovah's Witnesses, they didn't support politics but they were kind to me and, you know, they respected me as their son, see.  So, and then some of my other family members in the Phoenix area were directly supportive of me.
Speaker 1: Now you've been elected to the city council [Phoenix City Council], what was your reception from the other council members and people in general at this point?  You're the first.
Speaker 2: I was the second African, second African, Morrison Warren was the first one and he served for four years and then there's a gap of two years before I came on the scene.  And since that time, Cody Williams and also Mike Johnson [Michael E. Johnson] have been able to--but we'll talk about the district system too if you want to a little later.
Speaker 1: So, Mr. Warren was the first and you were the second?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What were your--what was your reception like?
Speaker 2: Well, there were some people who really supported, they supported the idea of diversity.  I did get a call from--I still have that, that card, he signed it as Ku Klux Klan [KKK], you know, he didn't think, you know, blacks is this and black is that, and you ought not to be there.  So you pick up some of that, but by and large, I, I tried to support people all over the city.  There were some folks who said that I was only concerned with black issues, and my answer to that was, I am concerned and if there is a larger percentage of them--of African Americans who come to me, I don't have a quota on African Americans but I am going because we were elected and we ought to serve all people.  So I established that early on.  And I think even now folks'll come up to me and say that I was the best council they ever had in Phoenix.  But nevertheless, I did what I--I can point to a lot of successes.  In fact, in that video that you'll get, Goddard [Terry Goddard] will tell you--he said in the video that, you know, when he came on as mayor, he said, "Mr. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode], how do we do this?"  And he says, "Well, Mr. Goode said that he listens to folks, he makes a decision, and he sticks by it."  And later on the council finally came around to my position, and he said, I could compromise, yes, but I don't compromise on things that I know are completely wrong, even if I'm just one vote on it.  And I can site you a number of instances for my vote in the, in the--took me nine years on that overpass at 16th Street to get it, and the mayor said I'd never get it.  But I was persistent, I stayed there long enough so I was able to get it.  Other things were, were more coming.
Speaker 1: Dur- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Martin Luther King [Martin Luther King Jr. Day], we passed Martin Luther King in the City of Phoenix before the federal government did.  You don't hear much about that but, anyway, we did.
Story_ID: 565977
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode] could you give us some insight into that campaign?  Two things are going on, you're also in school getting ready to graduate with your master's degree at this point, there's a campaign going.  What was life like for you at that point?
Speaker 2: Extremely busy.  And had three sons and a wife [Georgie Stroud Goode], and, and trying to get all of these things.  And then I look back, I don't know how I did it, but managed to do it.
Speaker 1: Tell us about the campaign, this is your first run as a politician so to speak.  What was the campaign like for you and the others that were helping to support you?
Speaker 2: Well, there were many events where all of the candidates would appear.  In that year there were two running for--new people running.  So, I was right there with them and I spoke, they spoke and--but I also organized a different--another campaign in South Phoenix [Phoenix, Arizona] and we had a lady who was close to a hundred years old now, we got a flatbed truck and we went into the neighborhood.  And there were about ten precincts in the black community that I would sort of, you know, use as a gauge.  But I went to all of them.
Speaker 1: Was there any one person that was like a campaign supporter or helper for you that you can recall who was really adamant about you being elected?  Was there one person in particular?
Speaker 2: Well the first year, first time I ran Opal Ellis, lady you talked about was certainly my--one of my campaign managers over on this side.  And then, you know, the charter government had their folks, because we were running citywide and you had to have the support of people all over the city in order to get elected.
Speaker 1: Was campaigning the same way it is now, was there a lot of advertising in radio, television, and were, were there the same types of things that we see occurring today?
Speaker 2: Some of the same but much less expensive.  You see the mayor is trying to raise a million dollars, and I don't know why.  And then I see some of the council people running fifty, sixty thousand dollars.  Back then I said I needed about a thousand dollars and I also said--one lady said she wanted to run me for mayor, I said, well, go out and get me ten thousand dollars.  That's a long ways from a million dollars now.
Speaker 1: So the campaign was obviously successful, so in one year you become a city council member and you, you receive your master's degree.  What was that in?
Speaker 2: It was in education, counseling and student personnel.
Speaker 1: And, so now you have your degree, you--who were some of your opponents that you--I also meant to ask you, who were some of your opponents that ran against you for city council [Phoenix City Council]?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't recall but we did have opposition and they were running, since we were at large they was running to, to, to unseat who they could but we always had opponents.
Speaker 1: How many seats were available at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, we increased the size of the council to eight when we went to the charter but I think we must have had six.
Speaker 1: There were six seats, and were they all vacant at this time?
Speaker 2: You were running all.
Speaker 1: Because, because there were two year?
Speaker 2: Two year, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Two year terms. Now, each politician usually has some kind of a form or a platform.  What was Calvin Goode's platform?
Speaker 2: Goode for good government.
Speaker 1: Goode for good government, and explain what the issues were that, that you said you were going to deal with for the people?
Speaker 2: I also indicated that I believed that no matter where you live or how fat your pocketbook was, you're entitled to equal access to city government.  And I was--we didn't have any--we didn't have offices and we didn't have anybody to really help us but I also was accessible to people.  I've always had my telephone listed in the phone book so people could call me and I would respond to them.
Speaker 1: So you had an open door policy?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Now, prior to in '69 [1969] when they tried to get you to run the first time, you kind of--you, you were a bit ambivalent towards it.  Were you really ambivalent this time or, or did you really desire to win--or, or did you have a take it or leave it attitude?
Speaker 2: No, once I get into something I intend to win, and I did, in '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: What were some of the high points of your campaign?  What were some of the great parts of that campaign?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a individual, I don't have a lot of high or lows I'm more of an even keel person.  And when I get into something I get into it to win, and so we were able, as I indicated, to put together two cam- (unclear) campaign which we all was as a group.  But I didn't always agree with the group, and certainly my point of view had to be represented.
Story_ID: 565978
Speaker 1: So you win and election night you find out that Calvin C. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode] has won the election [to the Phoenix City Council], what was that night like?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I accepted it, you know, I didn't, didn't go out and--I'm a teetotaler, so I didn't go out and get drunk or anything.  I just accepted the fact that facts thought I was a good candidate and they went out and voted for me.  And I was very pleased to be a part of the team.
Speaker 1: How about your children and Mrs. Goode [Georgie Stroud Goode]?
Speaker 2: I think they were happy.
Speaker 1: They were--were they a tad more excited?
Speaker 2: Well, I think my wife gets more emotional than I get but, you know, I--and the sons also helped in the campaign.
Speaker 1: Did they (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And sometime they were passing out literature and, as I was telling you about this lady who was a hundred years old, platform, flat back truck and went out with, with a microphone and they went into the community.
Story_ID: 565979
Speaker 1: So now you've made it, you've, you've successfully ran a campaign--two campaigns.  You've won the seat, and what district was this now that you were in?  Or was it at large you said?
Speaker 2: At large.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you're there [Phoenix City Council].  What were some of the first issues facing you that you went to work on?
Speaker 2: I'm not so sure that I can go back and pinpoint the very first issue.  During the time I was there, certain issues--affirmative action became one of my goals.  Bridges became one of my goals.  And I just believed that people ought to have access to city government.
Speaker 1: So when you say access to city government, people--you said you had a, a open door policy, can you recall any of the things--people, people know you in the community now.  They're starting to call you about things to get things done, do you recall any of these, these phone calls or conversations you had with quote, unquote friends about things they would like to see occur?
Speaker 2: Well, there were so many of them that it takes a long time to go through and try to, to--I guess it was floods when the bridges were out.  And I remember I said we've got to get better bridges.  You know, you come out and you put this little old bridge in the middle and you put dirt at each end and then when the floods come, you know, we dam up the water.  But sometime the--they have to let the water out because the bidg- the dams are threatened, so they bulldoze out the dirt so the water could go down.  And at one time, the only bridge opened was South Central [Phoenix, Arizona] and the one over Tempe [Arizona].  I say, this is, this is insane.  And one of the councilmembers said to me that, "Mr. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode] you'll never get bridges."  She said that, "I'm gonna wait on (unclear) dam."  Well, there was a thought mean, you know, earth and dam up try to catch all of that water.  I say that may never be built.  So we've got to have better bridges so folks can--north and south have access.  So we went to work and we did get--I didn't do it by myself, you know, sometime you lay the seed and just keep pushing until it gets done.  And we had bridges over--well, you know, the bridges now we have.  And then I can remember one of the councilmembers said, "Mr. Goode, 7th Street--7th Avenue is gonna be the last bridge you gonna get."  I say, well
Speaker 1: Who was this councilmember, do you recall his name?
Speaker 2: Councilman White [ph.].  And he also--well, say something about him later on.  But I said, "Well, we'll see.  We got 7th Avenue, and then since then we got 35th Avenue."  And the other day I was driving and the--56th Avenue out there.  So that one I had no part in but still we did get better bridges, we got Central [Central Avenue] and--half of Central and, and 6th [Avenue], 7th Street, 16th Street, 24th Street.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the, the other supporters for you and the bridge issue, people that wanted the bridges and helped you get it through?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you have to have a majority, so they came around and supported.
Story_ID: 565980
Speaker 1: It's been said that you were called to--I did some research you were called the conscience of the council [Phoenix City Council].  Do you think that you and your, your presence there really made people--the other council members really say, hey, you know what, we need to do the right thing?  Do you think that if you had not been there that Phoenix [Arizona] would not be in the condition it is in now?
Speaker 2: Without a doubt.  You know, after three months on that council, I went down to a council meeting my stomach felt kind of upset and I said to them, "Excuse me, I'll be back."  So I went on down where we were meeting, went on down to the restroom and I felt woozy.  And I said to myself, Calvin [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode], you better sit down before you fall out.  I sat down and the next thing I knew there was a--one of the staff who came down, Glenwood Wilson came down, was bathing my face.  I'd passed out.  The ambulance came and Georgia [Georgie Stroud Goode] had come down that day, and he said, "They're putting you--your husband in the ambulance to take him to the hospital."  And so she got in the ambulance with me and went on over to the hospital, and they said bleeding ulcers.  And I got up from there and I said, never again am I gonna let these folks--I was internalizing.  I saw things that ought not to be, and I always thought that, you know, you ought to be fair and you ought to be able to look at all of the concerns of the people in the city.  So got up from there and, and I never had that again.  I learnt--had to learn how to handle that situation.
Story_ID: 565981
Speaker 1: What were some of the, the--I won't say controversies but, as you say, you were internalizing things that you had seen, different--we'll just call them injustices?   What were some of those things that you can--if you can recall in particular outside of the bridge issue?  What were some of those things?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly I believed in affirmative action and I pushed that, because I felt that the staff should be diversified.  And that was an issue and we did get some improvement.  I think Carol Coles Henry is certainly head of that department now and is still addressing some of those concerns.  Getting contracts from the city, for instance, I think is extremely important.  We didn't have any offices at that time and I pushed for offices.  And one little office down in the basement of the first floor of city hall, you know, that round building where the city council [Phoenix City Council] meets.  And we finally got some offices on the floor and I can remember the lady, who got elected when I did, didn't think we ought to be pushing for offices.  We finally got offices there and then before I left we each had our individual offices.
Story_ID: 565982
Speaker 1: And then I pushed for staff.  How do you expect me to do all this work? You pay me--start out three thousand dollars a year, two year term.  How do you expect me to do all of this?  And I had to supplement my income by working with the high school district, and that became an issue with some of the board members.  But that's another issue too.
Speaker 2: Well, let's talk about it a bit.  They, they didn't want you to be a councilman and have a job also?
Speaker 1: Well, I think because of the--some of the things I was pushing for.  Some folks in the community got some of those board members so there at the end they started making trouble for me.  And I say, you know, "I go to council meetings and then I work in the community as a community--school community worker then I make up that time.  And look at all the kinds of things I'm doing to improve for your students and your, your other people in the community."  But a couple of the board members didn't see that and I think they'd gotten to them and they started putting pressure on me.  And then I said, well, I've always made the mind that I'm not gonna let some--my job dictate to me what I can and cannot do as long--I'm giving you full measure of service.  So, finally, they said--they phased out the job and then they said, "Well, we can give you a job teaching business education--,"  I got my teaching certificate in business--and, "but you'll have to be at school during school hours."  So they're trying to cramp my style here.  And I said--, "Or we can give you six tenths counseling job."  And I said, well, I been rendering, you know, above and beyond the kind of things I was doing to help the district but they couldn't see that.  And finally I found out that I could--'79 [1979] I say, I don't let these folks dictate what I'm going to do so I just submitted--finally had a little small pension and I just decided I would retire.
Speaker 2: So during that time period there's various struggles you're trying to do because you're trying to help the community.  I think it was once said by another councilman in another city, Hosea Williams, that the job of councilman is one that's truly about the people and not the money.  And you just dictated that it was a struggle trying to make ends meet, you had to do two or three things.  Did you really at this point feel that the money was not the issue, that you had to complete this job to its best fulfillment for you and the people?
Speaker 1: No, I think I demonstrated that by resigning from the, from the district.
Story_ID: 565983
Speaker 1: Okay, so now between '72 [1972]--were you at twenty-two, twenty-two years and within that, that was eleven terms.  Was the same structure the same way as far as the at large structure?  When did it go into districts?
Speaker 2: Five years at large and then the matter when Terry Goddard came into office he was advocating a district system.  And all the members on the council [Phoenix City Council], with the exception of Calvin Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode], said the district system was bad and wrong.  They pointed Chicago [Illinois] as having a--fifty people on the--and corruption and so that's, that's their government, we ought not let--worry about us.  I said--point to San Antonio [Texas] where they had a very successful district system.  I said, "We've got a district system in the federal government, we got one in the state government, we got one in the county government and some cities have districts."  So I pushed for districts.  And I can remember in the power structure, you know, they didn't like the district system.  They raised a lot of money, and really deep down in my heart I didn't think it was gonna pass.  To go to the district system.  And one of the councilmembers said to me, "Mr. Goode, if you don't back away, no black can ever get elected again."  I said, "Well, you know, my feeling is the district--so much depends on the person.  The district system does provide the opportunity, you know, it's up now to about 170,000 people in each district.  Now how you gonna represent all of the district?"  So I kept pushing.  And they also invited some black ministers down at OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] and said, "You folks ought not to be supporting the district system."  Well, anyway, we had a meeting in Los Angeles [California] and I was over there and a storm came through Phoenix [Arizona], and I think there was some divine intervention here.  But lo and behold, it passed.
Speaker 1: Who was the councilman that said, you know what, you should back off otherwise another black won't be elected again.  Who said that to you?
Speaker 2: Councilman White [ph.].
Speaker 1: Tell us about Councilman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the ironic thing about it is he got defeated in the primary and I was the only person who won in the primary that year. So.
Speaker 1: Tell us a bit about Councilman White and your relationship with him on the council?
Speaker 2: Well, we had opposing viewpoints on the council.  There was another one on there that looks like every time I voted one way, he'd vote another way.  So, we had some division in the council that I had to deal with.
Speaker 1: So what year did the, the eight district system pass?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember, it seems to me '84 [1984], '85 [1985], '86 [1986] somewhere in that neighborhood.
Story_ID: 565984
Speaker 1: So, Calvin Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode] is now--he's come into the school systems, he's gone into the politics, you're there--it's in the '70s [1970s] and you're in the middle of this--and you're getting things done.  You have the, you have the, the bridges, you're getting all kind of things performed and done over, over the year--over the whole tenure of your position.  Another big thing we were discussing was the Dr. King's holiday [Martin Luther King Jr. Day]. Can you explain that and your role in that?
Speaker 2: Well, the union came to the city council [Phoenix City Council] and advocated that we do the holiday even before this, the--
Speaker 1: Which union was this?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether it was the laborers--I remember--can't think of his name now.  He's a black man who was also chair of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] later on.  George's [ph.] wife was, was a teacher and they all opened up a store there--a clothing store there on Broadway--on Buckeye Road [Phoenix, Arizona].  But I can't think of his name right now, I'll probably think of it later.  But he came and presented it us and then we pushed it, and the council just quietly passed it so that all of the workers then would have a holiday.  And this was before the, the [U.S.] Supreme Court passed it.
Speaker 1: So there was no real opposition to this?
Speaker 2: Well, we did it in such a way that it was done quietly.  And they enjoyed having the holiday, and it certainly helped I think with the passage of the Supreme Court (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year is this?
Speaker 2: As I indicated earlier, it was somewhere between '84 [1984], '85 [1985] somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: But prior to the, to the national holiday?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, uh-huh, prior to the national holiday.
Story_ID: 565985
Speaker 1: Now, as we go forward a little bit more, at this point, you're the only--you're the second African American to serve on the council [Phoenix City Council].  Were there any other aspirations you might, you might have been having at this point as you went forward as far as politics are concerned?
Speaker 2: No, I had no other aspirations.
Speaker 1: And tell us about Terry Goddard and your relationship with Terry Goddard?
Speaker 2: Well, when we went to the district system the practice had been that the person who got the most votes would become vice mayor [of Phoenix, Arizona].  So I said to them I was--to tell you the story, I was vice mayor earlier, I think that was '84 [1984] I believe, '74 [1974] and '84 [1984].  I think it was '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Terry Goddard was mayor in what year, sir?
Speaker 2: I think it was '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Who was '74 [1974] as mayor?
Speaker 2: Well, I was talking about--it's John Driggs I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then John Driggs was with the savings and loan institution and there was another mayor came in and so on.  But, we were going on the basis of the person who got the most votes would become vice mayor.  And then I, I won in the primary so I said, hey, I won in the primary so I got the most votes.  So they decided to make me vice mayor for that year, and we had a little saying that when we'd go out to groups, I would say, "Folks rest because you got--you're in Goode hands."  I use that name again.  But--and I though Goddard was a forward type mayor, I thought he was a good mayor.  And we certainly worked together on number of projects that we were able to push forward.
Speaker 1: What were the responsibilities of a vice mayor besides the title, what were your responsibilities?  Were they above and beyond that of a councilman?
Speaker 2: Well, when the mayor is out of town or couldn't attend a meeting then I would preside over the rest of the council.  And then there were certain--we had boards and we had certain commissions.  I sought to be on certain commissions that dealt with--for instance, I was over the human services commission with Head Start.  I'm a grown strong advocate for Head Start even now because I'm actively working with Head Start.  I got on the, the judges--city judges, and where there were city judges I wanted to be there to assist in being sure that we got good judges.  And a number of the other commissions that I chaired in addition to being vice mayor.
Story_ID: 565986
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned Head Start, which we know is an educational program for, for preschoolers and before preschoolers, do you think your feelings for Head Start had something to do with your own parents' [Clara Loring Goode and Warner Goode] educational advances for you all, that they were very important to have education for you?  Do you think you carried that over for other children?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that, that is the case.  Certainly, we had three sons and, you know, the mother has a lot to do because I was so busy doing other things.  But Head Start came in 1967 I believe it was, and we developed a center there.  Can remember still we had neighborhood councils, and I remember a lady saying we need a childcare center in our area.  So we went to, went to bat and got it.  Reverend George Brooks [George Benjamin Brooks, Sr.] probably had the first Head Start in the City of Phoenix [Arizona].  So I have been actively involved, I was the president of the Booker T. Washington Child Development Center [Phoenix, Arizona] starting in '67 [1967] I believe.  And we just celebrated forty years and we've got a recent bond issue that--I mean a community block grant.  We expanded from sixty in the basement of First Institutional Baptist Church [Phoenix, Arizona] to a location at 1522-1519 East Adams [Street] and we got--so now we're up to 192 kids.  And we got a--latest community--city passed a community block grant, we got a, a $290,000 grant to expand two more classrooms.  And then we've got to raise 40 percent in terms of a matching, so we've applied to one company for eighty-five thousand.  I hope that comes through.  That's still gonna leave us with some additional monies I need, so but anyway we're determined because we have--we've been able to--in fact, we got a parent center there that we were able to--community development raising monies and so forth.  And then we have one building we brought in from the airport, I don't think we ever paid that dollar but, anyway, about fifteen thousand dollars to get it in shape.  And then First Institutional Baptist Church gave us a building to have two classrooms in it but it cost eleven thousand dollars to remove it.  That was a parsonage right there by the church there.  But, anyway--and we got a grant for almost eight hundred thousand dollars for four new classrooms.
Speaker 1: Please explain to us, for the benefit of those that might not know, Head Start's mission and purpose?
Speaker 2: To take children three to five years old and give them educational experiences which will help them--good nutrition, parental involvement, lunches that are nutritious. All of those kind of things that some other parents were able to take their children--there're certain income criteria you have to meet--able to give that to their children but poor kids, they don't have those advantages.  So it's a program that has been around for over forty years now and very successful.  But there are some folks who still oppose Head Start, you are not to being doing this for these poor kids.  But I'm a strong advocate for early childhood education.
Speaker 1: And you're still involved with them to this day?
Speaker 2: I'm still--I'm vice president and I'm the one who supervises the program.  Dr. Grigsby [HistoryMaker Jefferson Eugene Grigsby] is the, the president and I'm the vice president.  Now, when I went on the council [Phoenix City Council] in terms of trying to set it apart from, you know, supervising up here I got off the board here but I was still working to a degree.  And then when I got of the council then I'm back in it but Dr. Grigsby is a, is a good person and we work together in terms of pushing this program forward.
Speaker 1: Now, Dr. Grigsby was one of your teachers, he was the art teacher here at Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona]?
Speaker 2: He was the art teacher here at Carver but he was not my teacher.
Speaker 1: He was not your teacher.
Speaker 2: He came later.
Speaker 1: We're gonna take a break and we're gonna go into 1990, and you ran for mayor for a moment, we're gonna discuss that for a moment and--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and come through that.
Story_ID: 565987
Speaker 1: Mr. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode], you've had successful tenure in the city council [Phoenix City Council] and you attribute a lot, a lot of this to your own tenacity to be able to get things done once you decide you're gonna do something.  Do you also feel that the people could really, really relate to you in some kind of a way because you are of this community?
Speaker 2: I think so, and they learned to respect me and I tried to no matter who you are, as I said earlier, I felt that you ought to be heard and you ought to have access to city government.  But, I didn't do all this by myself, you know, it takes majority votes and sometime it's a matter of convincing others of seeing the light so to speak.  So, and, and again I feel as I said earlier, that this is the best country in the world that I know of.  And certainly I've had the opportunity to rise from a poor boy, barefooted--Gila Bend [Arizona] to become vice mayor of this city [Phoenix, Arizona] and to get--gain the respect and I'm grateful for all of that.  And certainly the good Lord has been on my side.  But I'm just pointing out some things that happened along the way and that we still haven't completely arrived at being the kind of country I think that we can be and should be.
Speaker 1: You were described as a councilman that was always willing to listen.  How do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: I'm a good listener.  Even now I think that's one of my strong points, listen, an active listener in terms of trying to figure out how can we deal with this situation.  And I have people still calling me today, and sometime I, you know, it gets to be quite a situation in terms of trying--
Story_ID: 565988
Speaker 1: Fact, for instance, now where I live there are some folks who want to build some high rises and want to move into, which was--we considered a black neighborhood.  Years ago, many of the blacks have moved out but for people with money coming in trying to buy up and convert it to their uses, you're talking about a eight story building on the corner there a few blocks from my house and also a eleven story building.  We're presently fighting that.  In fact, we had a man who said, "Mr. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode]," they have a, a museum right down the street here.  "What we'd like to do is come up to Carver [George Washington Carver Museum and Cultural Center, Phoenix, Arizona] and move a non-profit on the second floor.  Well, see, the second floor is not ready yet because the recent bond issue we got will--we hope to fix that up but--," and then he said, "we ought to tear down these warehouses in back and build some condos.  And they're talking about--."  I say, "How about affordable housing?"  "No, it'd be attainable housing," that's the new term they're using now, attainable.  I say, "Where the poor folks gonna live?"  Well, my neighborhood we had the Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington Child Development Center, Phoenix, Arizona]--we planned and then we had a special redevelopment plan and then we had Eastlake Park [Phoenix, Arizona].  Now, where are the folks gonna live?  And then to have a city hearing officer say, well, he hopes someday that they'll pay the folks enough money so they can move to Paradise Valley [Arizona].  To me that was asinine, to even think that way.  And where are poor people gonna live in this city?  And that's a battle we're waging right now in terms of we don't wanna move.
Story_ID: 565989
Speaker 1: So you're still an advocate for--even though you're not actually on the council [Phoenix City Council], you're still an advocate for fair housing, for affirmative action ideas, things of that nature.  I've also witnessed a bunch of research that during your tenure you got an ordinance passed that outlawed or prohibited discrimination against gays.  Could you tell us about that, in the workplace?
Speaker 2: Well, I just feel that people should not be discriminated because of the sexual orientation.  It's not my thinking that, that way it ought to be.  But to discriminate based on that--and I did come out in opposition to discrimination of any kind.
Speaker 1: And what year was that, that you--
Speaker 2: I don't remember the exact year but it's been a few years before I left the council.
Story_ID: 565990
Speaker 1: So, in 1990 Terry Goddard resigns from the mayorship to run for governor, and what do you do at that time Mr. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode]?
Speaker 2: I was still on the council [Phoenix City Council] and the, the vote was left up to the other councilmembers to select the interim mayor 'til the next election.  One of the other councilmembers thought I should be the mayor and at one time I had four votes in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was this councilmember?
Speaker 2: It was a lady, Carter, Joy Carter, yeah, Joy Carter.  But I had four votes and Paul Johnson had four votes, and I couldn't get the fifth vote.  I tried but, you know, that's the eight people on the council and five would be a majority.  I couldn't get the fifth vote so Paul Johnson became mayor.  Now, if you look at qualifications, Calvin Goode has his master's [degree], Calvin Goode had number of years on the council, Calvin Goode had experience and so forth but they didn't want--and its--was that if we still maintained a tie then the presiding judge would thence cast his vote.  And they didn't want that to happen so one of my votes, Howard Adams, who was in a wheelchair decided to go with Paul Johnson so he became the mayor.
Speaker 1: Now, what were Paul Johnson's credentials, and what was his background?
Speaker 2: Small construction and no college experience.  And he had been on the council not very long, and recently we met with Paul Johnson he's become quite a developer now.  And he was pres- chairman of the bond committee, and I went before them and asked for some money for Eastlake Park [Phoenix, Arizona], five hundred thousand dollars, they granted that but they--I'm trying to get it moved up from the bottom because we need to replace that amphitheater.
Speaker 1: So, how long was Paul Johnson the mayor of Phoenix [Arizona]?
Speaker 2: I am trying to remember.  I guess Skip Rimsza came in and then the present mayor [Phil Gordon] is--what's his name--so, he was there for several years.  I, I don't recall the exact number of years.
Speaker 1: Do you have any, do you have any regrets about not winning that, that position?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought I was certainly the most qualified but in reality the better qualified person doesn't always win in this political structure.  But that's the way it happened and I was able still to do some things and I'm still doing some things that I want done.
Speaker 1: Now, so 1990 you ran for mayor and basically it was a vote based upon the, the council (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Councilmembers.
Speaker 1: 'Cause, cause he resigned.  Did he make governor, Terry Goddard become the governor?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So when you, when you--
Speaker 2: I was disappointed that he didn't because I did support him for governor, I think he would have been a good governor.  And I think he got defeated twice, and hopefully he may run again.  I don't know when our present governor [Janet Napolitano] has to step down because of term limits.
Story_ID: 565991
Speaker 1: So, when you ran for mayor or when the vote was up, were you able to still stay on the council [Phoenix City Council]?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So how much longer were you on the council after this bid for mayorship that fell through?
Speaker 2: Well, there again, you're asking me to pinpoint dates and my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, this event happened in 1990 when you ran for the--
Speaker 2: Well, I retired in '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you stayed about four more years or so on the council.  And did you have a different mission--after this mayorship in which you know you should have probably won because of your credentials or--and just the way that it was, were those next four years any different for you on the council?
Speaker 2: Well, only to the extent I still push for those things I believed in.  And I think the, you know, the council did name this building after me and I think they thought that was a--something really great.  I didn't ask them to do it.
Speaker 1: Was this before you retired or during your retirement?
Speaker 2: Right after I retired.
Speaker 1: And you retired in '94 [1994].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So they named--which building is this that you said they named after you?  What building is it?
Speaker 2: It's one of the municipal buildings, 251 West Washington [Street], eleven story building.
Speaker 1: And it, and it's called the Calvin Goode--is it Calvin C. Goode Building [Calvin C. Goode Municipal Building, Phoenix, Arizona]?
Speaker 2: Municipal Building.
Speaker 1: Municipal Building.
Speaker 2: And inside of it there is a--they have a plaque there, and I showed you the inscription on that plaque inside the building.  And also, at the insistence of my wife [Georgie Stroud Goode], they collected a number of my plaques and other things and got a big wall that he was an advocate for all people.  And has--you ought to see it.  Yeah, I thought it's a good, good display.
Story_ID: 565992
Speaker 1: As you walk around Carver [George Washington Carver Museum and Cultural Center, Phoenix, Arizona] these days and you're doing different various things in, in the building, do you ever have like flashbacks of your, of your senior year [at George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona]?  Do you have flashbacks of what used to be going on in here?  Do you ever have those memories come to you as you walk about the building?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that I probably have more good experiences in this building than anyone else in the city because I was a student here for almost a year.  And I worked here for, for two years on the second floor.  And I been working with the organization for since ten, eleven years now.
Speaker 1: And you still live in the, in the general vicinity of, of the neighborhood that you, that you started in pretty much as a young man?
Speaker 2: About a mile from here at 1508 East Jefferson Street, right across from Eastlake Park [Phoenix, Arizona].  And that's a story in itself.  I think I told you, didn't I, about lady thought we ought to move out there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, go ahead and tell us now. You didn't tell us that, that'd be good to hear.  You, you moved in
Speaker 2: Yeah, and a lady said, "Mr. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode], you look like you and your family are good people.  We've got a vacant house in our block, why don't you come and move into our neighborhood?"  And Georgia [Goode's wife, Georgie Stroud Goode] said, "Well, I'll tell you, why don't you move into our neighborhood and help us to continue to upgrade and to build.  We've been able to build about fourteen new homes over in that area and there's a few more spaces to--vacant lots to be filled."  But that ended the conversation.
Speaker 1: Now this is--this area--this is the home that your children were born and raised in, correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 565993
Speaker 1: Tell us about th- your children, now, your sons, what are they doing--involved in?  Are they involved in politics in the city [Phoenix, Arizona]?
Speaker 2: No, they don't seem to think about getting into politics.  The oldest son [Vernon Goode] went to ASU [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona], got his M.B.A., worked with a health company for a number of years, and would like to get into teaching so that's what he's trying to pursue now.  I guess kind of follow his mother's [Georgie Stroud Goode] footsteps.  The middle son is, is Gerald [Gerald Goode], he got his B.S. degree, A.A. from Phoenix College [Phoenix, Arizona], and from Maricopa Tech, Maricopa Community College [Maricopa Community College District].  And then he got his degree from ASU in business, and he still lives here.  He works with the state department.  He married a young lady who, as I showed you down here about--she ran for--in the Olympics in '92 [1992] and '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: Her name is?
Speaker 2: Her name is Lynda Tolbert-Goode.
Speaker 1: The Olympian?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, 100 meter hurdles.  And you remember I told you on the last hurdle Gail Devers fell and Lynda came in number four through all (unclear).
Speaker 1: I think we all have a visual of, of Gail Devers falling, and she was the one next to her at that point?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And then the youngest son is Randolph [Randy Goode], he got his degree in graphic arts and design.  And he works from his home as an art director for a company.  In one of the pictures down here, I don't know whether you noticed in the library is one that he painted.  And then the ironic thing is all three of my daughter-in-laws got their degrees in social work.  And Natalie [Natalie Goode], Randy's wife, also got her master's in social work.
Story_ID: 565994
Speaker 1: So you have--the children are successful.  Now, I've noticed that on this campus here there're a lot of great things.  This is a museum, now the Carver School [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona] has a museum.  There's a lot of great things that you've accomplished since your retirement.  Can you just give us some of things that have occurred after your retirement--since you've retired as far as the art around here, the arts district and those things?
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember when Hattie Colbert [Hattie Marie Colbert] came to them and said, "Mr. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode], would you come and help us?"  They were kind of floundering so I said, "Okay." There--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: You were telling us about, about Hattie someone.
Speaker 2: Hattie Colbert came and asked me if I would work with them in terms of the museum [George Washington Carver Museum and Cultural Center, Phoenix, Arizona].  So we were able to go to the school board and then--this was in 1996 I guess it was, and ask the school board to sell us the property.  So we got 4.8 acres of land here and we were able to raise about a hundred thousand of our own funding and went to the State Parks Board [Arizona State Parks Board] and go another 140,000 and bought the property. Sandra Kennedy, who was on the school board, later became state senator was very helpful to us in terms of getting the school board to, to agree to sell it.  We do have a deed restriction that said, it must continue to be used as a museum and a cultural center, else the high school district can come in and we pay them back their money and they'll take over.  Some folks thought that was a bad thing but I thought it was a good thing because we had some folks who say we ought to tear that building down and build us a modern museum.  I said, no, no.  So we're very pleased and, as I indicated earlier, we did get one bond issue and we were able to get a number of things done on the first floor.  Last year we were finally able to get air conditioning for this here.  And we went back to the, to the city and we got a $3.1 million, and we hope to be able to complete some things on the first floor.  And then one of the things I tried to get is an elevator before we can use the second floor and this is the third time.  The first time we had to use the money from State Parks Board to put on a new roof.  Well, that was critical I think, the first thing you do.  And then the second time we had the safe and sanitary, you know, safety issues so we had to use it for that.  This time I said it's gonna be top of the list, so that's what we're working on now.
Speaker 1: Mr. Goode when was the school used and when it closed in '54 [1954], what was going on in this building?
Speaker 2: The maintenance crews for the high school district and the warehouse used it.  And in this instance here, they had offices here and offices on the stage.  They had two floors, they ran forklifts over the floor, and stored a lot of things in here.  And then the buildings over there and the warehouses in the back, that's where we get some of our source of income because it's expensive running--trying to run a museum.  So, they moved out, I think the building was vacant for probably a couple of years and then that's when we came in were trying to make all of the--and then I showed you where the stadium is still out there with classrooms underneath.  So, we have visions of--
Speaker 1: So besides the, the total renovation of this particular location, what are some of your future visions for the community as a whole?
Speaker 2: Well, for the last several years, you know, we been trying to get the building in shape.  And certainly we should see it, at one time it was a center when Mr. Robinson [W.A. Robinson] was principal in the high school.  We had a lot of activities going on here, certainly we need to get back to that.  Presently, we do lease it out for weddings and, and meetings and those kind of things but we need to do more in the community center.
Story_ID: 565995
Speaker 1: Are there any other areas of Phoenix [Arizona] that--or any other projects that, that you have as pet projects for yourself now that you're dealing with?
Speaker 2: Well, I mentioned to you about the Head Start, which is one of my favorites, and we're working on that.  In addition to that and this here [George Washington Carver Museum and Cultural Center, Phoenix, Arizona], I wanna get more young people involved.  This was a high school [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona] and we should be doing more to attract them with kinds of activities that they'd like to have.  One of the other things I've been involved in is senior housing.  Tanner Chapel A.M.E. Church [Historic Tanner Chapel A.M.E. Church, Phoenix, Arizona], you know, is located right here at 7th [Street] and between Washington [Street] and Jefferson [Street], and between 7th and 8th Street.  The church owns all of that property--get free.  And there are some young folks who wanna tear the building down and go out and get a campus, but Georgia [Goode's wife, Georgie Stroud Goode] and I have been opposing that and we certainly hope that, that historical church, first opened in 1929, will stay there.  At this location, certainly we want to see those things get done to make this kind of facility that will--the community can use--continue to use and do what we need to do here.
Speaker 1: Has anybody come to you or have you singled out anybody, are you mentoring anybody?  Do you have any Calvin C. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode] proteges in politics or government or even the school board right now?  Anybody that stands out in particular that, that you see will be a leader in the future?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a problem.  It's hard to get people to serve on boards and commissions.  And the city has a number and the state has number of positions, boards and commissions.  And so, one of the big disappointments is some of the middle aged people, and they wanna say, you know, we made it.  And folks come to this city and we don't know they're here, they have some skills and so forth.  They ought to come back and help us to continue to develop many of these things.  But I meant to--what I wanted to get was the senior housing.  A newest project is 110 units, it's about 2150 East Broadway [Road], senior type housing.  And Tanner Gardens was the first one at South 18th Street right of Broadway [Phoenix, Arizona].  That's a 127 units I believe, senior housing.  And then we have a third one over in Glendale [Arizona], a 156 units.  I'm president of the board, now I can't claim credit for all of those because a past minister of Tanner Chapel got Tanner Gardens and Tanner Terrace [Glendale, Arizona] developed, but we have it under a umbrella of Tanner Properties [Tanner Properties, Inc.].  This newer one is under our present administration that we developed in terms of decent--safe, sanitary, decent housing I think for all American citizens ought to be available.
Story_ID: 565996
Speaker 1: You've mentioned throughout this interview your, your views of diversity and your tolerance. How do you think these skills developed in you?  Do you think they were put into you as a child where you can be tolerant, not necessarily supportive about everyone's idea but you're very tolerant of diversity?  Where do you think those skills came from?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure that I can answer that.  I guess certainly my background indicates to you I've had to deal with all kinds of situations and I have to try to convince people the need and work with me in terms of getting some of these things done.  And I guess we got a--I'm not a throw rocks or I'm not violent, I'm nonviolent but I do feel very keenly that we need to be about the business of helping other people.  I think that's one of the purposes of--that we should be concerned about our brother and our sisters.
Speaker 1: Do you think that possibly this is good for informational purposes--do you think that the role of your wife [Georgie Stroud Goode] being supportive has played a big, a big role in your life coming up?
Speaker 2: Certainly, she shares some of the concerns in Atlanta [Georgia], you know, Atlanta is a big city and so forth but they have problems down there too.  And certainly she's been supportive of my efforts here, even though at times she'll say I need to have you at home more often.  I say, "Well, you know you got to share me."
Story_ID: 565997
Speaker 1: I mean, there are things that, that I feel I still need to do and I see other folks not getting involved.  And this middle aged group here--in fact, I think the athletes ought to be more involved in this struggle that we're facing.  And some of the other professional people who moved to this city.  And they'll go to Tempe [Arizona] and Scottsdale [Arizona], I think folks ought to live where they wanna live but still I think they ought to give back to the community.  And I'm sort of disappointed when I go out.  I serve on the Governor's Advisory Committee and some others when I ask folks, hey, even with the city, wherever you are, if you live in Tempe or you live in Scottsdale or wherever you need to get involved, because it does make a difference to have someone at the table who may look like me.
Speaker 2: I thoroughly understand.  Now, as we wind the interview toward our close, what are some of your hopes and dreams for the African American communities across the country, not just in Phoenix [Arizona] but in general?
Speaker 1: We have made progress and no doubt about it.  When I came down to Phoenix in 1944, there were restaurants--I went into a restaurant over here on Central Avenue and went in there and they didn't wanna serve us.  In the balcony--you'd sit in the balcony, jobs were scarce.  So we have made progress but what I'm saying is we've not made the kind of progress we need to make.  And there's more and more it looks like it's becoming those who have and those that have nots, and it's getting more critical for poor people to live in this country.  And I think we ought to have compassion and work to try to help some of folks who need help.  And I would certainly hope that more blacks will get involved in the struggle because we have not completely arrived yet as I've said before.  And there're folks out there, our young people for instance, it's troubling.  And this whole idea of drugs, and I say, you know, often who's making the big profits of it.  If you wanna kill a snake, you cut his head off.  But these folks who make the most money--and crime has become a big business and they're misleading many of our young people, destroying.  You talk about the people in jail, a lot of African American males, not only does it hurt our, our group but, you know, what are we gonna do about it?  And I know the church is to me, isn't as concerned as they ought to be about some of these issues.  There are some of them who are.  But whether you're in church or not, I think the good Lord expects us to do, do what we can because, as I said earlier, we are our brother's keeper and we ought to be able to do something to help them.  Now I know that sometime people get big cars and big houses, and get deep in debt and all of that.  And they don't have time for social activities, but I think they need to devote some time to helping those who need help.  And I think that's what the good Lord would want us to do.
Speaker 2: And do you have any words of inspiration for young people that might have a vision, might have the spirit of Calvin C. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode] wanting to do for their people but just don't know how?  Do you have any words of advice for those young people or people in general whatever age?
Speaker 1: Well, I think people have to have a desire to do and I know that I'm committed, I've always been committed.  And I guess until I die, I'll be committed to doing what I can.  It places a burden on my family, on me but--and I see young people who because of don't know how, I didn't know how until I learned.  But they have to have the desire to want to do, to help where help is needed.  And, if you've got some answers, certainly I would be willing to, to take your answers because you're in this middle aged group I think.  So, what shall we do?  Sometime they don't listen to me, they think I'm old and fogey I guess.  And just because I don't drive a big fast, fancy car and got a big house and live in, and those things were not things that I want and need.  But sometime folks feel that, that is the way to live and not give back to the community.
Story_ID: 565998
Speaker 1: How would you like Calvin C. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode] to be remembered and immortalized in years to come?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not concerned about that being, you know, my existence has been low key, I don't try to get publicity and all of those kind of things.  I try to do what I need to do quietly and move ahead on it.  People don't need to try to put me on a pedestal, and I say I'm just a, a person that God created here and I still have things I need to do that's deep in me.  And sometime my wife [Georgie Stroud Goode] don't always understand but I still think I'm on a mission here, and there're things I need to do before I close my eyes forever.
Story_ID: 565999
Speaker 1: If there was anything that you had to do over again in your life, is there anything you would like to share with us that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I don't know that there is.  I can't--I've made mistakes, yes, we all have made mistakes.  But I think overall life has been good to me and I've been able to achieve many of the things that I wanted to achieve.  But there're still things that out here that needs to be doing.  There's still problems facing us, and sometime you think things are all settled and then some of these things are coming up again.  Just like the Civil Rights Movement, we thought we'd corrected many of those things but now with the [U.S.] Supreme Court just recently declaring that maybe affirmative action or education or so forth is the wrong thing with the Supreme Court being--so the fight is still struggle.
Story_ID: 566000
Speaker 1: Mr. Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode] do you have any--a parting comment that you can give finally for everyone that comes directly from Calvin C. Goode? A phrase, an idea, a thought, an opinion, it's up to you?
Speaker 2: Well, sometimes it's difficult to put something in few words, but I think all that I've said here today is certainly I would like folks to think about--and the most important thing is to become involved.  You know, we can complain and we can talk about the situations but unless you're actively involved and get in the battle to correct some of these things, words don't always make something happen.  And especially the ones who have achieved, they think by their own bootstraps, and that not at the expense of some of us older folks who have led the fight.  We need new fighters, fresh blood to come in and help us because there're hundreds of young people out there who are going astray and need help, need guidance.  And who's gonna do it?  We say Lord we are your hands and your feet on earth but are we really doing what we ought to do and not just talk about it.
Speaker 1: Mr. Goode, I wanna thank you very much for this interview. You've been a pleasure to interview and thank you very much.
Story_ID: 566001
Speaker 1: I'm glad you got it and thank you once again.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Moment of truth though, now, Mrs. Goode [Georgie Stroud Goode], did he leave anything out?  Is there anything he should tell us that he's holding back?
Speaker 1: (ADEL HODGE):  Yeah, she said--she whispered to me one of the people he ran against the name was Outlaw [James Outlaw] (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Outlaw, oh, how can you run with a name like that (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well, a Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode] always beat a Outlaw.
Speaker 2: (GEORGIE STROUD GOODE):  He was running for the council [Phoenix City Council] and his name was Outlaw.
Speaker 1: And he was a minister too.
Speaker 2: (GEORGIE STROUD GOODE): Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, he was a white minister.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And he was running directly against you or was that during the at large time?
Speaker 1: (GEORGIE STROUD GOODE):  That was directly against him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So what kind of majority did you get, what kind of margin of victory did you get?
Speaker 2: Well, I won.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You trounced him, didn't you?
Speaker 2: There was another man who ran against me and even some of the blacks wanted to support this man.  I can't think of his name now, but I beat him too.  So, every time I ran, I was successful.
Story_ID: 566002
Speaker 1: It appears that that's a picture taken in 1972 as I received my master's degree from Arizona State University, Tempe [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got that one, next. What about this?
Speaker 1: It appears that that's a picture that when I was went to one of the sister cities to develop a sister city relationship in France I believe.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year was that photo taken?
Speaker 1: That I'm not sure, there's no date on it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What period does it look like it--just a general idea so that when they put them in order they have some sense.
Speaker 1: Probably in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good enough, next. All right, what about this one?
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the--one of the city council meetings.  Paul Johnson was--I think he was mayor at that time or Skip Rimsza.  But we had quite a, a number of women there, and I was very pleased, two, four, six, six women.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we got it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wife [Georgie Stroud Goode] and our three sons and our first grandchild, and it looks like that may have been Joshua [ph.] so it probably happened about thirteen, fourteen years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Starting from the left next to your wife and moving left to right, could you name which son is which?
Speaker 1: Next to my wife is Gerald [Gerald Goode] our middle son, and next to him is Vernon [Vernon Goode] our oldest son, and then next to him is Randy [Randy Goode] our youngest son, and his wife Natalie [Natalie Goode].  And I think the baby must be Joshua our first born.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, thank you.  Okay, next.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's a picture again of the Phoenix City Council, and it must have been in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, very good.  See what he's got for us.  Oh, look at that one.  Okay, what about this?
Speaker 1: This is a picture with the former governor of Arizona and Dr. Grigsby [HistoryMaker Jefferson Eugene Grigsby] and Miss Lilly Dye at our Head Start center, Booker T. Washington Child Development Center, 1525 East Adams [Adams Street, Phoenix, Arizona].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  For those of us who aren't as, as aware of Arizona's history, which former governor would that be?
Speaker 1: Mrs. (laughter) well as I know her name.  The one with the big white--what's her name?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  See, I'm from Chicago [Illinois] I don't know.
Speaker 1: As well as I know it, I can't--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay, okay, all right, they'll figure it out.
Speaker 1: (GEORGIE STROUD GOODE): She wore a beehive hairstyle.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Oh, Ann, Ann Richards (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (GEORGIE STROUD GOODE): (Simultaneous) Rose, Rose Mofford.
Speaker 2: Rose Mofford, yeah.  And that's in the backyard of one of our child development center buildings.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, got it.  Go ahead on the next one.  Okay, what about this one?
Speaker 2: This is a picture that when the lawyer, he died recently.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Johnnie Cochran?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was when Johnnie Cochran was here and he consented to have this picture with my family and.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great, okay, next.  Okay, tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of--in Gila Bend [Arizona] when we moved out.  And the lady in the middle there is my older sister Lena [Lena Goode].  The baby in her arms is my sister Iretha [Iretha Goode Lucky]. Iretha is still living.  And then there's a picture of, of Doretha [Doretha Goode] and my brother Melvin [Melvin Goode] and my sister Lillie [Lillie Goode], and there's Calvin Goode [HistoryMaker Calvin Coolidge Goode] and he's the one that he got his first haircut when he was thirteen.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is Carver High School [George Washington Carver High School, Phoenix, Arizona], 19--what year is this?
Speaker 1: Forty-five [1945].
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-five [1945].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And point to him.  Okay.  It is captured.
Speaker 2: Okay, you wanna describe it Mr. Goode?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's my picture.  I really took that picture when I was in Prescott [Prescott High School, Prescott, Arizona] and I didn't have money to buy another picture so I just used that picture for the senior yearbook.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Worked well.  Worked out good.
Speaker 1: That's a picture when I graduated from Arizona State College, now known as Arizona State University in 1949, and got my degree in business administration.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good enough. Next.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, that's Bear Tracks.  I got my degree from Phoenix College [Phoenix Junior College; Phoenix College, Phoenix, Arizona].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bear Tracks is Phoenix College, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was in 1947.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good, thank you, that's helpful information.
Speaker 1: This is 2003 black heritage celebration.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  What can you tell us about this photo, sir?
Speaker 1: Well, they had a black heritage celebration in 2003 and I was--I received the award--I think they call it the grad award, which means that person is really involved in the community.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, how about this spread here?
Speaker 1: That's a picture of the cultural keepers civil rights champion and in the background there is the Carver Museum [George Washington Carver Museum and Cultural Center, Phoenix, Arizona] with Dr. George Washington Carver.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Take your fingers off, please. Okay. Hold on one second.  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's it for right now.
