Story_ID: 316612
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] William H. Gray, III, Gray is spelled G-R-A-Y.
Speaker 1: And what does the H stand for?
Speaker 2: H stands for Herbert.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was born in August, 1941 on the 20th in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well I am a minister by training and profession, but I've had a number of other involvements.  I was a college professor at about five or six universities, history and religion.  I was also a member of the United States House of Representatives for approximately thirteen years.  I was also the president of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] which is involved in development for higher education.  And now I have my own consulting business [Gray Global Strategies, Inc., Washington, D.C.] that deals with public policy, business diversity, and community affairs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were, I've read that when you retired you were the highest ranking African American member of [U.S.] Congress, ever.  Is this true?
Speaker 2: Yes, up until now today, unfortunately, that is true.  In the twelve and a half years I was there, I went from being a freshman to the youngest budget committee chairman, youngest in terms of age as well as time served.  I was chair of the budget committee for four years, and then I became chair of the Democratic caucus, and then I became majority whip, which is the third ranking leadership position in the House of Representatives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 5, 2005.
Speaker 1: All right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Right now, Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 316613
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And we ask 'em of everybody.  The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is probably fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: That's hard (laughter).  No one favorite, warm weather, South Florida or the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's not no is it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, no is not it, is the phrase.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I don't have one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At least I don't think.  My friends may say differently.
Story_ID: 316614
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, good.
Speaker 1: And your father's [William H. Gray, Jr.] side.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name was Hazel Yates, Y-A-T-E-S.  Yates was her maiden name.  Born in Louisiana.  Her--
Speaker 1: Do you know her birth date?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, her birth date, I know it was in August, it was August the 11th.  I don't remember exactly the year but it was probably somewhere around 1913 or 1914 in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know where in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember exactly where.  Maybe it might have been Shreveport, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, well what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: We didn't spend a lot of time tracing ancestors.  I know her parents because they were my grandparents and they were alive for many years until I was an adult.  My grandfather [Albert Yates] was a gentleman who was a college professor.  He taught Greek and math at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  He had also been a professor at Grambling [College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana].  And my maternal grandmother [Bertha Randall Yates] was a elementary school teacher.  They were both teachers, and one at the college level, historically black college [HBCU], Southern University, the black college of the state, supported by the state for blacks during the period of segregation.  And she taught at the Scott Street Elementary School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which was right out the back door of our shotgun house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, a shotgun house is--
Speaker 2: A shotgun house is one of those houses where you can open the front door, fire a shotgun, and the bullets or the pellets would go out the back door, because it's one straight corridor.  And that's what a shotgun house is, and anybody who's lived in the South any period of time in working class, in poor people's neighborhood, doesn't know anything about curved hallways or hallways that bent, it was, you open the front door and you can look straight ahead and you'd see the back door.  And so it got the name of a shotgun because you could fire a shotgun and not hit anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So are there any stories from your mother's side of the family about her relatives on that side or, there's no stories about the ancestors at all, you don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, not going back a generation, I mean, she had brothers and sisters.  She had two sisters, one older [Olive Porche], one younger [Ivory Mae Hollins], and a younger brother [William Yates, Sr.].  It was a family of high achievers.  I mean, both my grandmother and my grandfather had college degrees at the turn of the century.  I mean, I'm talking about had graduated from college in 1904 and 1905 and 1906 from small black colleges in the South, mainly in Louisiana, and going on to become teachers.  Their children, my mother included, did the amazing thing, they graduated from college in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s].  They all went, all of them went to college, every one of them went to college--
Story_ID: 316615
Speaker 1: My Uncle Butler, the younger brother of my mother [Hazel Yates Gray], became a doctor.  He was trained as a physician and was in the Tuskegee Airmen as a flight surgeon.  He got there late, the war [World War II, WWII] ended before, I think, he saw any actual combat.  But all of them were highly trained, highly educated, back during a time when that wasn't supposed to happen.
Speaker 2: Is that--would his name be Butler Yates?
Speaker 1: His name was Butler, William Yates [Sr.] and his nickname was Butler.  And I don't know how he got that nickname, but they called him Butler, but it was William Yates.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: But there's no, that's quite a--it seems like that would be quite a story, how you--I mean, it wasn't common for black people to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It wasn't even common for white people to get a college degree in 1904 or 1905.
Speaker 2: Right.  So is there, is--
Speaker 1: Ninety-nine percent of white people didn't have a college degree, so for a black person it was really unusual.  I never knew who my grandfather's [Albert Yates] father was, we suspect that it was somebody white, okay.  And that he was probably the offspring of a liaison between a master and a slave, a female slave and a white master because he was very, very fair.  He could pass for Walter Brennan's second, twin brother.  He had blue eyes, very, very fair and you could think that he was white.  My grandmother [Bertha Randall Yates], we never knew her history either, but she was full blooded African American, might have had a little Indian [Native American] in her or a little Creole (laughter), or something like that.  And, of course, in Louisiana there was often a lot of mixture, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir, I mean all over the place.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In Louisiana especially.
Speaker 1: But in Louisiana especially because, you had the Creole, the southern Louisiana, the coloreds, the mulattoes and so you really had a much more of a mixture in the African American community.
Speaker 2: And they were like stratified in terms of class structures based on color in Louisiana (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: --more than any other place.
Speaker 1: More than any other place.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So there's no stories about where they came from or how they--
Speaker 1: No.  No, we did not trace the history back, but it's clear from looking at my grandfather that he was the son, probably, of a white master and a slave woman.
Speaker 2: Do you know where he went to college [Leland University, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: I don't remember the name offhand, I'd have to look it up, but he was a very educated man and he taught mathematics and Greek.  I can remember that in the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s] when he was at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And his name was--
Speaker 1: His name, grand--Papa, that's what his name was, I don't know, that's what I called him, I called him Papa, you know, I didn't call him--but it was William Yates [sic.].
Story_ID: 316616
Speaker 1: Okay, now. Did your mother [Hazel Yates Gray] talk about growing up in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: No, she never spent much time, interestingly, ever talking about growing up in Louisiana.  And that was not unusual because, you know, for black people to talk about growing up in the South during segregation was very painful.  And so one of the ways you avoided the pain is you didn't recall it, and you would only talk about your family.  She talked about growing up with her sisters, her older sister Stollie [Olive Porche], her younger sister, Mae [Ivory Mae Hollins], and Butler [William Yates, Sr.].  But, you know, she would not get into historical accounts of what it was like in Shreveport [Louisiana], what it was like in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] or any of that.  And I always, as I got older, and experienced the raw segregation of the South myself, and the raw racism of the South, as well as the subtle racism of the North when we moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in the 1950s, I understand why she probably never talked about it, because it's too painful, and too distracting.  And so one of the ways you keep your focus on your dreams, your goals, is shed yourself of the drea- of the pain and of the hurt.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so your mother, we know she went to school and graduated from college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my mother was like all of her siblings, she went to Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And got her undergraduate degree.  Met my father [William H. Gray, Jr.].
Story_ID: 316617
Speaker 1: My father [William H. Gray, Jr.] came out of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  He was actually born in Richmond, Virginia.  His father [William H. Gray, Sr.] was a combination of Indian [Native American] and African American.  And he was the only child.  His mother was a schoolteacher, elementary school teacher in Richmond.  He was born in Richmond.  My grandfather on my father's side was a minister in Richmond, Virginia when my father was born, before that he had been in Kent County, Virginia [New Kent County, Virginia].  And after my father was born, a few years afterwards, they moved to Philadelphia.  He moved there to assume the ministry of a church, the Bright Hope Baptist Church in Philadelphia.  My father was born in 1911.  And they moved to Philadelphia in the early 1920s to assume a new ministry, the Bright Hope Baptist Church, and my father grew up in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  He went to the public schools.  And then he graduated from high school, very early.  And went to Bluefield State [Teachers] College [Bluefield State College, Bluefield, West Virginia], which was the historically black college [HBCU] in West Virginia.
Speaker 2: That's in West Virginia, right?
Speaker 1: In Bluefield, West Virginia.  There were two, Bluefield State, and West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia].  West Virginia State down in Charleston [sic.].  And essentially, he went to Bluefield State and then he came out of Bluefield State and went to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and got a master's [degree] in chemistry.  And then he started teaching at a historically black college, Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  He was very young, he was like twenty-one.  He graduated from college at like eighteen or seventeen.  So he was very young.  He met this student, and sparks, and he married her, that was my mom [Hazel Yates Gray].  He then came back to Philadelphia and went to work on his Ph.D.  He decided he wanted to be an educator and he wanted to be a administrator so he came back, got his Ph.D. in education from the University of Pennsylvania.  My mother went to Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and got a master's degree in home economics, this is in the late '30s [1930s], early '40s [1940s].  And then he left the University of Pennsylvania and became, I think, he probably still holds the record for the 20th century, I'm not sure, but at least up until that time in 1941, he became the youngest black college president in history.  And he became president of a black college, Florida Memorial [Florida Normal and Industrial College, St. Augustine, Florida; Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida], which at that time was located in St. Augustine, Florida.  It's now moved to southern Florida, it's down in, outside of Miami [Florida], I think, Opa-locka, Florida [sic.].  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now that's one, I confess I've never heard of but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Florida Memorial College.
Speaker 2: --is it still, still--
Speaker 1: Still there.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Still going strong.  But it used to be in northern Florida in St.  Augustine.  So he went there to become president, and after four or five years there, he was called to the presidency of Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], which was the big state black higher education institution in Tallahassee [Florida].  And so we went to Florida A&M about 1945, '46 [1946] and he was there until the early '50s [1950s] as president.  And then we left college campus and moved to North Philadelphia where he assumed the ministry of the church that his father had pastored, Bright Hope Baptist Church, and he also became editor of the [Philadelphia] Afro-American newspaper, a columnist for the [Philadelphia] Daily News and a bunch of other things.  Human rights commissioner for the city, a civil service commissioner for the city, human rights commissioner for the state.  And but his focus was the ministry, primarily.
Speaker 2: That's quite a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I sort of grew up in North Philadelphia in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know, did all the normal activities (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 316618
Speaker 1: What--are there any stories about your father's [William H. Gray, Jr.] ancestors and stuff going back?
Speaker 2: No, we, that was one--he had a very small family, he was the only child, and we were--have never been able to find any really significant relatives, whatsoever.  There were some cousins and nephews but they all passed away.  They were significantly older than he was, but they passed away in the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Oh, his father was William, was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was a minister.
Speaker 1: --Gray.
Speaker 2: William H. Gray--
Speaker 1: William H. Gray--
Speaker 2: --senior.
Speaker 1: --senior [William H. Gray, Sr.], yeah.
Speaker 2: He was William H. Gray, Jr.
Speaker 1: And he was a pastor, we know that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he moved from Richmond [Virginia], I guess, to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: He moved from, no, he moved from a little church out in the country in Kent County [Virginia; New Kent County, Virginia] to Richmond, to the big city.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we can go, we can take him all the way back to Kent--
Speaker 2: Kent, Kent County.
Speaker 1: Kent County--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Virginia.
Speaker 2: And, in fact, I have a picture of the church which he built and, or laid the foundation for, back in the early 20th century, 'cause it has his name on it, someone sent it to me, and he was a pastor there for a brief period.  Now before that we are not able to trace history other than that we know that there was very strong Indian [Native American] blood in the family--
Speaker 1: And he was--
Speaker 2: --on his side.
Speaker 1: I guess, he would, he would have had to be born in the 1880s maybe, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was born, you know, much earlier, I'd probably say yeah, I'd probably say 1880s, 1890s.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your father was born in 1911, then you're in '42 [1942].
Story_ID: 316619
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My [paternal] grandfather [William H. Gray, Sr.] died early.  He died about 1949, 1950.  He was about sixty-one, sixty-two years of age.  And again, you know, we lived in the North, so we were sort of disconnected to the roots of where it began.  And again, there was just really not much discussion about, you know, what came before Grandpop Gray.
Speaker 2: Now was Bright Hope Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] populated by people from Virginia that came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: It tended to be a Virginia, South Carolina, North Carolina, and Florida church, as all of the black churches in the North, as blacks migrated north, they tended to select churches to go to where people from their state and from their cities or counties went.  And so we became a church known as a Virginia, South Carolina, North Carolina, and Florida church, because of my father's [William H. Gray, Jr.] connection in Florida as a college president, we attracted a lot of Floridians, especially young people coming out of Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].  You know, some professor would say, "Hey, when you get to Philadelphia you go by Bill Gray's church, he used to be president here."  And they'd come in and say, "Dr. Gray, I'm a graduate of Florida A&M, I graduated in 1955," and I'm from, oh, I'm from Ocala, Florida, or I'm from Sanford, Florida, and they'd have a wonderful conversation and boom, they'd become a member of the church.  The same thing with people from the Richmond [Virginia] area, from the Virginia area.  And for a variety of reasons, Carolina, we have a lot of members from Carolina, but that was back in the early days.  So we were sort of a church that was known for those four states.  But we had people from everywhere.
Speaker 2: I'm gonna ask you this.  Sir, now, when you describe both sides of the family you describe people that really are highly motivated to achieve in the educational arena.  I mean they go after degrees in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my--
Speaker 2: --teaching.
Speaker 1: --grandmother on my father's side had a college degree.  My grandfather did not, on my father's side.  We believe he was a high school graduate, we're not even sure of that.  But on my mother's [Hazel Yates Gray] side both of her parents [Bertha Randall Yates and Albert Yates] were college trained.  And so, when you think about what America was like in 1910, 1915, and think about you've got two parents who are college trained, my mother, and you got one who's college trained on my father's side, and one who very strongly supports education as a minister, my father's side.  You know, for me there was no question I was going to college, it was like, if you don't go to college we're gone break your neck.
Speaker 2: All right, so it was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, it was just a question of which college you were gonna go to.  And there wasn't any question about whether we were gonna make the sacrifice to pay the bill for you to go school.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this was discussed I suppose at an early age that you were going to college.
Speaker 1: It wasn't even discussed.  It was sort of like in your genes, you knew you were supposed to.  I mean, what, if I had ever suggested to my parents that I didn't wanna go to college, I probably would have had to send a telegram, I wouldn't go home and tell 'em that, I mean if I did, you know, they'd kill me.  I mean, you just, it was automatically assumed.
Story_ID: 316620
Speaker 1: What was your mother [Hazel Yates Gray] like and what was your father [William H. Gray, Jr.] like, and who do you think you take after, and well what traits do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I mean, I think they were different people (laughter).  She was the southern lady, homemaker, teacher, you know, public school teacher, she taught at the high schools in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] most of my youth, and spent a lot of time taking care of the home and raising the kids, you know.  That was what she was about.  Very kind, very sweet person.  Kind of old-fashioned in many ways, some of the southern old-fashioned ways, you know.  Whereas my father came out of Philadelphia, he was a city boy (laughter), a city slicker you might say.  Very aggressive, very bright, he believed that you achieved excellence.  He was also a strong fighter against injustice as a minister and as an educator.  And he was a good dad.  A great provider, worked two, three jobs all the time.  But, of course, that was usual for black people, you had to work two or three jobs to maintain whatever the status was.  If you were upper middle-class you had to work two or three jobs, if you were middle-class you had to work two or three jobs, if you were working class you had to work two or three jobs.  And he, they were different individuals, different personalities.
Speaker 1: And what traits do you think you take from 'em?
Speaker 2: I probably take a little bit from both of 'em, probably, well my sister [Marian Gray Secundy] used to say I was more like my father than my mother.  But I always thought she was more like my father (laughter) than I ever was, I thought I had been, you know, calmed down a little bit by the sweetness, the genteelness of my mother, and she was more the rabid go-getter, you know.  So but she used to say, "No, you're the one like dad," and I'd say, "no you're the one like dad."  So well, you know, I had a little, I think I take after both of 'em.
Speaker 1: So dad was definitely the leader of the household, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, I had a strong male image at all times in the house that was always urging me to do my best, always urging me to do better.  And, I had a very strong male presence in the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I had a strong mother too (laughter), who had all the attributes of the strong African American woman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so it was a great combination.
Speaker 1: So it was just you and your sister?
Speaker 2: Just two of us.  I had a sister who was three years older than I was.
Story_ID: 316621
Speaker 1: Tell us now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have lots of childhood memories.
Speaker 1: No, an earliest?
Speaker 2: The very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The first memory.
Speaker 2: --very first memory that I can, you know, pull out of the computer and say this is the first one I can't go back any further, no.  I don't have any one.  I have a bunch of things that are running, evolve around various kinds of situations.  I can remember as a little kid waking up at 949 North 20th Street, that's the shotgun house in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, getting up at five o'clock just to have coffee with my [maternal] grandfather [Albert Yates], and I was a little kid.  My mother [Hazel Yates Gray] would have a fit when he would give me coffee and he would always sneak me some because at five o'clock she was still asleep.  I can remember a [maternal] grandmother [Bertha Randall Yates] who didn't like me to play with guns, you know, cap pistols.  And (laughter) I can remember when my father [William H. Gray, Jr.] was president of Florida Memorial [Florida Normal and Industrial College, St. Augustine, Florida; Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida], he was holding me by the hand and I couldn't have been more than three or four years of age, we were walking by the pool on the campus and there were some students in the pool, in a canoe and I can remember that.  And I remember he let go of my hand and I went and jumped right in, (laughter) trying to jump into the canoe.  And the students had to row, come over quickly and pull me out before I drowned.
Story_ID: 316622
Speaker 1: I mean, I have a lot of memories.  I can remember the first time I was called a nigger, you know.
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: That was in, spending summertime with my sister [Marian Gray Secundy] over in Louisiana and we used to do that--
Speaker 2: How old were you at that time?
Speaker 1: Oh, I guess, that we were at that time, we were at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], so it had to be about 1945, '46 [1946], '47 [1947], somewhere in that period, so I would have to have been five years old.  So, and every summer we would go from Tallahassee [Florida] in the panhandle of Florida across the bay coast, you know, Mobile, Alabama, New Orleans [Louisiana], and up to Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and spend a month with grandma [Bertha Randall Yates].  I mean, that was living, man, that was, you know, you used to look forward to that 'cause grandma would fix you whatever you wanted to eat, and we'd spend a month minimum, sometimes even two months with grandma and grandpa [Albert Yates] in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  And one of the things that my sister and I would do is we'd just go running around the neighborhood.  So one time we went downtown, and she and I were running around downtown and we went into a department store, I don't know what kind of store it was but, you know, it was a multi-goods store, and I saw the water fountain and I went over to get a drink and she told me I couldn't drink there and this, there was a sign that said whites only.  And what happened was a man came up to me and grabbed me by the shoulder and said, "Nigger, you can't drink here."  And I said, kept saying to my sister, "What's a nigger?"  And she immediately took me over to the colored water fountain, the water looked the same to me, I got a drink went home and grandma had to explain to me what a nigger was.  And, you know, so I--
Speaker 2: And she explained to you, I mean, do you remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I remember it, sure I even remember that, I can remember that vividly.  Well she took me out to the university of the big porch, sat me in the school room of the swing, the big swing, and began to rock, and talked about race and the problems of race in America, history of America, slavery, and that there were people who did not like black people simply because they were black people.  And, what I remember the most though was an image she used, which was, she said, we lived a few blocks from the state capitol, she did, grandma, and out the back porch you could look and see the spire of the state capitol.  And it was a very prominent, you know, thing.  And she'd say, "You know, see that state capitol out the back?"  And, of course, I couldn't see it but it was a figure of speech, and I said yes.  She says, "That's the state assemblies in there and the supreme court," and I said yes.  She says, "It takes all of them to keep you from drinking from that water fountain."  And she talked about the Congress of the United States, she talked about the Supreme Court of the United States, she says it takes all of them to keep you from drinking, that's how important you are.
Story_ID: 316803
Speaker 1: You say your [maternal] grandmother [Bertha Randall Yates] explained this to you, it really sounds political, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well she explained it to me in very positive terms.  So that I never felt what the object of the person who would call you that wanted me to feel, which was inferior.  You know, she explained it in such a way that made me feel like, man, you're so important it takes--they gotta do those kind of things to keep you from just being out of this world (laughter).  And so you walked away not scarred or scared or, you know, but you walked away strengthened, by the explanation.  You understood it, you tried to, you struggled with it, and as all black people do, you struggle with racism all your life, I mean, 'cause it makes no sense, and it makes you angry no matter what somebody says or does, you know.  The question is how do you handle it?  And, basically what she taught me at a very early age is you handle it by achieving, by being what they don't expect you to be, by doing what they say you can't do.
Speaker 1: Now your memory of that conversation is so keen now, and when I was hearing you describe that discussion, well, it seemed like it would raise questions as to what is the state capitol, legislature, what is the government, you know, did you have those kind (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: At five were you thinking like, what is the state capitol, you know--
Speaker 2: No.  I just, you don't know it at five or six years old, you just know that government is powerful and government runs things.  So I really didn't understand all the implications, so it was only later that I understood what she was trying to tell me--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just mean did it make you curious about--
Speaker 2: --that it took all of those folk, it took the courts, it took the governor, it took the state assembly, it took the congress, it took the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], it took everybody, justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], it just took everybody to try to keep you down, okay.  And the reason why is 'cause you're very important.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, the message there was that you are somebody, you are very important, and they're worried about you, okay.  And don't you ever forget, no matter what they call you or what they say about you, don't you ever forget that you are a very, very important person.
Story_ID: 316804
Speaker 1: How long were you in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], I mean, as a kid?
Speaker 2: Oh, we would spend our summers there, every summer from about 1945 to about 1952 until we moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when my father [William H. Gray, Jr.] left the presidency of Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] and we came to Philadelphia.  And that's, you know, we didn't go back to grandma's [Bertha Randall Yates] house for a couple of reasons, one we were older by then, and secondly as you get older, you know, you don't visit as much with grandma.  And secondly it was such a long distance, and of course, during those days you didn't travel as much as you do today.  I mean, today you don't think about getting on a plane in Philadelphia flying to New Orleans [Louisiana]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --or Baton Rouge.
Speaker 1: I was trying to, just trying to get a sense of the chronology of how long you lived in Baton Rouge as a family before you moved to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we lived in Tallahassee, Florida.
Speaker 1: Tallahassee, okay.
Speaker 2: And then every summer we'd go over to Baton Rouge.
Speaker 1: So you were born in Baton Rouge but you didn't, your father was--you moved to Tallahassee (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a college professor.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And in those days, he was a college professor, professor at Southern [University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], but more importantly, my mother [Hazel Yates Gray] was from where, Baton Rouge, her father [Albert Yates] was a professor at Southern.  And in those days when, back in the '40s [1940s] if you were black and your wife was gonna have a baby, you usually tried to go back to her house, to her parents' house to have the baby, why?  Because it was so awkward for black people to travel.  It wasn't like, oh, just get on a plane, I'm getting ready to have a grandbaby, so no, people, you avoided racism, you avoided the insults.  And so what happens is the grandparents stayed there or her parents stayed there, she got her degree from Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in May, and delivered me in August.  And she went, you know, immediately back to Baton Rouge and my father did too.  Why?  'Cause, you know, you don't ask your elderly parents to travel through the wilderness of racism and the confrontations of riding in the back of the train, the back of the bus, you do that, okay.  Or if you have a little piece of car, you drive.  And you put it on the younger person in the family, you know, you didn't stay at the Holiday Inn, you didn't stay at the Hilton, you know, there was no Motel 6, or there were hotels, there were motels but they weren't for blacks.  So, we started the bed and breakfast movement in America 'cause we had to drive until we came to a city, and then you went into the hood and found out who was taking in roomers overnight, and it was always somebody.  And you'd go to that, you would just stop anybody on the corner and say, "Hey I need a place to stay tonight, I got my family, I'm on my way to Louisiana," and they'd say, "Oh, there's Miss Ann's over here, there's Miss Jones' over there, there's Miss Smith's over there."  And you'd go there, knock on the door and it'd be a big house, and you get a nice clean room and dinner.  You spend the night, get up in the morning, breakfast and off you go.  And that's kind of hard to do if you're elderly.  So essentially back in the '40s [1940s], if the parents and the daughter were separated at the time of birth they usually got together by her kind of going back.  So that's it literally, and it was also where my father was a professor at Southern University so it was very logical.  I was born in Louisiana.  Right after being born, he became president of Florida Memorial [Florida Normal and Industrial College, St. Augustine, Florida; Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida], we went to St. Augustine, Florida, spent four or five years there, then we came to Tallahassee, Florida, and spent six, seven years there.  But during those summers, we'd go visit grandma, man, that was great living, great experience--
Story_ID: 316805
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, I mean the sights, the sounds, smells.  I don't know, it depends whether you're at grandma's [Bertha Randall Yates] house or whether you're in your own house.  We lived on the college campus in the president's house which was very nice and far better than 90 percent of what everybody else lived in, not just black folk but also white folk.  And so we had the sounds and the sights of young black students who were going to college.  Sights and sounds of football teams practicing and playing the football game on Saturday, the marching band.  The sights and sounds of professors discussing some intellectual topic over coffee in the dining room, or some management issue at the university or fundraising issue.  The sights and sounds of little dogs and cats running (laughter) around in the yard.  The sights and sounds of garden parties where you have students and faculty over in the backyard, or the sights and sounds of grandma, which were totally different.  The big oak tree with that big swing that was always there for you to go swing in.  The sights and sounds of the kitchen, I mean the kitchen, of the chicken coop, yeah, she had a chicken coop, old corrugated tin, where she raised chicken.  And she had a garden where she did the collard greens and everything else.  And, you had a rooster right out the backyard, wake you up in the morning.  I mean, not on television but I mean a real rooster.  And when you had chicken, grandpa [Albert Yates] went out there and grabbed the chicken and broke the neck and cleaned it and you fried it and you had chicken.  You know, it wasn't, you didn't go to the supermarket and buy it in nice wrapped packs, you know, cleaned and deboned.  You had ice cream where you put the cream in and you put the peaches in, and you put the sugar in and then my job was to sit there and just churn and churn and churn, they would put ice all around it.  I remember those kind of things.  But boy, when you finished, you had fresh ice cream that was homemade, could beat anything that you could possibly buy today in any store, at any price.  You know, down the street was an old shack of a restaurant with a big oak tree with all the roots exposed, and my sister [Marian Gray Secundy] and I used to love to go down there and get a red beans and rice and pork chops (laughter) and that was one of the specials of this little shack.  It was literally a shack, okay.  The sights and sounds of grandma would be, you know, just love and affection, you know, waking up at five o'clock in the morning having coffee with your grandfather, hoping your mother [Hazel Yates Gray] didn't get up so she would start yelling at him about, "Why are you giving that young boy that coffee," okay.  Sitting around eating fried fish on Friday night that had just been caught out of the Mississippi River, and fried catfish, corn muffins, oh, yeah.  I mean, those were the sights and sounds I grew up with.  And then when I was a teenager I was--we moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], the cars, the trolley cars, the delivery trucks with horses and delivery of the milk, you know, and it was dropped off at your front steps, you didn't have to go to the market to buy it.
Speaker 1: Was it hard to adjust to that, I mean coming to Philadelphia after having lived in the South?
Speaker 2: No, it was exciting.  I mean, you came to the North and you saw all this concrete and all this asphalt, all these streets and these towering buildings, you know, row homes that were three and four stories high, you'd look up and you couldn't even see the sky, you had these tall buildings, eight, nine, ten story buildings, you never saw that stuff in Louisiana or in Florida.  You know, you didn't see tall buildings, twenty stories high.  Riding on a street car, you didn't have a street car to ride in, in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  Now you did have one in New Orleans [Louisiana] and that was a big deal because we used to go to New Orleans and one of the things we used to do is go for a ride on the St. Charles Street trolley.  I mean, that was a big deal.  So I mean, it was a different world.  Stickball on the back street, basketball on the courts, and just a different kind of atmosphere.  You know, mustard pretzels and cheese steaks, all those kind of things.
Speaker 1: Philly cheese steaks.
Speaker 2: Absolutely man, if you're from Philadelphia, you learn to eat the Philly cheese steaks early in life.  And so it was different, totally different settings, totally different sights, totally different sounds, totally different smells.
Story_ID: 316806
Speaker 1: What were you like when you were a little boy?  What did you like to do and what didn't you like?
Speaker 2: Oh, I liked almost everything.  I mean, I loved athletics, I loved being outside, I loved playing with my playmates, and, you know.  I was into everything (laughter) as my mother [Hazel Yates Gray] would say.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that was about it.  Actually, I liked to do almost everything.
Speaker 1: What kind of personality did you have, would you say?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I'd probably, you know, I was told that I was quite outspoken and I would say a lot of things that I shouldn't have said, (laughter) you know.  Like one time I walked in, my father [William H. Gray, Jr.] was president of Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], he was having a major reception at the house of donors and important people, you know, not the students, not the professors but, you know, really, trustees and givers.  And I came walking in, they said, and they were introducing me around, and I just, they said something came up and I just said, "Yeah, well, you know what my daddy said about that person?  My daddy said he was a son of a," and I said it (laughter) and I do remember that occasion.  I don't remember what made me say that but I was quoting him directly.  All I knew was, the next thing I knew I was up in the air by one arm being taken upstairs where I got a whacking (laughter).  But, you know, that was, I was told that that was typical of me.  Whatever I saw, whatever I heard, might come out my mouth (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you liked to talk and express yourself and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  One day we were driving, I was told by my mother one day we were in the car with folks and we were driving down a street and we passed a liquor store and I said, "Oh, stop, there's my daddy's medicine store," you know.  So I was pretty, you know, candid.
Story_ID: 316807
Speaker 1: Now was church a big part of growing up? I guess it would have to be?
Speaker 2: Yeah, church was a part of growing up.  You know, when I was on the campus we went to the campus worship service.  And back in those days you couldn't even be a college president unless you were an ordained minister in the black community.  My father [William H. Gray, Jr.] was an ordained minister (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that's, you hit upon a point that's probably--
Speaker 2: Most of your black colleges [HBCUs] were affiliated with the church, Baptist, Methodist, Presbyterian, and they wanted the presidents to be ministers.  So my father was an ordained minister even though he was a college president and had never pastored a church, okay.  And you had chapel almost every day, you had some kind of a chapel service, which was required, they actually took roll, I mean students had to go.  It wasn't voluntary like, would you like to come to Sunday service on campus at the college chapel like it is today, no, you had to go.  And so church has always been, and religion and faith and values of faith, have always been central to my family's existence and to mine.
Speaker 1: Now as you said the black colleges, most of them were founded by churches.
Speaker 2: They came out of the basements of the black religious experience.
Speaker 1: And the white religious experiences too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of white (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well a lot of white--
Speaker 1: --denominations found in black colleges.
Speaker 2: --denominations assisted black churches in building colleges.  Why?  Because black kids were denied access to education, not just higher education, but all forms of education.
Story_ID: 316808
Speaker 1: One of the great philanthropists of the 20th century was a white American who built over four thousand schools, K [kindergarten] through twelve, throughout the South.  And that was the founder of Sears and Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].  He was a good friend of Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 2: Oh, Rosenwald?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Julius Rosenwald.
Speaker 1: The Rosenwald family.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.
Speaker 1: And there was a belief that, you know, we gotta make sure that folks get an education.  And even though the state university, LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], wouldn't let 'em in, so yeah, white philanthropy and missionaries provided resources for the southern universities or the Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], which is a historically black college [HBCU] in New Orleans [Louisiana], founded by Sister Katharine Drexel out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], okay.  Catholic, black Catholic college, which today produces half of the blacks who get a physics degree and also produces a disproportionate share of blacks who go to medical school.
Speaker 2: Right.  A lot of pharmacists.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and pharmacists.  And, I mean just, and but if you look at every black college, they had a tie to a black church, that church in turn had a tie with white people of faith.  You know, Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Presbyterian [sic. Baptist] or you can just go see the connection, Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte, North Carolina], Presbyterian.  You can just, you can see the religious connection.  And this was particularly true of the early black colleges founded in the 19th century, the private black colleges, two black colleges, the private ones, they're the earliest, Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] in Ohio claims that it's number one, 1830s, 1840s, it was a stop on the Underground Railroad escaping from the Mississippi Delta north to Canada in central Ohio.  But all of, most of those colleges, in fact all of them, were founded in the 19th century.  The public, the big publics, South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], were all established as a result of segregation that took hold at the beginning of the 20th century.  And essentially what happened was that they under Plessy v. Ferguson [1896] and its extension, the ruling came, well if you build a state university just for blacks, you can deny them access to The University of North Carolina [at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], and North Carolina State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina], University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida], and Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida].  And so you have the anomaly of here's Florida A&M on one hill of the state capital of Florida, Tallahassee, there's another hill where the capitol is, and on the other side there's a hill where Florida State is.  But by building that you could deny.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then, of course, you had even the stranger part of racism where states would even pay black students to go out of state to graduate school, you know, go north.  So that you wouldn't have to open up the graduate school, the law school, the medical school.
Speaker 2: Now that's a strange situation.  We've heard it so many times in these interviews--
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --where people actually were paid to go to the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly, or go to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]--
Speaker 2: --or go to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 1: --go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: Yale, Harvard--
Speaker 1: --or go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know.
Speaker 1: To go to Howard, Penn--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Penn, University of Pennsylvania medical school [University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine; Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or University of Michigan 'cause they can get in, but we don't wanna even integrate our graduate divisions.  So North Carolina had about six black colleges funded by the state just for blacks.  So that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that the highest number in any state?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think probably North Carolina might be the highest number.  I mean, you know, Elizabeth City [State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], Fayetteville State [University, Fayetteville, North Carolina], Winston-Salem [State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], North Carolina A&T is the main one.  Let me see, I'm trying to think of what, but I'm saying, there's quite a few, but a lot of states had quite a few, quite a few.
Speaker 2: You had a couple of northern states, Ohio had some, you know, finally developed Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ohio had Central State.
Speaker 2: Pennsylvania had Cheyney [University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania]
Speaker 1: Wilberforce was private see, Central State came later.  But and Pennsylvania--
Speaker 2: Now Cheyney State--
Speaker 1: --had Cheney.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But they didn't find found Cheyney.  Cheyney was not founded on the principle of racism, denial of blacks going to other institutions in Penn, it was founded because it was a runaway slave, underground station.  It was out in the middle of the wilderness.  And a lot of black schools were built that way.  Lincoln University in Pennsylvania is in Oxford, PA [sic.].  Well, Oxford, PA [Pennsylvania] is built up now, but fifty years ago it was out in the middle of nowhere.  And the same thing with a lot of black colleges in the South.  And that was done on purpose because they wanted black kids to be away from the overt racism, and they didn't wanna put 'em in big cities where they would be confronted by whites, so if you built out in the country, closed the wall, closed the gate, you'd have a safer environment and that became very, very important especially for young black women.
Story_ID: 316809
Speaker 1: Well tell me now, church was very important, now mostly campus church activities when you were growing up, I guess.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then I, then in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: --but you would visit Philadelphia sometimes?
Speaker 2: --when I went to Philadelphia, you know, church was all day Sunday, you know, very important part of our life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father [William H. Gray, Jr.] was a minister.
Speaker 1: Now did you like music when you were growing up or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked music.
Speaker 1: What kind, did you--
Speaker 2: But I have no musical bone in my body.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't play an instrument?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't play anything (laughter).  My mother [Hazel Yates Gray] tried to get me to take piano lessons and I rebelled against that.  You know, in Philadelphia, you know, in the hood, you didn't take piano lessons, that was kind of sissy, you were out playing basketball, you're out playing football.  And now I wish, you know, I regret that I didn't pay more attention to those lessons now, because I've always loved music, I mean popular music, church music, you know, just about every style of music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, well, where did you to school, first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to--
Speaker 1: --your first grade school?
Speaker 2: First grade school, well, the first grade school I went to was the Lab School [Developmental Research School, Tallahassee, Florida].  Now let me explain what a lab school is because most people don't know what that is, those who are over sixty would know in the black community.  At all of these universities they would have a laboratory school where the teachers would be students who were gonna be future teachers, they would get their teacher training, right, remember I said, keep the environment safe.  And since a lot of these were women, they would create a school right on the campus, Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] had a great lab school, but it was not only for where I went, but many of, most of the children of faculty members went and also a lot of people in the black community, particularly the middle, upper middle-class kids, because you didn't wanna send your kid to the segregated schools that were poorly funded, so if you could, you got 'em into the lab school at the university, and there you would have the best teachers, the best minds, the newest techniques, and best equipment.  And so my first memory of going to school, was going to the school at Florida A&M, which was called the Lab School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And they had these on every campus.  It was a way of avoiding segregation, it was also a way of training your teachers in a non-segregated environment.  It was literally segregated 'cause it was all black but it wasn't done by a quote, government.  And so I went to Lab School, elementary.  I also spent a year at Scott Street [Elementary] School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] where my [maternal] grandmother [Bertha Randall Yates] was when we were transitioning from Florida to Philadelphia.  I went--
Speaker 1: And that's in Baton Rouge, right?
Speaker 2: In Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  I went to the Scott Street School which was a public school for blacks only.  And then I went to Meade Elementary [General George G. Meade School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], 18th [Street] and Oxford Street.  I went to [Jay] Cooke Junior High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was a part of the public school system.  And then I went to [Simon] Gratz High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: You said Grant?
Speaker 2: Gratz, Simon Gratz (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Gratz, oh, Simon Gratz, that's right.
Speaker 2: G, it's G-R-A-T-Z.  Simon Gratz.  Named after a very prominent Jewish citizen in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we've interviewed some people that went to Simon Gratz.
Speaker 2: And so I went to Simon Gratz.  And I grew up in North Philadelphia, went to Gratz for high school.
Speaker 1: So did you graduate in '59 [1959]?
Speaker 2: I graduated from Gratz in 1959.
Story_ID: 316810
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school, you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I think probably I didn't work that hard in high school [Simon Gratz High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] but I did very well, I graduated fourth out of 369.
Speaker 1: But you didn't work that hard?
Speaker 2: No.  But I liked all, I liked most of the subjects except, I didn't like math.  And I wasn't too in love with science, chemistry, okay.
Speaker 1: Math was later, does that work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe that was--I think it was just, that kind of, you know, capability was not--the social sciences I loved, history.  But I was involved in a lot of things.  I was involved in student government, I was vice president of the student body, I was editor of the yearbook, I was a four-letter athlete, four varsity letters in, you know, basketball, and I loved sports and so, you know.
Speaker 1: That's something, four letters.  That's a lot of activities.  So you were running and doing something every season, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Basketball, football, baseball?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Track?
Speaker 2: --basketball, track, cross country, and tennis.
Speaker 1: Tennis, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: I played tennis to get the fourth one.  I wanted to be the only four-letter athlete in my class so I played tennis.  I had, I knew a little bit about tennis because back on those college campuses they had tennis, because back in the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s], the only place blacks played tennis were on college campuses or black private clubs like Arthur Ashe played at a private black club in Richmond [Virginia] that had a court under Dr. [Robert Walter] Johnson.  Well, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The president would always know how to play (laughter).
Speaker 2: But, you know, we had tennis courts at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], and I had a lot of great examples.  My father [William H. Gray, Jr.] brought Althea Gibson to Florida A&M, and I used to be the ball boy and go pick up the balls for Althea and my father when they were out hitting.
Speaker 1: Wow, that's the famous Althea Gibson that won Wimbledon [The Championships, Wimbledon, London, England].
Speaker 2: Althea Gibson, the Althea Gibson.  And so, you know, and I had learned how to hold a racket as a kid, never played it much 'cause, you know, when you come to North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you walk around in the '50s [1950s] with a tennis racket, you gonna become Rocky Marciano and Joe Louis, you know, fighting your way home, you know, you gonna end up being a--'cause everybody's gonna wanna have, so you always hid your racket somewhere in North Philadelphia.  But I decided to go out for the tennis team and play so that I could get my fourth letter.  But it was track, basketball, I wanted to play football but my father wouldn't let me play football my first year in high school, because I got a C in one subject at midterm and it was chemistry (laughter).  And he said, "Nope, you got a C."  So by the time, okay, then the, so the year would roll around, I was getting all A's and Bs but by that time, you had already lost a year.  And so I said, forget it, you know, no need to go out, I'll be so far behind trying to catch up.  And I wasn't a big bruiser, I was a little skinny kid, you know.  My mother [Hazel Yates Gray] was afraid I was gonna get killed on the football field anyway.  So I ended up running cross-country in the fall, playing basketball, and track.  And then one year I did track and tennis at the same time so that I could get my fourth letter.
Story_ID: 316811
Speaker 1: You grew up in an era when a lot of these great popular musicians were emerging (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh--
Speaker 1: --in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: --absolutely.  I mean Philadelphia was a unique place.  I mean, I love Philadelphia, it was a great city, it still is a great city.  But I can remember going down to Pep's [Musical] Bar [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know, which was down at Broad [Street] and South [Street], and seeing Aretha Franklin when she was sixteen and was known by nobody, nobody knew who Aretha Franklin was, and she wasn't even the main event.  She was just the first act of a three-act, and I think Miles Davis was the main event.  The Showboat [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was a little place down in the basement on Lombard Street.  I mean, you had, it was a great place for music, you know, Marian Anderson.  I mean, you had it, classical, as well.  Church music, Charles [Albert] Tindley, Tindley Temple [United Methodist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I mean, all kinds of music, and it continued to evolve.  You know, [HistoryMaker Kenny] Gamble and [HistoryMaker Leon] Huff, who popularized basically black community life into pop music, which turned into a crossover.  It wasn't bought by the black community it, you know, they got rich because white people bought it.  And it was sort of like today when people talk about rap, I don't like this rap.  I said well, and they're always talking about the black community, okay, but who buys it, 80 percent of it is bought by whites.  And so, you know, black music crossed over and it became crossover music in the '60s [1960s] and in the '70s [1970s] and Kenny Gamble and Huff were in the forefront of that.  Motown, with The Supremes, prior to that we had songs, you know, I remember the original 'You Ain't Nothing but a Hound Dog,' you know, Big Mama.
Speaker 1: Big Mama Thornton that sang that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I remember it, much slower, you know, a much slower beat, you ain't nothing but a hound dog.  It was sort of a jazz-blues beat, and then here comes Elvis [Presley], you know, whoop.  And so we had music that was special to us in our community, gospel, jazz, harmonizing, we even had rap.  I mean, there were rap songs, 'Close Your Eyes,' that I used to dance off of, and the guy would start talking in the song and talk halfway through the song, you know.  And so we had a form of rap, I mean.  But that stuff was just special to our community and they were popular and sold in our community.  But later people like Kenny Gamble, Motown also, took that genre of music, popularized it to the point where it was on '[American] Bandstand,' it replaced Elvis, it replaced The Beatles, you know, The O'Jays, you know.  And the message music that came out, and The Temptations, you know, 'Cloud Nine,' you know, stuff like that, suddenly became popular in suburban America.  You know, white folks were buying it and it became the music.  But black folk have always been the ones who have contributed the most unique art form in American history, which has been music.
Speaker 1: Now when you were coming along I think Dee Dee Sharp (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --"Meet me on South Street."
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And all that sort of thing that was popular.
Speaker 2: And she was talking about South Street, and she'd talk about, then there was the songs about, I'm trying to remember what the other song by the group was, a women's group, and it was--
Speaker 1: Was it The Shirelles?
Speaker 2: The Shirelles, and they would name all the South Streets.  See, every city had a South Street.  Richmond [Virginia] had 5th Street or Houston [Texas] had the Fifth Ward.  Every, you know, Harlem [New York, New York] had a 125th [Street], but every city, every town in America had a South Street which was that place (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or Broadway (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  A place where black folk hung out, okay.  And it was sort of the hangout, it's where you had the black restaurants, you had the jazz shops, you know what I mean.  And it, and I remember, I can't remember who made it and I can't remember the song, but they talked about each one of these cities gonna meet you there, and they named all these streets but every, Detroit [Michigan] had one, Chicago [Illinois] had one, you know, a special street that was us.  So, you know, you, you went to Philadelphia, you were gonna go out on the evening, go down to South Street, man.  I mean that's where--
Speaker 1: Fillmore [Street] in San Francisco.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 103rd Street in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 2: And it was.  And later, I mean, you go to South Street today, South Street today in Philadelphia is, you know, just like being in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], and it's been transformed where it's the hangout for the majority, okay.  But when I was growing up, it was the hangout for black folk.
Story_ID: 316812
Speaker 1: Who was at Simon Gratz [High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when you were there?  What was the population like, was it a black school in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Simon Gratz was a public school in an area called Nicetown-Tioga section of Philadelphia.  I had to catch a bus to go to it.  And the school, I don't remember how many students we had, but it was a pretty good-sized high school, maybe about a thousand, and it was about 95 percent black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And let's see, I'm trying to think of who were there, Leroy Kelly.
Speaker 1: Oh, the football player?
Speaker 2: The famous Cleveland Browns football player.
Speaker 1: Morgan State [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Morgan State.  Leroy was there at that time.
Speaker 1: So he must have been the star of the football team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was one of the stars of the football team.  He was a great football player.  But we had a variety of folk who were a part of that high school experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so you were vice president of the student body when, when you were a senior?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was senior.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were number four in the class?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 316813
Speaker 1: You knew you were going to college, we already know this but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, how did you decide what school to go to?
Speaker 2: Well it was a very difficult decision, you know, 'cause I had grown up on black college [HBCU] campuses and, you know, I loved them (laughter).  And, you know, I had been accepted to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], and I had also been accepted to a bunch of other schools.  I think I applied to about ten or twelve, and I just couldn't make up my mind so I just keep applying to everything.  And finally I decided that I wanted to go to a small college, that I was gonna go to a majority institution, and so I went to Franklin and Marshall [College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania].  They had a very high academic rating, all male, sixty miles away.
Speaker 1: Franklin Marshall [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Lancaster, Pennsylvania.  It was a little all-male college that had a very high ranking academically in the same category as Swarthmore [College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania], Haverford [College, Haverford, Pennsylvania], Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts], that kind of a college, a liberal arts college.  And I went there and had a great education.  I mean, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not great on social life but it was great for education.
Speaker 1: Right.  So this is in Langston [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Lancaster, Pennsylvania, Franklin and Marshall College.
Speaker 1: In PA [Pennsylvania].  And what did you major in?
Speaker 2: I majored in history.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you major in, did you have an emphasis on American history or ancient history?
Speaker 2: American history.
Speaker 1: American history, okay.  Okay.  All right.  Now well, how, how was life there, were there very many black students at--
Speaker 2: No.  It was about twelve or thirteen hundred students and there were five my freshman year.  When I graduated there were about fourteen, fifteen.  But about eight of those were African students, you know, from Nigeria, places like that, Chad, and back in those days there was not the view of the diaspora as it is today, that we were all brothers of the color.  There was not the socialization--
Speaker 1: So they was, they kept separate--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Then the African students--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --kept, kept apart from the African Americans?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, well what was the--what kind of school is Franklin and Marshall?  Was it founded by a religious institution?
Speaker 2: I think, Franklin and Marshall has some religious tradition to it, like all private colleges in America, black or white.  If you look far enough, you know, the Puritans, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Catholics, [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts], [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana], Catholics, you know, Southern Methodist University [Dallas, Texas] and the Methodists, Drew University [Madison, New Jersey] and the Methodists, Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], the Presbyterians, all of those private colleges have their roots in a religious tradition.  And I think Franklin and Marshall had its roots in the Evangelical Lutheran movement but hadn't, was not connected strongly with any religious tradition by the 1960s.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those ties had been severed.
Story_ID: 316814
Speaker 1: When you were there, like the Civil Rights Movement, I guess, the latter years of high school [Simon Gratz High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in those early days there the Civil Rights Movement was really heating up.
Speaker 2: Civil Rights Movement was percolating, you know, in the late '50s [1950s] and the early '60s [1960s], and it was really heating up.
Speaker 1: Sit-in movement started up back in the '60s [1960s] basically.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The Freedom Rides in '61 [1961].  I mean, it just keeps escalating, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And now were you, as the son of a prominent minister [William H. Gray, Jr.] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and someone who was an editor of a local paper, black paper, I mean, did you all talk about politics at home a lot?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did.  I mean, we didn't talk about, we lived it.  I mean, every major politician in the city was in my house at one point, I'd see 'em.  I don't care whether it was the mayor, city council people, or, quote, the outside advocates.  I mean, we lived in those days, even though the South was segregated and the North was supposed to be integrated, we were not integrated.  We had economic integration to some extent, but you did not have spatial integration or geographic.  Black folk were denied opportunities in big major American cities to buy homes where they could afford to.  So you had, and I suppose this is where the ghetto idea came from, you'd have living in the same block and in the same neighborhood black folk on welfare and blacks who were doctors and lawyers, and that was the way it was on my block.  You had Freddie Massiah [Frederick Massiah] who was the distinguished black architect who helped design Independence Hall [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but he was black, he lived there.  On the other side of him--
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: Massiah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Then next door to me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just like Messiah--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --like you're spelling Messiah, M-E-S-S--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I-A-H?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was Jamaican, no, he was Haitian by birth [sic. born in Barbados].  But a very distinguished architect in Philadelphia, built a lot of big prominent--people didn't know it was designed by a black (laughter).  He lived there, but on the other side of him was a big apartment complex which was mainly low income welfare people.  Next door to me on the left was a guy named Jimmy Allison [ph.] who was a prominent black businessman, you know, owned a lot of small businesses.  Next door to me on the right was the home of Bishop D. Ward Nichols, bishop of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.  Next door to him was an apartment house where Cecil B. Moore, a young [U.S.] Marine sergeant, who had just left the [U.S.] military and was going to law school [at Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And, of course, he became the famous Cecil B. Moore, the civil rights advocate.  Across the street was Hobson [R.] Reynolds, who was the head of The [Benevolent and Protective Order of] Elks.  Down at the corner was one of the many homes of Father Divine.  Around the corner, a block and a half away, was the home of Sadie [Tanner Mossell Alexander] and Raymond Pace Alexander.  Sadie Alexander was the first woman in America to get a Ph.D. in economics and as well as the first black woman-- and she also got a degree in law.  She was the first woman to have both a combined Ph.D. and a law degree, white or black, but she was the first black woman to graduate I think from the University of Pennsylvania Law School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] too.  I mean, and in between all of this you have people who were on welfare, people who were laborers.  We all lived in the same block.  So when you walked out on the street, on the same block, it was not homogeneity of, you know, social status, you'd see all kind of people, all kind of people would see you.  A kid on welfare could see Dr. [William H.] Gray [Jr.] with a Ph.D. or Mr. Massiah, the famous architect, and they lived on the same block.  And, and, and so my father was very much involved in the city politics, but from an advocacy point of view, you know, which was a typical old black preacher in a black church.  And so in my home often, the politicians would be there, the advocates would be there, the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] would be there, the head of the Urban League would be there.
Story_ID: 316815
Speaker 1: We also had a very close family relationship that went back three generations with the King family, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr. used to stay in our house during the Civil Rights Movement when he came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  He didn't stay at a hotel, he stayed with us.  And one time he stayed with us for over a week and a half.
Speaker 2: Did his family have a relationship with your family, I mean, in terms of your grandfather [William H. Gray, Sr.] or your father [William H. Gray, Jr.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they knew each other.  My father knew Martin's father [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Sr.], you know, all Baptist preachers, it was sort of a small world.
Speaker 2: Ebenezer [Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] is I guess, one of the most, if not the most prominent Baptist church in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then Bright (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then Martin went to seminary where?  Crozer Theological Seminary [Upland, Pennsylvania; Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York], which was right down the road from Philadelphia.  Well, you know, back in those days, in the old days, when you sent your kid off to college, you told them who of the family friends lived where in the neighborhood, and get in touch, and you made 'em call up because there was a lot of things, because of segregation and a lack of opportunity for social life et cetera, as well as financial.  You know, you would call those people up and go by and visit 'em, you'd take your date there for an evening and have dinner.  Martin Luther King used to have dinner at our home when he was at Crozer as just a young theological student.  His father used to come up and preach at Bright Hope Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  He'd come over and sit on the pulpit, you know, when his father came, and that gave his father an opportunity to visit him.  So, I mean, those kind of ties existed, and so I grew up in an environment where I saw leadership all the time.
Story_ID: 316816
Speaker 1: This college, Franklin and Marshall [College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania], was there any campus activism in relationship to civil rights in those days?
Speaker 2: Not too much.  It was out in Pennsylvania Dutch country and, you know, there were practically no targets of overt racism that the college students would take on.  I mean, we had our problems, you know.  But whenever I wanted to be involved in the Civil Rights Movement I went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or wanted to go down South on the Freedom Rides and, you know, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] once said to me, "Bill [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III], what you need to do is stay in school, get your degree, so that you can be the next generation."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you can provide some leadership, you know, we need you to stay here, we got lots of troops down there.
Speaker 1: What kind of, I mean, were you comfortable at Franklin and Marshall?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I was comfortable and uncomfortable.  I was comfortable academically, I mean it was very challenging, a very darn good school and I'm glad I went there.  Socially, very uncomfortable, one, it was all male, that was the first mistake, and then secondly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you, I mean--
Speaker 2: --secondly.
Speaker 1: --you consciously chose, why did you choose Franklin and Marshall?  Was, was it your choice?
Speaker 2: Because I had grown up in the black waters of my community all my life and as Sam Proctor [Samuel DeWitt Proctor] used to say, you know, you gotta be an amphibian.  You gotta have gills for the water of the black community, you gotta have lungs to breathe on the land of the majority.  I had gills, where'd I grow up?  I grew up in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I grew up on Florida A&M's [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] campus, Florida Memorial [Florida Normal and Industrial College, St. Augustine, Florida; Florida Memorial University, Miami Gardens, Florida], I grew up in the black community of Baton Rouge, Louisiana, I grew up in a black Baptist church environment, and I had more gills than I knew what to do with.  The question was, hey you need to develop your lungs.  And so I made a conscious choice to develop those lungs, okay.  And yes, when I look back, God, I think about my friends who went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and what they have in terms, not academically, they got a good education just like I did, but they have a network of friends that goes all over the country, I mean, even today.  A guy who graduated from Morehouse, I had a roommate from college for graduate school [Drew University, Madison, New Jersey] who graduated from Morehouse, wherever we would go, we'd go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], he'd pick up a phone, somebody from Morehouse, we'll go to chicken-switch Georgia, somebody from the House.  I mean, you know, I, forty years later I go pick up the phone and call who, from Franklin and Marshall?  We were classmates, we were cordial but no lasting long-term permanent relations.  So I sacrificed, I wanted a different kind of education, so I consciously made the decision that I wanted to go to a small college, and that I was gonna go to a majority college, 'cause I had grown up all my life in the waters of the black community, I had the gills, I needed some lungs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So well, I mean, that, the obvious problem, I think--
Speaker 2: And then I was only sixty miles away so I could pop in a car or pop on a bus, pop on a train and one hour and a half be back home.
Speaker 1: Well that was the outlet, 'cause I was gonna say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And practically every weekend I did.
Speaker 1: Any--
Speaker 2: I had a girlfriend and, you know, I'd go back.  The only time I wouldn't go back was during basketball season 'cause I was on the road as a basketball player, but I'd go back every weekend just about and go to Philadelphia and hang out at the universities, Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], West Chester [University, West Chester, Pennsylvania], Lincoln [University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], you know, Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], down to Howard, Delaware State [College; Delaware State University, Dover, Delaware], you know, where the girls are.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did it make it easier to study being out there at Franklin and Marshall?
Speaker 2: You had no distractions, that's for sure (laughter).  You know, other than basketball, if it wasn't during basketball season, and you can't play basketball all night, so.  You know, off you went to the library.
Speaker 1: How did the students treat you, the majority of the students?
Speaker 2: Generally well.  Most of the students were from the northeastern part of the--New York, you know, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania.  But they had grown up in integrated surroundings so there was never any kind of the overt kind of race stuff that you found at some other institutions.
Story_ID: 316817
Speaker 1: So you majored in history.  Did, was that what you expected, I know being in--you probably were aware of a lot of African American history growing up just being in the places you were, I don't know, I'm assuming (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not really.  I was aware of African American presence but not history.  Because you gotta remember, American intellectually never taught African American history, they would teach American history and African Americans would be an afterthought.  There would be Jackie Robinson, a brother who did well in baseball, extremely rare brother named Ralph Bunche who did something in the Middle East, that that's basically it.  Even the part about slavery was smoothed over, talked about in terms of economic differences between the two regions caused the confrontation, not slavery, okay.  It never went into depth in any of that.  So, no, you gotta remember up until the late 1960s, America never taught the history of black people in this country.  We never taught that the traffic light, that the inventor [Garrett Morgan] of that was black, we never taught where plasma came from, we never taught where the cotton machine came from, we didn't, you know, today we do but you gotta remember up 'til the 1960s that was never taught.  I didn't start learning that until I learned it on my own, and they didn't teach it at Franklin and Marshall [College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania] either.  You know, they had the typical text on American history and it was generally a gloss over of black folk just passing.  I started developing an interest in black history in college and all of us had to write a thesis.  I wrote mine on 'Lincoln and the Army of the Blacks.'  That was what it was called, that was the name of it.  And I won the senior history prize for it, and it was a very controversial position that I took in 1962.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Which was, [President Abraham] Lincoln basically was not in favor of the black community, that Lincoln basically was in favor of the Union, and freeing blacks was only a result of his desire to maintain the Union, and he had a military necessity, he couldn't recruit people to be in the Union Army, that's a, I mean, that's what the riots were about in New York [New York], you know.
Speaker 1: So did you write about those in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  And I wrote about that his, that the arming of the blacks was what drove the Emancipation Proclamation.  And that he, if you read his, and I went through all of his personal writings and quoted where he just said, "I'm not in favor of freeing the slaves, but if I have to in order to preserve the Union I will."  And then his writings where he talked about, we need troops and we can't get troops because there's no moral purpose to the [Civil] War and that well, there, we can get troops from blacks, but there's a political problem, how do we have them serve and then enslaved.  And how, so he came up with the Emancipation Proclamation which if you read it, it didn't free anything.  It basically provided for the Army to get over a hundred thousand African Americans to serve in the military like the 54th Brigade [54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment] out of Massachusetts, the movie, 'Glory' that was later made in the 1980s, 1990s, okay.  We never told those stories.  We never told that there were blacks who actually fought in Union uniform.  We haven't told the story that by the end of the war, many of the drivers and the Quartermaster Corps people were blacks.  And he got them 'cause he did the Emancipation Proclamation.  And the Emancipation Proclamation basically gave him the ability to get these folk into the military because the Irish immigrants were not signing up.  He also had the problem of foreign affairs, where the nations of Europe were about to come in on the side of the South, and one of the ways that he prevented them from happening is turn it into a moral cause.  Why?  Because England had already freed its slaves, France had already outlawed slavery.  So by lifting it to a moral issue, it prevented those countries from joining the South.  And so I wrote, it was very controversial, I mean, my classmates were like, hmph--
Story_ID: 316818
Speaker 1: But I had a very progressive professor [at Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania] who was a Civil War historian.  He was a specialist and a guy named Freddie Klein [Frederick Klein].  And he told me, you know, to pursue it to the full extent and he encouraged me to do it.  Whereas other people were saying, "You gonna write about blacks in the Civil War and blacks who were armed?  There's nothing to write about."  I even had two professors tell me that.  There's nothing to write about.
Speaker 2: That's amazing, 'cause now this is 1960, this is the centennial celebration of the Civil War, '61 [1961] to '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: This is '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 2: --so you write this in '62 [1962] in the middle of that celebration thing.  I remember--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --as a kid, you know, on television--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --they had the centennial of the Civil War on CBS and the--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --reenactment of Battle of Gettysburg, all that stuff was going on in those days as people were focusing on the Civil War--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --again after a hundred years, and your paper came out (laughter) in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: And it was very interesting, but the history department professors selected me as the--everyone who was majoring in history had to write a senior thesis, mine was selected as the best.  And I got what was called the history prize, the Landis History Prize [Charles I. Landis Award] for the best senior thesis.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Which I was amazed at, considering how controversial it was, but you know.  Now, of course, there are many authors who have written that.  [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett wrote a very prominent book a few years ago pointing out that if you really look at Lincoln's letters and look at his personal papers and read what he wrote, not interpretations--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you will see that he was not a person without his own prejudice.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's 'Forced into Glory[: Abraham Lincoln's White Dream,' Lerone Bennett, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah, forced into, he was forced into--
Speaker 2: 'Forced into Glory,' yeah.
Speaker 1: --a situation of Emancipation Proclamation and changing the war from a constitutional confrontation to a moral confrontation between slavery and non-slave.
Speaker 2: And did you see what the History Channel did to Lerone Bennett?  They set him up against three people against him and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, sure.
Speaker 2: --you know, and--
Speaker 1: I mean, we still can't--
Speaker 2: --they hardly gave him any chance to speak, I mean--
Speaker 1: --we still can't deal with it today.  Race is the Achilles heel of America.
Story_ID: 316819
Speaker 1: We turned to [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and '63 [1963] would be a good place to go.  We just left '62 [1962], so, any other thing, anything else about that paper [undergraduate senior thesis] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I graduated from--I wrote this paper in '62 [1962], in my senior year [at Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania].  I graduated from college in '63 [1963], and then, of course, I went to the March on Washington.  And, you know, our families were friends, we had--my father [William H. Gray, Jr.], I think, talked to [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] before, the day before his speech, my father talked, you know, as preachers will do, we preach to each other, he sort of told my father what he was gonna speak about, okay.  And what most people are beginning to understand now, is the I have a dream part was never a part of the speech, that was never a part of the speech.  But what happened was, when King got up there and gave his speech, okay, very logical where he tied the civil rights struggle to the American dream and that this civil rights struggle is rooted in what is basic about America, your Declaration of Independence, the constitutional rights to all human beings, world leadership, he tied it and he said, "You know, in essence, can't you see that what we're struggling for is what this country was all about from 1776."  And people forget that his speech was a very harsh speech.  He talked about bankruptcy, moral bankruptcy in America.  That they had written out a check that came back insufficient funds.  I mean, he used scathing, hard language to talk about this country's moral fiber and what it was doing to a group of people.  This was not a sweet speech.  And that was his speech.  Now what happens, as often happens in the ministry, in our community, when you get to the end, you don't have a close, you sort of leave it to the moment.  And Martin picked up the theme of a better America, and he's dreaming of a day, one day, and so what happens is, America remembers, and what got sentimentalized was this quote last five minutes of this speech, the dream portion, where he was, as we say coming home, amen, yes.  He lifted us all up because, and everybody, whether you sat in a suburban home outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or whether you were there in the march, whether you were white or black, you had to agree, yeah, that would be a great time if little boys and girls who were black and white sat down at the table.  Oh, it would be great if freedom could ring from Stone Mountain, Georgia, and from the Rockies [Rocky Moutains], or, you know.  It was just, it lifted everybody up and brought everybody together.  Now that's what everybody remembers of the speech 'cause that's what gets played over and over, that's what people recite is, "I have a dream," but they very seldom look at the harsh criticism--
Speaker 1: They don't look at that bad check, yeah.
Speaker 2: The bad check and what, you know, the lynching.  I mean, this country lynched people.  I mean, black people for the slightest accusation, not just in Georgia, not just in Mississippi, but they lynched them in Minnesota, they lynched them in the northern states.  And if you go look at, there's a book out about lynching in America that has the photographs that shows thousands of Americans standing around, dead bodies hanging from trees that have been castrated and burned, people have had this done to them alive, and they're laughing and smiling, and I'm not talking about old men, I'm talking about little boys and women.  I mean, I wish that I could make every person see that and it would be sort of like when you see what the Nazis did to Jews in those ovens, and you see in the history films those bodies coming out of ovens, you know, it hits you, see but we've never shown the pictures of lynching in America.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the book is 'Without Sanctuary[: Lynching Photography in America,' James Allen].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we've never shown those pictures.  And so, it became something that's in the South and that's behind us now, let's get on with the dream part.  And the problem is we've never confronted our roots and so race still remains a significant issue.  It's not as significant as it was fifty years ago, thank God, but we haven't made nearly as much progress as some people would like us to believe that we have made.
Story_ID: 316820
Speaker 1: And if you read [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] it's funny, I mean Martin Luther King talked about preferential treatments and preferences, okay, and why we can't wait.  He had a whole, a chapter on the tactics of going forward and he talked about preferential treatment to make up for three hundred years of neglect.  You know, what you did to the black people, you have to do something for the black people.  And it doesn't necessarily have to be cash payments, like we did to those that we put in the concentration camps of America during World War II [WWII], the Japanese, where we did make some cash payment, you know.  But basically, you know, you gotta do something for them to make up the past.  So he was very prophetic.  But I remember Martin was hated by the majority community.  And some of the same people now who are columnists, TV commentators, or religious leaders, okay, and political leaders who used to hold press conferences attacking him, calling him everything but a child of God.  I mean, some of 'em are still in office, some of 'em are still quote, syndicated columnists.  And if you go back and read their columns in the '50s [1950s] and in the '60s [1960s], then they called him a communist, they called him everything.  J. Edgar Hoover, you know, tried to poison America against him, as, this is really a communist inspired movement, the Civil Rights Movement, but it's just amazing, we don't have that ability to look at the past and so yes, when I was a history major back in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], there was nothing that was taught positive about black people.  We never made a contribution to this country.  We never were a hardworking industrialist people who gave to the country, gave to others.  And so it would be very easy for somebody to grow up saying, "They're a bunch of moochers, all they do is take.  They're a serving class, they've never done anything," because we didn't teach it.  You know, we didn't teach it.  And so if that's what you've heard for thirty years of your life when you get to be thirty years of age, what are you gonna believe?
Speaker 2: Now what you said during the break too that I thought was very significant is that you said that Dr. King was the first African American leader to speak to the entire nation.
Speaker 1: Yes.  What people don't realize is the power of that moment, the power was not simply in the words, the dream, or even the indictment which took up 80 percent of the presentation (laughter), we focus on the 20 percent, the sweet part, the part that we wish we had.  But you gotta remember up until that time in this country, the only person who consistently talked to the nation on television or radio was the president.  They'd cover State of the Union, major addresses, press conferences, nobody else.  Let alone somebody who is leading a movement seeking to change the country, white or black.  And for the first time in American history, a black man was placed at center stage to address the country, nationwide on television.  And you could sit in Iowa, California, Texas, turn on your tube and see it uninterrupted yourself.  Not through the lens of a newspaper editorial or story, not through thirty second, two minute, news report, okay.  And that was true not only for white people but it's also true for black.  Martin Luther King was the first African American to address the nation, where everybody was told shh, sit down, listen, uninterrupted.  And it just ruined a lot of people's images.
Story_ID: 316821
Speaker 1: In those days too, to set this up, there were two, in those days when the Democratic National Convention was running or the Olympics was on, or some big national, whenever there was a presidential press conference, every station covered it.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And on television we only had the major networks, NBC, ABC, CBS.
Speaker 2: Right, you didn't have these cables, you didn't have all the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had three stations on your TV--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --no matter where you were, you probably only had three stations--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --all of them all covering this.
Speaker 2: Right.  And you had the radio stations.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And they covered it from the time he got up and spoke to the very end, uninterrupted, no interpretation, they couldn't interpret it until afterwards.  And I remember seeing the reaction, I was there, okay, but then when I went back, and it was replayed several times, I mean, the news analysts on the major networks, their mouths were just open when it was their time to comment, they couldn't comment because the reaction of the crowd was so overwhelming and they were, apparently, were moved, they were almost speechless like well uh, uh, uh, that was some speech.  That should make history, uh, uh.  I mean it was, you know, like, wow.  [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] did not come across as a crazy radical, he did not come across as some wild communist.  He talked about the pain and the suffering of those who had suffered under the yoke of racism, segregation, slavery.  He talked about how it was a total contradiction to what this country stood for by quoting every American document, okay.  And saying, we said in the Declaration of Independence, we said in the [U.S.] Constitution, we've said, and we went to war [World War II, WWII] and fought a racist Nazism but yet the same blacks who went to fight the war, when they got home they had to sit in the back of the bus, okay.  And it, television was very critical for the Civil Rights Movement.  You'd had demonstrations before, you'd had boycotts before.  A. Philip Randolph and his great union [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters] that led the charge back in the '40s [1940s] and in the '30s [1930s].  But what was different, is this time television covered it, and people sitting at home in their nice suburban homes, white people, saw little old ladies being hit with billy clubs, fire hoses, and dogs, simply because they want to go into a restaurant and be able to buy a cup of coffee.  Simply because they wanted to go into a bus terminal, sit where they wanna sit, buy a bus ticket and sit anywhere on the doggone bus 'cause they pay the same fare as anybody else.  Folks started saying something's wrong with this.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it kind of focused people on things they never thought of.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, people saw things that they'd never really saw before, what they'd always seen was an interpretation.  So no, it was a major moment.  And, I say the Civil Rights Movement was the third revolution of America.  The War for Independence [Revolutionary War], okay, in the 18th century or 19th century [sic.] and then in the 19th century we had the Civil War, and then the Civil Rights Movement, we had three revolutions in this country, two with arms, one nonviolent.  That both of them transformed this country.  They are the three watershed events of our history, our short history.  If you had to pick three events and say what three events changed the country, those are the three.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you were there, having just graduated from high school--
Speaker 2: From college.
Speaker 1: --from college, from Franklin and Marshall [College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania], did you have a sense of this was a history making, I mean, did you have a sense of it?
Speaker 2: Not until afterwards.  I just thought we were marching again, you know, protesting again.  I was there, you know, I was standing under those trees in that hot sun.  You know, when Mahalia [Jackson] sang 'The Moments of Meditation,' [sic.] and Peter, Paul, and Mary sang 'The Hymn,' [sic.] it was like a church service.  And then the preacher from Georgia, who was not a stranger to me, but you gotta remember most people had never seen him, had never seen King.  So they'd heard but never seen him.  You know, he gets up and makes this statement.  And it was later that I got a sense that man, you really went to something historic, not just because there were over 250,000 people there but, you know, as I later listened to people talk about the impact of his words on their life, and as I began to see people change.
Story_ID: 316822
Speaker 1: [U.S.] Congress said okay, let's pass, you know, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, let's pass the Voting Rights Act of '65 [1965], let's pass legislation and then the president of the United States, I mean, the moment I knew it was real was when the president of the United States started saying, we shall overcome, [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson.  Who was Lyndon Baines Johnson?  Lyndon Baines Johnson was the person who just ten years before had been opposing everything that [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] stood for.  And as William Moyers, Bill Moyers, says, that's probably why he never could run again for president, because he said, "I'm doing something that's probably gonna kill my party but it's right for the country."  Because the Democratic Party had always been the party for white racial majority rule, and the turning point, you know, that who are the elected officials in the South?  They were Democrats, most blacks were Republicans.
Speaker 2: He was sort of facing the tide though in those days, it was bound to shatter the Dixiecrats, that he couldn't do, he couldn't be in favor of civil rights and keep them under check (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well what happened was, what you had was, the Democrats had the Dixiecrats as a part of their coalition, so historically the Democratic Party was not the party of civil rights.  Up until 1960 the party of civil rights had been who?  The Republican Party, the party of [President Abraham] Lincoln, Everett Dirksen, those were people who argued for it.  And most blacks in this country were registered Republicans, people don't, and we don't even teach this in history.  But blacks in the South were Republicans.  Why?  Because who were the Night Riders?  The Night Riders were the sheriff, the mayors, the councilmen, who were all Democrats.  They didn't vote.  Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] got censored first, not because of any bad activity, but because he had the nerve enough to stand up and endorse [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower, a Republican, who won all the black votes for president, all right.  Now the only Democrat who had gotten some significant black votes before that was [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt [FDR].
Speaker 2: FDR, yeah.  Black people, I think, for the first time voted Democratic with FDR.
Speaker 1: That's right.  But it was still large amounts voting Republican.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If you go look at it, it was not overwhelming.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember the '60 [1960] election our class--
Speaker 1: But it was the [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy election--
Speaker 2: --our class of black students in Dayton [Ohio] were split between--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: [Richard Milhous] Nixon and Kennedy.
Speaker 1: Right.  And but the first election where you saw massive movement of blacks in the North, I mean in North and in the South was the Kennedy election.  And that was because Kennedy did one thing.  He picked up the phone and called Coretta Scott King and made it public.  Now I know people who were involved in both of those campaigns, and Art Fletcher [HistoryMaker Arthur Fletcher] will tell you that according to every poll, two months before the election, Nixon was gonna win between 65 and 75 percent of the black vote, but that phone call.  First time any presidential candidate had ever personally shown that kind of interest in the suffering, injustice of black people, and it flipped, it flipped.  Ministers got active, I know, my father [William H. Gray, Jr.] was one of 'em, he helped to write to what was called the little blue book that came out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  It was a pamphlet that was distributed to black churches two weeks before the 1960s vote that said vote for Kennedy, he's the man, and Kennedy had no civil rights record at all.  He was not a pro civil rights senator but that telephone call, blacks voted for Kennedy.  And they were really scared about Johnson, but Johnson became president and Johnson's--you know, when you look back and when I look back as a former politician and a historian, the person who probably in the 20th century did more for blacks in this country was Johnson, concrete legislation, changed direction, more than any other president and any other administration in terms of civil rights, bringing down the barriers, he did.  Now after that, you then suddenly see a switch, blacks become Democrats and then you see the Republican Party start a new strategy, it was called the Southern Strategy.  Because whites became disaffected with the Dixiecrats, became disaffected with the Democrats, who were the party now of civil rights, not the Republicans, which meant interfering with their way of life in the South.  So you saw the Dixiecrats do what?
Speaker 2: Switch parties.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's what [Senator] Strom Thurmond had done already.  And they start switching and then you saw the Republicans adopt what was called the Southern Strategy, they wrote about it, they put this in books, where what they're gonna do is go after the southern vote, the rural vote, and the urban ethnic vote.  And they got on, they took positions on busing, school integration, and judges, okay, that still exist today and still are driving forces.  And as a result, basically captured the White House [Washington, D.C.] and the majority vote again.
Story_ID: 316823
Speaker 1: In '64 [1964] I know the big Democratic National Convention, that's when the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party [MDFP] took their delegation to Atlantic City [New Jersey] and shook up the Democratic Party, forced Hubert Humphrey and LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] into a corner, you know.
Speaker 2: Well basically what they did was, Democrats in the '60s [1960s] after [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy election, moved from the Republican Party into the Democratic Party and they started asking, they said, "If y'all serious about this business of equality, let's get rid of all these arcane rules that prevent our participation at the local level."  So Fannie Lou Hamer, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, and others joined in the movement to say okay, Democrats, you've said from the White House [Washington, D.C.] we shall overcome, but, you know, you still got these rules for the state party and for national delegates, who gets elected, how they get elected, that don't jive with that, and that's what that battle was about.  That's what the battle was.  And it was a nasty battle, but it was also a public battle, but as that battle went on, it became fodder for the Southern Strategy to say, come with us, we don't have that, okay.  And then, you know, you had the War in Vietnam [Vietnam War] that tore the country up.  And then you got into patriotism versus not patriotism, the other kind of thing.  You then had Chicago [Illinois] and the riots in Chicago during the [1968] Democratic [National] Convention.  And so by the time you get to the end of the '60s [1960s], toward the end of the '60s [1960s], you had parties that have flip-flopped.  The, you know, whereas the Republicans had been strong in the Northeast and strong in the South with the black vote and blacks had voted for like [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower overwhelmingly, okay.  And even though blacks voted for Kennedy they didn't vote overwhelmingly for Kennedy.  But now you're talking about, by the time Johnson runs, they're voting huge overwhelmingly.
Speaker 1: Landslide.
Speaker 2: Landslide, and we're talking about 70 percent, 80 percent.  And so you have clearly the development of a political strategy which is to get the support of the southern disaffected Democrat, who is white, get the support of white ethnics, you know, low and moderate income whites in suburbia or in some cities, you know, and sometimes the labor leadership is over here doing one thing and they're doing another, so by the end of the '60s [1960s] what you end up getting is you end up getting the election of [President Richard Milhous] Nixon.
Story_ID: 316824
Speaker 1: What I wanted to get at though is, what were you doing during this period and I know you're following it in a way but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  What I did was I graduated from college [Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania] and went to seminary, to Drew Theological Seminary [Drew Theological School, Drew University, Madison, New Jersey].  And at Drew Theological Seminary what I did was get trained for the ministry.  And what I did was, we started getting involved in a little town called Madison, New Jersey in the Civil Rights Movement and we picketed the barbershops because the barbershops wouldn't cut everybody's hair.  And I was one of the leaders in that movement.  And my father [William H. Gray, Jr.] was in North Carolina somewhere and he turned on the national news and here was a picture of me with a guy holding a straight razor to my face saying, "I don't cut your hair."  And my father called up in a panic.
Speaker 1: Now this was in the paper?  In the--
Speaker 2: It was on the national news.
Speaker 1: National news, okay.
Speaker 2: Evening news, on every national evening news.  A group of us decided to challenge this system of discrimination and bigotry so what we did was we marched down from the campus, down to this barbershop, where it was the main barbershop for the town, and we walked in and, of course, the press was waiting and people were all around and we walked in, there were about four of us and sat down.  It just so happened I walked in first so I was way inside and sitting down and the owner of the barbershop came over and said, "What you want?"  And we said, "We wanna get a haircut."  And he had a straight razor in his hand 'cause he was shaving a customer, and he said, "I don't cut your hair," and the razor was about six inches from my face, I felt like almost saying well, I don't want a haircut either, let me out of here.
Speaker 1: No, now what nationality was the barber was--
Speaker 2: Oh, he was white.
Speaker 1: But I don't cut your hair, he sounds like an immigrant.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was speaking with a heavy accent.  He was an immigrant.
Speaker 1: So he just got here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was first generation (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Relatively.
Speaker 2: He was first generation.  You know, small businessman, he had opened a barbershop and he was from one of the old countries and maybe he had been here twenty, thirty years, and he was about late fifties but still had his accent from the home country.  And he says, "I don't cut your hair."  And, you know, this razor is right in front of me and I'm going, yeah, I, okay, let me get out of here (laughter).  But I couldn't move him so we ended up going to court and being arrested, and going to court for disorderly conduct, end up going to court and the court ordered that anybody who had a public license was required to provide service.  And so we were involved in some civil rights stuff there.  But I got my ministerial training at Drew and I was also working as a student minister, first at my home church in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Bright Hope [Baptist Church], and then First Baptist Church in Montclair [New Jersey], which was the old church of Harry Emerson Fosdick.  And then I went to Union Baptist Church [Montclair, New Jersey] in Montclair, which is a very significant African American Baptist church, and they asked me to become the minister the day I graduated from seminary.  So I became the pastor of a rather significant Baptist church the day I got my degree.  And--
Speaker 1: This is in 1964, you're a young, young man.
Speaker 2: So this was 19--when I graduated and took over this church it was 1967.
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Sixty-seven [1967], all right.  I had a date wrong.  I read some place it was '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, this here, well, I let me count now.  Sixty-three [1963], three years, uh, no it would have been 1966.
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 2: I became the minister of the church in the spring of 1966, a very prominent congregation, the Union Baptist Church of Montclair, and that was my first ministry.  And then, of course, I immediately, because ministers in the black community in those days did get involved in the civil rights because we were the independent force in our communities, and so I became involved in a lot of civil rights stuff.  I was looking for an apartment in Montclair and was denied an apartment and I knew, you know when somebody is discriminating against you.  They show you an apartment, then you call back and say I wanna take the apartment and they say, "I'm sorry, it's no longer rented," and you knew.  And so a friend of mine who happened to be a lawyer, Sam Bass [ph.], was with me when I was informed, and I told him what happened and he called his wife and said, "Honey go down to this apartment building and ask for this apartment."  She went down the lady said, "Yeah, it's available."  So he said, "Bill [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III], what do you wanna do?  I'll be your lawyer."  And so, we decided to sue.  And we didn't go to the civil rights commission or equal rights or equal opportunity commission with the state or the city, we sued in court for damages, that I had been damaged by this racism.  And--
Speaker 1: So a civil suit?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we won.  And the suit was known as Gray versus Serruto [Gray v. Serruto Builders Inc., 1970], which for years everybody who went to law school in New Jersey had to read (laughter) and study.  And so, you know, we stayed involved in the struggle.  We got involved in politics, electing the first black mayor [Matthew G. Carter] who was a member of my congregation in a town where the black population was less than 20 percent.  Building coalitions, we formed a housing development corporation that built the first nonprofit housing in Montclair and low income housing in the urban renewal project so that people were not pushed out.  So, but that's the kind of thing that Baptist preachers do.
Story_ID: 316645
Speaker 1: I'm Larry Crowe, interviewer with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: William H. Gray, G-R-A-Y, the third [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III].
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now I'm retired, but my major occupation was Baptist minister for forty-five years, a member of [U.S.] Congress for thirteen years, a professor in history and theology at five universities before going to Congress, and then after Congress, fourteen years as president of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF].
Speaker 1: All right.  And, sir, we're continuing an interview we started back in 2002 [sic.], I believe, in August of 2002.
Speaker 2: Gosh.
Speaker 1: But what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?  It is June, I don't remember, June 15, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Right now we're in Washington, D.C. at the office of my consulting firm, Gray Global Strategies [Inc.].
Story_ID: 316646
Speaker 1: We were talking about the March on Washington.  We had finished, basically, discussion about that and we were ready to move you from Franklin and Marshall College [Lancaster, Pennsylvania] to Drew University [Madison, New Jersey].  So tell us how that happened, I think you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, my senior year, I basically in college took all my requirement courses in the first three years, saved my elective courses for the end of my collegiate career, 'cause I couldn't make up my mind what I wanted to do, you know, did I wanna become a doctor, a dentist, lawyer, and I put as a last choice, minister.  As it turned out, the, when it came time to make a decision and I finally had to do it, which was just before going into my senior year, I decided I really wanted to be a minister and so therefore I took a lot of historical and philosophical courses, religion courses, rather than science and biology and all that.  And I applied to [Drew] Theological Seminary [Drew Theological School, Madison, New Jersey] and I was accepted to several of those but I decided I was gonna go to Drew University in New Jersey, which was at that time, a really up and coming theological seminary with a Methodist tradition, even though I was Baptist.  And I had graduated from college in 1963, went with my father [William H. Gray, Jr.] to the March on Washington, and right after the March on Washington I came back and went to graduate school in September at Drew Theological Seminary to start my master's degree in divinity, and I spent three years at Drew.
Speaker 1: Now I don't wanna speed by too fast.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But just, sir, can, did the March on Washington, attending the March on Washington with your father who was a minister at Bright Hope Baptist in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] this influential community church involved in politics and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the influence the March on Washington had on me was--
Speaker 1: No, no what I'm asking is, did that march influence your decision to become a minister?
Speaker 2: No, I had already decided to become a minister before the March on Washington.  I had to make that decision in 1962 before I started my senior year because I had a senior year with no required courses, I could have selected any courses I wanted to, and I did that on purpose 'cause I couldn't make up my mind what I wanted to be.  And if you were gonna be, wanted to go into medicine or dentistry, you had to take a lot of science courses and I hadn't taken those.  If you were gonna go into the law, there were courses that you could take but I hadn't taken, and then the same thing with ministry.  So I made the decision to go into ministry in the summer of 1962 so that when I went back to Franklin and Marshall, I selected the appropriate courses that would strengthen me to go to graduate school for seminary, for religion, theology.
Story_ID: 316647
Speaker 1: --Just have another question about Franklin and Marshall [College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania] before we move on, who were some of the key teachers and mentors at Franklin and Marshall?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a history major and there was a Dr. Freddie Klein [Frederick Klein], who was a professor of American history, who specialized in the Civil War.  And I wrote my senior thesis, everyone who was a history major had to write a senior thesis in order to graduate, and I wrote mine on [President Abraham] Lincoln's arming of black soldiers, which at that time was quite radical.  Most people were saying there's nothing to write about, what are you talking about?  And there was, you know, the usual view that Lincoln was the great emancipator who had done this wonderful act to emancipate the slaves and here I ended up writing a senior paper which basically said he armed the blacks out of military necessity.  And that in order to provide the arming of the blacks, he had to elevate them and provide them with freedom and that he got over 150,000 black troops that fought for the Union after the emancipation.  They were not front-line troops except in a few places, like the 54th [Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry Regiment] and the 55th Massachusetts [Infantry Regiment] but they took over the kind of jobs that had to be done, like the wagon drivers, the loaders and so forth, logistical jobs, which freed up others, whites, to fight on the front line, and that gave him a big manpower boost in the second two years of the war.  And so the emancipation was really locked into military necessity.  And if you read Lincoln's papers as I did, I had to read everything he ever wrote about arming of black troops and the controversy around bringing blacks in, and the Emancipation Proclamation, you will find that he said, "If I could win this war without arming the blacks I would, but I can't."  And in order to arm them they need to be emancipated, there must be a reward.  And that's clearly in all of his papers and all of his papers are available and I read them all.  So I wrote this radical paper which everybody raised their eyebrows 'cause that was not the accepted historical perspective.  Now today it is.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Since 1963 there's been a total revision of the Civil War, of American history, and slavery and of Abraham Lincoln.  I mean, he still was a great man, he still rose to the occasion and did some extraordinary political decision making in the midst of that conflict but it wasn't so idealistic as we wrote it before the 1970s and '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well that's quite, now you were, you know, Dr. Klein I take it was not a black professor?
Speaker 2: No, Dr. Klein was not.  Franklin and Marshall was a white liberal arts college.  We had, in my freshman year, we had five blacks.  By the time I graduated we had fourteen blacks out of about twelve, fourteen hundred students.  It was all male and of the fourteen blacks, seven of them were from Africa.  So there were no black faculty members, Dr. Klein was white but he was a preeminent Civil War historian and he liked my paper (laughter) very much.  And, in fact, I won the [Landis] History Prize [Charles I. Landis Award] for the graduating senior with the best thesis.  And everybody was quite surprised, but Dr. Klein said his research is right, he said, "If you read the writings of Lincoln, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [William H.] Gray [III] is right, that really is the feeling of Lincoln."  And then there was Norm Zacour [Norman P. Zacour] who was chairman of the history department.  Norm Zacour was a rather short man who liked cigars, I mean, he would have these eight inch cigars that were big and round always in his mouth even in the classroom, they weren't lit, he wasn't smoking it but he was chewing on 'em.  He was a Middle Ages historian, and, you know, the Middle Ages was his specialty.  And but I was drawn to him as a person, and a personality.  He was one of my professors that I had a good relationship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anybody else?
Speaker 2: No.  You know, it was, you gotta remember this is the late '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s] and it was a different kind of America then, especially when it came to black students at white colleges.  I mean, the relationships were not usually there.
Story_ID: 316648
Speaker 1: In 2002 [sic.] we talked about your relationship with [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], someone who would visit your home and knew your father [William H. Gray, Jr.] well and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well we were very close.  Our families had been friends for three generations.  Daddy King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Sr.] and my father were very close friends.  And we had spent time in their home, my father speaking at Ebenezer Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  Daddy King and later Martin speaking, Martin went to school at Crozer Theological Seminary [Upland, Pennsylvania; Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York] which was like twenty miles south of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in Chester, Pennsylvania [sic.].  And on the weekends he'd come by and visit, you know, sort of like typical of what happened in black families, you went off to a school and if the school was in Atlanta [Georgia] and your parents knew somebody in Atlanta, they'd say make sure you go by and see aunt so and so.  And you'd go by and see her because she'd have great food, even give you some money.  And so Martin used to come by and visit us, especially on the weekends.  And as a student minister, he occasionally preached at the Bright Hope Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And when he became a civil rights leader, he would come to Philadelphia and stay at our home and preach at the church and to raise money for the movement in the South.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in 2002, we talked about this, and after 1963, you were saying that Dr. King was the only black public figure that, or the first black public figure to speak to the entire nation and so here he is, right after this speech he writes a recommendation for you to attend Drew University [Madison, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, as a part of the closeness of our families, I asked him, really it was late fall of 1962, would he write one of my recommendations, you know.  At that time Martin was a very controversial figure (laughter).  And some people said, "Why are you asking him, he's a little controversial, there are people who don't like him, it may not help you."  But I liked him and, you know, I thought a great deal of Dr. King and the work he was doing in the Civil Rights Movement and I asked him to write a recommendation for graduate school and he wrote one for me to go to graduate school and for me to become a Rockefeller fellow, which is a scholarship program for ministry.  And I got in and I also got the Rockefeller scholarship as a result of his recommendation.  And so I knew him very, very well personally, and he was a great human being.  Did I ever think he would be a Nobel Laureate, you know, an icon of human rights and deliverance?  No, I didn't know him that way.  And so by 1963 I had been accepted to graduate school, I was gonna go to graduate school, and I went with my father to the March on Washington, prior to going to graduate school--
Story_ID: 316649
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your experience at Drew University [Madison, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Drew University was a wonderful place for education.  It had been started as a theological seminary before it became a college and then a university.  And so there was an undergraduate, there was a graduate, and there was a theological seminary, and I was in the oldest part, the [Drew] Theological Seminary [Drew Theological School, Madison, New Jersey].  We had outstanding professors.  We were leading and on the cutting edge of American theological development and thought with people like Carl Michaelson and Robert Bull in church history, Howard Key, in New Testament, Bernhard Anderson, in Old Testament, you know, just really outstanding, George Kelsey, who was an African American, who had been a student at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] in Christian ethics.  And it was a great place.  And I went there for three years and got a Master's of Divinity degree.  And also worked in northern New Jersey at two churches, First Baptist [Church] in Montclair [New Jersey] which was a majority white church, it had been pastored by the great historic figure Harry Emerson Fosdick at one point.  And then I became a minister at the Union Baptist Church [Montclair, New Jersey] which later I became the senior pastor when I graduated and that became my first ministry.  But I had a great time, great education.  We were about twenty-five miles west of New York City [New York, New York] so, you know, on the weekends I used to hang out in New York and go to the theater and go to the jazz clubs and The Village Gate [New York, New York] and the Blue Note [Jazz Club, New York, New York] and those places.  And just, it was a wonderful time for me.  It was a wonderful period in my life.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the musicians that would appear in New York in those days?  I know, I want you to tell us.
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, you had Cannonball Adderley.
Speaker 1: Also, any contact you had with Malcolm X and some of the other political figures, I mean.
Speaker 2: I didn't have much contact with any of the great civil rights political figures in the New York metropolitan area or in the nation because that was a time of intense study.  I mean, you really didn't have time to do anything but hit those books.  You might have a Friday night or a Saturday night free and then, you'd pile in a car, somebody's car, I didn't have one, and, you know, we'd hop over to New York and go to a jazz club like The Village Gate or the Blue Note and you see Cannonball Adderley, you know, Gerry Mulligan, and a whole host of people.  You know, this fine young lady who was just absolutely gorgeous, [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, you know.  There was this other young lady who had this rhythm and blues, her name was Aretha Franklin, you know, who were playing at these clubs.  And it was just great, you know.  [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis, the pianist, and but that was a sort of a social life.  We didn't have time to go to New York and spend time, quote, in the political movements or the social movements.  You spent your time crashing those books, and that's what you did for three years.  I was student minister at my home church in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for the first year, Bright Hope Baptist Church.  Then I became a student minister at First Baptist.  And then I became a student minister at Union Baptist and there the minister [Reverend Deual C. Rice] retired, announced his retirement, and the church decided that they wanted me to become the minister.  So the day I graduated from theological seminary and got my degree, the church voted me as the pastor of the Union Baptist Church in Montclair, a historic Baptist church that had built their own sanctuary and church building in the 1920s, which was very unusual.  And Montclair was a suburban, (unclear) community, upper class, primarily white but a large black population and it was just a wonderful place to start a ministry and I was there for about eight years.
Speaker 1: So this is 1965?
Speaker 2: That've been 1965 and '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I became minister of the church in '66 [1966].  I was student minister in '65 [1965], '66 [1966] I became senior minister.  And then I entered the field that I also loved which was education.  And so I was pastor of Union Baptist Church and I taught at Montclair State [University, Montclair, New Jersey], Rutgers University [The State University of New Jersey] in Newark [New Jersey], Jersey City State [College; New Jersey City University, Jersey City, New Jersey], and St. Peter's College in Jersey City [New Jersey].  'Cause I always wanted to be a minister and a college professor.
Speaker 1: What, what was your degree from Drew in?
Speaker 2: My degree was a MDiv, a Master's of Divinity.
Speaker 1: All right.  And that was an advanced--
Speaker 2: And specialty was church history.
Speaker 1: That was in 1965?
Speaker 2: No, 1966.
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966], okay.
Speaker 2: And my college degree was a Bachelor of Arts in history from Franklin and Marshall [College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're teaching and pastoring Union Baptist during the late '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 316650
Speaker 1: Malcolm X is killed in '65 [1965].  [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] is assassinated in '68 [1968] while you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, while I'm in Montclair [New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Yeah, but tell me--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you know, I remained very close to Martin.  When I became the minister of Union Baptist Church [Montclair, New Jersey] in 1966, it was Daddy King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Sr.] who preached the installation worship at eleven, and it was Martin who preached and spoke at three in the same day.  In fact, it was very unusual because on that day in Montclair at the Union Baptist Church and later at that service that was held at the high school, Martin Luther King and Coretta [Scott King] were there and his father, we called him Daddy King, and his mother Alberta [Williams] King, we called her Big Mama, all were there on the stage together.  And so they sort of, our relationship was closer than ever.  He came and installed me, the father and the son, and the whole family was there.  You know, people in the movement that I knew like Ralph Abernathy and others used to preach in my church.  And I was busy with ministry, you know, and basically very, very supportive but not involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  I wasn't active in the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] in Atlanta [Georgia] 'cause I was pastor of a church in Montclair, but certainly helped gather money and send it.  And then, of course, he was killed.  And that was a great tragedy and it hit very hard, our family because we're not talking about a civil rights leader, we're talking about somebody we knew, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what you were doing that day?
Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact, I can remember exactly what I was doing.  I was over at a church group's meeting, a meeting of a church group, I think it was called the pulpit circle at Pop and Fannie Shear's [ph.] house.  They had a meeting, a dinner meeting, that night, and I went to it.  And I was at their house when somebody ran in and said, "Turn on the television, Dr. King's been shot."  And I remember.
Speaker 1: What happened then?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, everybody was just shocked, and we turned on the television and they said he'd been shot and that he was killed.  And I immediately went over to the Elmwood [United] Presbyterian Church [East Orange, New Jersey], which was pastored by one of my best friends, Joe Roberts [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph L. Roberts], and to tell, share it with him.  And they had just finished the service and he saw me coming, and he asked me to come up and say a few words, and I told the church.  And of course, there was bedlam because, you know, these people, this was a--Martin had become the symbol of the struggle for black America's freedom.  And, you know, to hear that he had been assassinated and killed was just something that people just--it was just a great shock.  And many of these people had heard him at my installation because Joe Roberts who was pastor of the Elmwood Presbyterian Church was probably number one or at least the second closest friend I had in ministry, we were just buddies.  We, in fact, we went to school together, I went to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] with him to get another master's degree, we used to drive down together every day.  And so I knew that he was having this revival and so I left the meeting of the pulpit circle and went over to East Orange [New Jersey] from Montclair, which were neighboring suburban communities and to share the news with him.  After church was over we ended up sitting around at his house, I think for about four or five hours 'til two or three in the morning, watching television reports and, you know, just trying to analyze what had happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what the implication was gonna be going forward.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I, I know Montclair and East Orange are more bedroom communities than--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --than a city community.  Did you, did any of your parishioners or any of the people around you like get angry and start kind of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, people were quite angry, I mean, you know, but we didn't have any violence, we didn't have any riots or anything like some communities had.  We didn't have that.  And one of the reasons why we didn't have that was because that very night and the next day, people in the community, the leaders in the community went and talked to youth and talked to people about, let's not respond in a violent manner.  The way to respond is a deeper and more enduring commitment to the struggle for equality and of opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were a pastor at Union and you were in New Jersey for eight years?
Speaker 2: I was in New Jersey from roughly, 1964 'til 1972.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So you started in '64 [1964] and stayed until '72 [1972]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was First Baptist Church and then Union Baptist Church.
Story_ID: 316651
Speaker 1: You know, in 1972 my father [William H. Gray, Jr.] had passed away.  And he was pastor of the church in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], the Bright Hope Baptist Church, a large inner city church.  And I was struggling with the decision of whether to accept the call from the church, that's what we call it, a call from the church to come back to Philadelphia and assume the ministry of the church I grew up in.  And I struggled with that until eventually I did say yes.  And I went back to Philadelphia and became pastor of the Bright Hope Baptist Church, the church I grew up in, church, sizable church in those days.  I guess, you would call it in 1972 a megachurch, two thousand members.  And I became minister of that church and I was again doing two things, I was teaching and preaching.  And that's what I wanted to do, that was my dream, and the dream had come true for me by the time I was twenty-seven, twenty-eight.  When I went back to Philadelphia, gosh, I was about thirty-two.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And your family was in Philadelphia?
Speaker 1: My mother [Hazel Yates Gray] lived there.  My sister [Marian Gray Secundy] was a professor at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and my mother was in Philadelphia.  And I had just recently gotten married, I had been married a couple of years, and so my wife [Andrea Dash Gray] and my little son [William H. Gray, IV], who was about a year old, we went to Philly, we up and decided to go to Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Now how did you meet your wife?
Speaker 1: How did I meet my wife?  I guess, let's see she tells the story I was a boldacious [ph.] fool.  One day I went to visit a sick member of my church and as I got out of my car, maybe five houses away, I notice this very attractive young lady parking her car and getting out of it.  And I sort of slowed down so that by the time she got to the sidewalk we'd be right there together.  And I said hello, introduced myself, you know, and she didn't know who I was, she said she thought I was a crazy fool.  And but she was very attractive and it just so happened we were going in the same place.  She was going to see the family, which was a member of my church, I was going to see them because the father in the family was sick.  They were elderly.  And she knew the son, okay.  And so we said hello and, I guess, about three months later I performed the wedding of the chairman of the deacon board, his daughter, at our church and she was a bridesmaid.  So while I was performing the wedding, I was talking to her about why don't you go out with me, and she said yes (laughter).  And so that's how we met.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  All right.  So, that's a good story.  So now at Bright Hope now, as you were telling us earlier, your father was engaged in a lot of political activities and had a lot of responsibility there and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, he was typical black Baptist minister.  Black Baptist ministers in every community are highly involved in political and social activities.  I was involved in Montclair [New Jersey].  I helped organize and was campaign manager for the first black [Matthew G. Carter] who became mayor of Montclair, he was a member of my church, and I ended up being his campaign manager.  So, you get involved in those issues because those issues, public policy issues, have a profound effect upon African American people and those at the bottom of the socioeconomic totem pole, and so ministers tend to be involved.  If there's a protest against something or for something, they tend to be involved, because they have historically been the only independent source of strength in the black community.  The preacher was paid by the black community, the black church, and even though he might have another job somewhere else teaching somewhere, it was hard to get at him because ultimately his church could support him and therefore people who were teachers, people who were in corporations couldn't be the advocates because they could lose their jobs.  And so black preachers have historically been that way.  I mean, if you look at Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.], if you look at them, in politics as well as just on the outside, not an elected official, but leading the movements on a variety of social issues.  The NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] strength came from the black churches, you know, voter registration, churches.  People who wanted to get the support of black community, where'd you go?  You went to the black church and there the preacher says I'm for him, or introduce you, et cetera or he says nothing and that was a signal to the congregation, don't vote for him or her.  And so I was involved in the same thing.  And when I got to Philadelphia I stayed involved in things.  There was a mayor there named Frank Rizzo who had some very repressive policies that affected the black community in very negative ways, closing for instance the city hospital [Philadelphia General Hospital, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And so we got involved in protesting some of these policies and people said "Well, why don't you run for office?"
Story_ID: 316825
Speaker 1: You were starting to do this, but can you profile the area that Bright Hope [Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is in, and then what--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --were the issues, sir, that you all faced, now, you mentioned Frank Rizzo and some other issues, what were some of the issues you faced in your ward?
Speaker 2: Well we were located dead in the center of North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], right next to Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was historically one of the black communities.  We had, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] didn't have one black community, Philadelphia had several black communities.  North Philadelphia was a black community.  In West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] there were two black communities, one north of Market Street and one south of Market Street.  In South Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], there was a black community.  Philadelphia was a very odd place, and you can go fifteen blocks and pass through two or three different neighborhoods, Italian, Irish, and black, okay.  It wasn't one place that you had black people deposited.  But in terms of Philadelphia, North Philadelphia was probably the best known and the largest of the black communities, low income people, tenements, the whole works.  And we had the typical issues that black people in urban America were facing in the 1960s and '70s [1970s].  You know, equal participation in the political process, selection of their own leadership, not some political committee downtown saying we gonna make you this boy and you gonna be loyal to us, you know, selecting who the black judges were gonna be, and often selecting people who were not really qualified, okay, but who had a history of just long-term loyalty to the political king makers.  And we took on those issues and said no, if we're gonna be a part of the political party, the Democratic Party for instance, we're gonna select our own candidates, you're not gonna, from another neighborhood tell us who are gonna be our council people, our judges, our congressmen and we're gonna do that independently of you.  Well that was a radical thing, you know.  I mean, what's wrong with you all?  And we're gonna also have input in the policy.  We want to begin to see more African American businesspeople get an opportunity to do business with the city and with the government, okay.  We wanna see more of the benefits of the city coming into our communities, some new schools, road repair, pick up of the garbage on a, on a more regular basis, like you do in those other neighborhoods.  And so those were the kind of issues, and it was basically the same kind of stuff you'd face in New York [New York], Washington, D.C., in the black community.  And essentially, that's where I got involved as a minister of a large inner city church.  You know, it was expected that I would get involved and I did.
Story_ID: 316826
Speaker 1: You were beginning to describe Frank Rizzo.  Who was Frank Rizzo and how did he impact the black community in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Frank Rizzo was the mayor of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  He had risen from being a policeman, a cop on the beat, all the way up the ladder, chief of police and then mayor.  And from a political point of view he was a Democrat, but a very conservative Democrat.  And often had ideas about the black community that fitted in a bygone era and did not fit into the empowerment movement that we in the black community wanted and were demanding, or selection of leaders who we wanted and demanded who were more qualified, better trained, to do jobs.  And as a result of the tensions, the city got divided strongly on racial lines and which was typical of a lot of cities in the 1960s.  You know, you saw it in Detroit [Michigan], the tension, you know, the aspirations of minority peoples as opposed to the majority, started to come out.  And Frank Rizzo just symbolized it, but it was real, a whole way of life, it was a whole political and economic structure who saw black people as really puppets to be manipulated, pawns, and who you gave crumbs to for their loyalty.  And basically in the 1960s and '70s [1970s] all across America minority people started standing up and saying no, no, no, no more of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're gonna select who our council member is gonna be.  We're gonna tell you who it's gonna be, and we expect out of the ten judgeships that are up for election, that three or four of 'em are gonna be African American, not one and not you selecting.  And so those are the kinds of issues, you know.  What do you do with the budget?  Where do you make investments in what communities?  And, of course, in black communities, in poor communities, there was no equality of investment.
Story_ID: 316827
Speaker 1: You went back to school too during this period right?
Speaker 2: Right, when I was still living in Montclair [New Jersey], I went to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] to get another master's degree.  And a friend of mine, Joe Roberts [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph L. Roberts], who was pastor of the Elmwood [United] Presbyterian Church [East Orange, New Jersey], we used to drive down every Monday morning and have all of our classes on Monday and Tuesday, and I got another master's degree.
Speaker 1: And this was on church history?
Speaker 2: Yeah, church history.  And so I just added to the bachelor's degree and the master's of divinity degree.
Speaker 1: Now did the experience at Princeton, how did it, I mean, what did you learn new at Princeton that you didn't know about?
Speaker 2: Not a, it was not a radically different experience.  It's a great theological seminary [Princeton Theological Seminary, Princeton, New Jersey], great school in a wonderful atmosphere, great professors, but as a matter of fact what I did was, soon as I got the master's degree, I said, "I should have bypassed this and gone straight to Ph.D."  So I went back to Drew [University, Madison, New Jersey] to pursue a Ph.D. in church ethics and completed all the coursework, but never wrote my thesis or did the comps exam, so I did all the coursework.  And this is what I was doing while I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was working on my Ph.D. at Drew University.
Story_ID: 316828
Speaker 1: Back in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], did the community achieve any victories against the [Frank] Rizzo machine?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we started achieving victories.  We started getting state reps [representatives], city council people elected who were not endorsed by the political machine, and who were vigorously opposed.  You know, I remember one old time politician, a black politician, sitting me down one day, he said, "Reverend I need to talk to you."  And he said, "Look you don't understand how we operate here."  And he basically was telling me, "Look, boy, you better learn your place, you're creating problems, because if somebody wants to be an elected official they have to stand in line and wait and they have to serve the party first."  And I told him I understood that and that's what I'm fighting against.  I said, "I want the top, the best African American who's qualified to be a judge, not somebody who has just been a long serving flunky to the Democratic Party."  And he thought I was crazy, you know.  But that was the thing during the day.  And so we ended up getting elected some state representatives.  I mean, that was an amazing thing, you, somebody would get elected to office who was not endorsed by the party, not selected by the party?  And we knew it was just organization, going door to door, knocking on the door, organizing people to come out and vote, talking about what the issues are, this person is not qualified, this person is, and we also began to do that with regard to minority districts.  Most of the city, whether it was councilmen or state rep or state senate, there were districts that were 65, 70 percent black, and no blacks had ever represented them, the senator, the state representative, the councilmen, the ward leader were white.  We, I remember one state representative race we got involved in, you'd walk around and ask people, "Do you know who your state rep was?"  No.  You'd tell 'em who it is, it was, a very elderly Italian gentleman, white guy, they never knew it.  And the fact was he never came into the neighborhood.  But he got elected because the party said we want all of you all to vote for him.  And we said that's gotta stop, you know.  And so we started selecting, you know, people, women, putting them up and they ran and they would beat people.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, and let me just say this too, it's okay to name names and so what I want you to do is tell us who did you run for these offices?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Well I'm thinking about we called the independent black political movement, first one was a guy named Hardy Williams.  Hardy is gone now but he had been all-star basketball player at Penn State University [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania], very bright, very talented, he won a state representative district.  I think Hardy was probably the first.  A guy named Dave Richardson [David P. Richardson, Jr.].  Dave Richardson came out of the gangs of Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], okay.  John White, Jr., you know.  And then the independent movement backed a guy named Charles [W.] Bowser for mayor, you know, which was, what, a black guy running for mayor independently.  And then I can remember others.  The young man who took my place in [U.S.] Congress, [HistoryMaker] Chaka Fattah, who's now the congressman and been here now eighteen years or so.  He ran for state rep against a gentleman that nobody had seen for six years in a minority district, and he won.
Story_ID: 316829
Speaker 1: State senators, Roxanne [H.] Jones, first Democratic woman for the state senate, black woman.  She had been a welfare rights advocate and she ran and won, okay.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is before, you mentioned that before I interrupted you and now I'm interrupting you again but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --now like, why is it important for women to be elected?
Speaker 1: Because they represent a vital part of our community, they're competent, they're capable, and in some cases more competent, and more capable than men.  And we just believed and, of course, as a Baptist preacher you gotta believe 'cause more than half of your churches are made up of women, so, you can't tell me white males only or white males and black males only, no, no, no.  We, we started a movement that was breaking down the walls not only of race but also of gender.  And we elected to the court, to the benches, common pleas court, municipal court, lots of women.  We formed a coalition with the progressive white community in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and put white women up for judgeships.  And, you know, we were just simply saying, we're gonna have, there are twenty judges up, we expect that ten of 'em, will be women and minorities.  And they'd laugh at us like, where you guys come from.  And what we would do is we'd put out our own ballot in the black and in the white community, in the progressive white community, we would knock on doors, we'd run a campaign.  And, of course, all of our candidates were superior, they had better education, you know, better training, better legal experience.  You had people being elected judges by the Democratic Party who were not even lawyers, (laughter) you know, they were not even lawyers.  But, you know, they were loyal to the party or to the party bosses.  And there was no requirement that they had to be a lawyer.  And so you'd have the bar saying, unqualified but they'd still win.  So we stopped that.  And we stopped it in Philadelphia in the 1970s with the black independent movement that formed coalitions with the black, white progressive movement, and we became the voting majority of the Democratic Party.  So after about five or six years of beating the party, the party said, okay, let's negotiate.  And then we would sit down at the table and say, okay, twenty judges, we want five women, we want six minority judges and we don't want all black, we want Hispanics.  And we did the same thing with city council.  In 1979, in city council that coalition elected the majority of the members of city council, which then led to the election of the first black president of city council.
Story_ID: 316830
Speaker 1: As I'm listening to you, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] sounds a lot like Chicago [Illinois] which I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course, it was the same as Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: But I mean in--
Speaker 2: In Chicago.
Speaker 1: --this regard, then the Democratic Party is the party.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's the--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's it.  There are no Republicans really, just Democrats.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And so but it's that, the ethnic rivalries are what make the difference.
Speaker 2: And the ethnics would fight for the loyalty of the minorities or the blacks, there really weren't any Hispanics at that time.  And the way they would get them is by rewarding party loyalists with an elected position, not who was the best qualified or who was the best leader in the black community.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.  The other thing I wanted to ask you was did your organization have a name?  I know, in some places I know--
Speaker 2: We eventually adopted a name called the Northwest Independent Movement [ph.], because most of us lived in the northwest but it was really not a good title because we basically were spread out over the city.  It was led by myself, Dave Richardson [David P. Richardson, Jr.], John White [Jr.], okay.  And we began to build coalitions that elected people.  The young man who is the mayor of the city right now, Mike Nutter [HistoryMaker Michael Nutter], was elected to city council by the same coalition back in 1991, now today he's the mayor, okay.  He was a young man who was an investment banker and that we tapped and said, "Man we need your leadership in public policy, come on and run for city council."  He did and he was elected four years ago as the mayor.  Just like [HistoryMaker] Chaka Fattah started out as state representative in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in one of these districts that was majority minority, black, but had about a seventy-year-old Italian gentleman who never set his foot in the black community, nobody knew him.
Speaker 1: Did you have particular allies in the liberal white community?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's how we became really the majority in the Democratic Party.  And so the Democratic leadership finally woke up and realized that they were not the majority anymore because white progressive voters in the Democratic Party, you know, the ones that people would say the liberals, joined us because they had the same aspirations, they wanted some people from their community to go to public office, but they couldn't beat the party but with us joining them, we beat 'em every time.  So after about five years of beating them, the party, we became the party.  [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W.] Wilson Goode [Sr.] became mayor, okay, Wilson Goode.  Back in 1979, a guy named Bill Green [William J. Green, III] won the election.  Bill, we said that we wanna see blacks in your cabinet.  Who's the black who was appointed managing director, Wilson Goode.  Wilson Goode was the guy who ran my campaign for [U.S.] Congress.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He was my field director.  So we had all of these relationships.  We had the first black president of city council, a guy named Joe Coleman [Joseph E. Coleman], okay.  Why?  Because we had the nine out of seventeen votes.  When you, we had elected for the first time two blacks at council at-large, there had never been in the history of Philadelphia a black councilman elected at-large on the Democratic side, we in one election elected two of 'em.  And then two of the remaining at-large seats were whites from our progressive coalition.  And the fifth one was a Hispanic [Angel Ortiz], there had never been a Hispanic elected to city council at-large.  He didn't win, but two years later he won.  So the coalition was blacks, Hispanics, and white progressives.  And within about eight years, that coalition became the majority of the party and started redefining the party so the slating of well qualified women, not just black women, but white women, took place.  We elected the DA.  There was a guy who ran for district attorney, you know, everybody said get out of here, you're not going anywhere.  He took on a guy who had been DA for a long time, well known, well financed, he won.  The incumbent DA was a guy named [F. Emmett] Fitzpatrick, the young snotty nosed kid who took him on was Eddie Rendell [Ed Rendell], who later became mayor and who later became governor.  So all of that was the coalition of the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And so I got involved in that but there were a lot of preachers who were involved.  I was the only one who ended up running for public office.  But it was, it was often the leadership came out of the clergy.
Story_ID: 316831
Speaker 1: Did the coalition begin when your father [William H. Gray, Jr.] was alive, or after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --his death?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  My father was involved in politics and that is supporting candidates, but also he was a civil service commissioner, he, and that kind of involvement, not the kind of fight we were talking about, you know.  We came in as a bunch of revolutionaries, we don't wanna just change the furniture and redecorate the rooms, we wanna tear this whole house down, 'cause it's no hope, you know.  We gotta rebuild this house to be equitable and to be fair.  We don't want y'all to give us that room over there, you know.
Speaker 1: And so sometimes there's an incident or, or some, something that, you know slaps the community in the face, gets 'em excited, gets 'em started, jump start.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was there any such incident in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that--
Speaker 2: I can't think of one single catastrophic incident that mobilized.  It was a slow organizing process where we had to demonstrate to black people and to progressive whites that you could win, you could beat the establishment.  And it was done.  I mean, at one point, there was even an editorial written by a local newspaper against me because as congressman, I was spending a lot of my resources and money and time supporting the revolution (laughter) locally.  And they wrote an editorial that said, "Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III] is doing a great job as congressman but he can even do a better job if he would spend more time and more of his resources in Washington [D.C.]."  I mean, God, I was budget committee chairman in six years, nobody had ever done that in Pennsylvania, let alone the United States, and they're telling me I ought to spend more time.  But what they're really complaining about was that what this coalition was saying was they would go in and demand, you know, what's the percentage of contracts going to minorities and women owned firms?  You know, the same people are getting these contracts, they're not open bid, and as a result, there's stagnation and sometimes corruption.
Story_ID: 316832
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your congressional run in '78 [1978].  Now had--was this your first political office?
Speaker 2: That was the first time I had ever held any political office.  I ran in 1976 against an incumbent, a twenty-plus year incumbent.  Oh, I didn't have a chance of winning.  It was get close and maybe you'll get a chance, 'cause he's up in age and is probably gonna retire, and so two years from now, you might get a shot.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was this another black--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Robert N.C. Nix [Sr.].  Bob Nix, great guy, problem was that he went to [U.S.] Congress at, I think, about fifty-eight or sixty, so by the time he got seniority, was almost eighty.  And so when I ran the first time, people said, "We need you to get into political office and we need not a city councilman seat, not a state rep [representative] or state senate seat but something big," and Congress was a pretty big seat, you know.  And so I ran as an independent against the party, and the idea was hoping you could get close, he's gonna retire, and you'll run next time.  Well, lo and behold, the revolution was such that I ended up losing by three hundred votes against a twenty-year incumbent.  We couldn't--
Speaker 1: So you were close.  That means you were very close.
Speaker 2: Well some people said that a little Chicago-ism took place in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], with the votes, (laughter) and that I really had won.  But I needed fifty dollars per machine to open it and do the recount.  We had about ten thousand dollars, we got a recount.  They originally said I lost by 1800 votes, when we had the recount, based on how much money I had, was about ten thousand dollars, it dropped to three hundred votes.  So obviously, and we didn't open but about 10 percent of the machines.  And so people said, "Hey, if that young boy had gotten a fair shake and did not have to pay that and all those machines were opened, he probably won."  We took it as a great sign.  And you know, and Bob was, we thought was gonna retire in the next two years anyway, and I ran two years later.  Two years later, Bob Nix did not retire and I was faced with a choice of you either run now or anybody will win, okay, and there were about four or five people getting into the race.  And so I ran.  And I won overwhelmingly.  I won 60-40, 65-35, and--
Speaker 1: What were some of the dynamics or, what did they try to do to defeat you?
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter) threats, that you'll be run out of this town, you are gonna lose your church [Bright Hope Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], we'll make sure that that happens, you'll never go anywhere, 'cause we're gonna block you off at everything you do, and threats against my supporters.  I mean, I only had two elected officials who were bold enough to stand up and say, "I support [HistoryMaker William H.] Gray [III]."  The rest of 'em wouldn't do it, okay.
Speaker 1: And [Frank] Rizzo's still mayor, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's the mayor.  Then, of course, he was for Mr. Nix.  And I didn't expect Frank Rizzo to endorse me, I didn't want it, as a matter of fact.  You know, I was running as the people's candidate, and so we won overwhelmingly in 1978.  We were also in the middle of again that continuing fight between the new coalition, that was emerging, and the old city politics because Frank Rizzo was seeking a charter change for a third term.  And so I didn't, I spent most of my time in the general election, opposing charter change, leading that, helping to lead that coalition.  So we had a huge turnout in the minority community, huge turnout in the progressive white community that turned down the charter change, three to one.  And we were identified with them, but it was a continuation of what had been going on throughout the '70s [1970s].
Story_ID: 316833
Speaker 1: You mentioned [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W.] Wilson Goode [Sr.] was your campaign manager or chairman, right?
Speaker 2: He was, no he was my field day manager.  He managed the field election.  At that time he was head of a housing, a nonprofit housing group [Philadelphia Council for Community Advancement, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And, you know, he was known by all of us who were activists, but he was not known very well.  And then later on I won in '78 [1978], the mayor's race came in '79 [1979], we basically said to the new mayor, if you want the support of this, acting support of this coalition, you gotta commit to a broader base in the political party in supporting candidates from the black community and women, but we also want you to appoint a black to your cabinet.  There were three cabinet positions, one of 'em was managing director.  He, well when he won, he appointed who, Wilson Goode.  We wanted a black superintendent of schools, schools were 70 percent black and there had never been a black in really a high ranking position in the school system.  And he appointed a woman named Connie Clayton [Constance Clayton] as the first black superintendent of schools in the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And we had a, a bunch of demands like that.  We wanted him to support minority businesses with the set-aside program to help share the economic growth with minority and women owned businesses.  And he agreed to it.  And as a result of, in the fall he won overwhelmingly.
Speaker 1: This is--
Speaker 2: Bill Green [William J. Green, III] was his name.
Speaker 1: Bill Green, okay.
Speaker 2: A former congressman.  And his father [William J. Green, Jr.] had been a seecon [ph.], of the Democratic Party in Philadelphia.  He had been chairman for years in the Democratic, he had, his father had represented sort of the old thinking.  Bill was new, very thoughtful, and understood the revolution that was going on and that the politics had to change, and that the folks who had been excluded had to be a part of it.
Speaker 1: Right.  So we're pausing again.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You didn't mention [HistoryMaker] Augusta Clark.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I interviewed her that same (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well Gussie Clark I have known for all my life.  I used to make money as a kid cleaning her apartment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well is she considered as a member of--
Speaker 2: She was one of the two city council people.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: She was a librarian--
Story_ID: 313841
Speaker 1: And what the coalition did was basically attack the old establishment.  New candidates, in 1979, which was my first year in [U.S.] Congress, I had won in '78 [1978], we had, we create these names, and we would call it, this group, the Committee of Twenty [ph.].  We had some labor folks who thought our way, there were the Young Turks in labor like us in politics.  And we said, look, the mayor's race is important, there's a black guy named Charlie Bowser [Charles W. Bowser], Bill Green [William J. Green, III] running, that's important but don't forget city council.  So we put together a slate of progressive forces out of this coalition that included for the first time, two black candidates, a council at-large, a Jewish candidate who had been kicked out by [Frank] Rizzo, okay, a progressive guy named Dave Cohen [David Cohen].  The two blacks were [HistoryMaker] Augusta Clark, who was a librarian and a member of my church [Bright Hope Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and a dear friend.  I used to clean her apartment when I was fourteen, that's how I earned money to go out on dates.  And then I would borrow her boyfriend's car and drop him off at Gussie's for dinner on Saturday night, and I'd take the car and go out on a date.  And so she was articulate, well-trained, never had any political experience, we convinced her to run for council at-large.  A guy named Johnny Anderson [John C. Anderson], who was a contemporary of mine, Johnny was a bright and brilliant young lawyer from West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  He had political experience 'cause he had been counselor to city committee but, you know, he was young and they weren't gonna ever run him for anything, and so we ran him.  Then we ran a guy named Ed Schwartz [Edward A. Schwartz], okay.  And we ran a Hispanic, the first time a Hispanic had been slated and we won four (laughter) of the five, the Hispanic lost.  He later won two years later when a city council at-large person passed away, and the one who had beat him, and he, we ran him again and he won.  And so you had two blacks, first time in history, Augusta Clark, Johnny Anderson.  You had two progressive Democrats, who the establishment hated, caused one to lose, and you had a Hispanic, which we had never had (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, Puerto Rican, I'm sorry was he a Puerto Rican?
Speaker 1: I think Angel [Ortiz] was.  I don't remember exactly but he might have been Puerto Rican not Latino from Mexico or Dominican Republican.  And then we said, "That's what this city looks like and that's the kind of representation, you know, let the people choose."  And so that gave you the nine votes that led to Joe Coleman [Joseph E. Coleman], the first black, becoming president of the city councilmen.  He had been a district councilman, okay, from the northwest section.  And there were other district council people who were black who got elected by their districts.  They joined with the ones we elected at-large and that gave you a nine vote majority, and they took control of city council.  We also, the incoming, Charlie Bowser lost a very close election in the primary.  And Bill Green made a commitment to us and to the black community that he would appoint an African American as a member of his cabinet.  He would appoint an African American as superintendent of schools.  He promised to open up the city contracting to ensure that minorities and women got a fair shake of bidding for those contracts and competing for them.  And he made big policy commitments that opened up the system.  So when November came and he ran against Frank Rizzo, who was now running as a Republican, he won and it was a big voter turnout.  And who did he appoint?  He appointed [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W.] Wilson Goode [Sr.] as managing director.  He appointed Connie Clayton [Constance Clayton] as superintendent of the schools.  And, of course, five years later Wilson Goode runs for mayor and wins.
Speaker 2: Just for the sake of history, tell us what happened that made Rizzo become a Republican?
Speaker 1: Well, we wouldn't change the charter.  Remember in '78 [1978], I said there was a fight.  He wanted to change the charter that would allow him not two terms but three terms.  And so when I was running for election in 1978, the big issue was not this young kid named Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III] who had won the primary, and that was tantamount to election, okay, 'cause my district was 85 percent Democratic, 65 percent black.  So, you know, there was no question that I was gonna win.  I devoted all of my resources and all my time to campaigning against the charter change.  So he didn't get a charter change.  So one year later he switched parties and ran as a Republican.  And that was the last remnant of that, remnant of that old Democratic establishment and we beat it when Bill Green won.  And then--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the era of the South when the Dixiecrats become Republicans.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Story_ID: 313842
Speaker 1: We then every year put together a progressive slate.  And the next year, a young kid, a lawyer beat this establishment figure [F. Emmett Fitzpatrick], you know, you know, Eddie Rendell [Ed Rendell], then Lynne Abrahams [sic. Lynne Abraham] got elected on the back of this, this kind of a coalition.  We started getting more and more blacks elected as judges.  Roxanne [H.] Jones, the first black woman in the state senate, who had been a welfare rights advocate, you know.  I mean, this was not an elitism in the black community, this was a cross section, you know, of people who--Gussie Clark [HistoryMaker Augusta Clark] was well trained, she was a librarian, very articulate.  Roxanne, I don't even think Roxanne had even finished high school, you know, but she was one articulate, grassroots sister who was committed and had the right principles and the right values.  And so we got people like that.  Young [HistoryMaker Chaka] Fattah out of West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], then when he moved to the state senate, we got another young man [Vincent Hughes] to take his place, and so we just kept building and building.  And that young man who took his place is now a leader of the state senate and the chairman of the appropriations committee in Harrisburg [Pennsylvania] in the [Pennsylvania] State Capitol.  So, you know, you can just look at the whole garden of flowers came out of that movement that led to very independent thinking on the part, and we were trying to say to the black community, don't let anybody select our leaders, we select our leaders, people who are loyal to the community, who have the values that the community want, not what some party downtown wants.  And that was a very radical kind of movement.  I ended up becoming the banker of it because I would raise money for my campaign and, of course, I never had a big campaign and I would be the banker of this movement.  But we elected a lot of people, you know.
Speaker 2: Was it hard to raise money?
Speaker 1: No.  You know, it was not hard to me.  I mean, I was raising money for me, you know, Congressman Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III] reelection campaign, but I didn't have a reelection campaign so what did I do with the money?  I used the money to support local candidates and national candidates who represented progressive thinking and the kind of values of empowerment that I thought were important in our communities.
Story_ID: 313843
Speaker 1: When I went to [U.S.] Congress in 1978, started in January of '79 [1979], there were forty-one Democrats in my class and there were five African Americans, myself from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Benny Stewart [Bennett M. Stewart] from Chicago [Illinois], Mickey Leland from Texas, and Julian [C.] Dixon from California, and Evans, Roland Evans, no, Mel Evans [Melvin H. Evans], excuse me, Mel Evans from the [U.S.] Virgin Islands, and we were the five African Americans.  Mel was a Republican and the other, all the rest of us were Democrats.  I had some very prominent people in my class.  Phil Gramm who later became a United States senator.  Newt Gingrich who later became speaker [of the house].  He was on the Republican side, Phil was on the Democratic side, he later switched parties.  You know, Geraldine Ferraro, you know.  It was a very, pretty prominent class.  Most of them had political experience, meaning they had been state reps [representatives], state senators or councilmen or mayors, it was even a couple of former governors.  I had had none.  I was just a Baptist preacher and I was sort of like, you know, just not familiar with the political, the traditions like, you're supposed to be quiet and listen.  So the first thing I do is I run for the number one position in the class, Steering and Policy [U.S. House Committee on Steering, Policy and Scheduling], which is the person who really has the power in the freshmen class, not the president.  And I ran against some pretty famous names, Geraldine Ferraro, Tony Coelho, you know, Buddy Leach of Louisiana who had been the speaker of the house in Louisiana, Peter [A.] Peyser from New York, and me.  I ended up winning.  And for the next two years I sat on the leadership committee that made all the decisions on policy, committee assignments, who gets what, I was the representative for that forty-one freshmen Democrats.  And that sort of kicked off my effort.  I became a member of the Budget Committee [U.S. House Committee on the Budget].  I became a member of the foreign affairs committee and took the place of Charlie Diggs [Charles Diggs] on the Subcommittee on Africa [U.S. House Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights and International Organizations] 'cause the [Congressional] Black Caucus members came to me, [HistoryMaker] Parren [J.] Mitchell [III] and Lou Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes] came to me and basically said, "Son, this is where you're going."  I said, "Wait a minute, I wanna go on the urban banking committee that does housing [U.S. House Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs], 'cause I got a lot of bad housing."  They said, "You're gonna go on the Budget Committee, and we need you to go on the foreign affairs committee 'cause Charles Diggs is no longer there, he was our voice on Africa."  And so I went on the foreign affairs committee.  I went on the Budget Committee.  And later, I ended up being chairman of the Budget Committee, six years later, which was a leadership position, you got elected to chairman, you didn't get it by seniority.  And I ended up being a major player on the war against apartheid because of my experiences on the subcommittee on Africa.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now this is the time, I think, the Congressional Black Caucus is still sort of in its formative years.  You know, it started in '70 [sic. 1971] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, the caucus was getting pretty well defined and there were nine members in the Congress who were black, we came and added five more and that brought us up to a great big number of fourteen.  But what was happening is that black caucus members were getting more seniority, you know, you had people like [HistoryMaker Augustus F.] "Gus" Hawkins, who was chairman of [U.S. House Committee on] Education and Labor [U.S. House Committee on Education and the Workforce].  Bill Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.] who was chairman of the Postal Committee [U.S. House Committee on the Post Office and Civil Service].  Lou Stokes who was Joint Economic Committee [sic. U.S. House Committee on Education and Labor].  And, in Congress it's that power that can be levered.
Story_ID: 313844
Speaker 1: I ended up six years later becoming the youngest person ever to become chairman of the Budget Committee [U.S. House Committee on the Budget].  I had only been there [U.S. Congress] six years, young in age and in tenure, but I ran and I won.
Speaker 2: Now how do you account for that?  I mean what's the, I mean, without being immodest, how do you account for that?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, basically, I looked around in 1984 and said, you know, what do you wanna do next?  I was on the appropriations committee and after two years I went to the most powerful, one of the most, three, what we call the big three committee, ways and means, energy and commerce, appropriations.  I went to appropriations.  I was on the Subcommittee of International Operations [sic. U.S. House Committee on International Relations; U.S. House Committee on Foreign Affairs] which is controlling the money for foreign affairs.  And I decided that I wanted to go back to the Budget Committee, and that I was gonna run for chairman.  And I said, "I can do that.  I can be a good chairman."  And I remember I went on television on a show called 'Black America's Forum' [sic. 'America's Black Forum'].  [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond was the host but he wasn't the host, they had two national black correspondents whose names I won't mention, and they said, "[HistoryMaker] Mr. [William H.] Gray [III] you're the vice chairman of the [Congressional] Black Caucus, you've been in a short period of time, you've been on the Budget Committee, you've been a spokesman on Africa, you have been vice chair of the black caucus, what are you gonna do?"  I said, "I'm gonna run for chairman of the Budget Committee."  They literally broke out laughing on air, not smiling, laughing and then they covered up.  And six months later, they called to ask for interviews and they said that was amazing.  And, basically, I went to people and talked about what I can bring to the chairmanship of the Budget Committee.  And so I got elected chairman of the Budget Committee, which is the spokesman for macroeconomic fiscal policy for the Democratic Party, after [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan had won forty-nine states over [Walter] Mondale.  And surprised people, like who is this person?  You know, I'm black, black guy, a young kid.  And nobody's ever heard of him, you know, and he won overwhelmingly the election to be elected chair.  And I took over as chairman and we had a good time as chairman of the Budget Committee.  And, I guess I just had the audacity to believe that you can do, I was raised to believe I can do anything I wanna do if I put my mind to it and if I was good enough.  And so basically I went to the various groups in the Democratic caucus and asked for their support.  And I got groups, the black caucus members overwhelmingly supported me, the women's caucus supported me, the progressive and liberals overwhelmingly supported me, and the conservatives supported me.  In fact, I was the second nomination or seconded by Charlie Stenholm [Charles Stenholm], who was at that time chairman of the Boll Weevils, who is the conservative caucus.  And he said, "Bill Gray has got good tractor sense," he said, "he and I probably don't agree on anything, but I know one thing, he's gonna be fair."
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now what year is this when you're elected?
Speaker 1: I was elected in December of '84 [1984].
Story_ID: 313845
Speaker 1: But in 1985 you wrote the legislation to impose economic sanctions--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on South Africa.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: I mean, tell me how did that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) You know, when I took over, yeah, when I took over the seat that really had been Charles Diggs', but he had been chairman, so I just became a member of the authorizing Committee of Foreign Affairs [U.S. House Committee on Foreign Affairs], Subcommittee of Africa [U.S. House Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights and International Organizations] when I got here in '79 [1979].  I transferred off that committee two years later to appropriations.  But the chairman was a guy named Steve Solarz [Stephen J. Solarz] from New York.  He and I had become friends.  And there was a guy who sat behind me who was in my class named Howard Wolpe from Michigan, former college professor.  And the three of us just started working together in 1979 and '80 [1980] on the issue of South Africa, what could we do to move the bubble in the ball.  And we agreed that we had to impose sanctions, that the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan policy of constructive engagement with South Africa which basically said, we wanna constructively engage with the apartheid regimes, because only by doing that can you convince them to back off of apartheid.  We said no.  That's been tried, what you really have to do is apply sanctions and pressure and get the rest of the free world to force them to give up apartheid.  And we came up with a set of sanctions, banning Krugerrands, air transport between the two countries, and a bunch of other things.  Those things essentially came out of the 1979, '80 [1980] study by the Rockefeller Foundation on what America should do on apartheid and it said limited sanctions.  So we came up with limited sanctions.  And we were the advocates for that from 1980 all the way up until 1985 when we got those limited sanctions passed for the first time, not only out of Africa committee but the full committee and the [U.S.] House of Representatives.  They died in the [U.S.] Senate because of the Jesse Helms filibuster.  Jesse Helms from North Carolina filibustered and we couldn't get enough votes to stop the filibuster.  We missed it by one vote, and a very surprising vote.  It was the vote of the Pennsylvania Senator Arlen Specter.  And I remember standing on the floor with Ted Kennedy [Senator Edward M. Kennedy] and Lowell [P.] Weicker [Jr.], a Republican from Connecticut, as we watched everybody vote.  And there were two people who we didn't think we could get and they voted to end the filibuster and we said, oh, we got it and in came the senator from Pennsylvania, a Republican who surprised everybody and voted with Jesse Helms.
Speaker 1: Now he would eventually fight with the Republicans and become a Democrat.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he eventually switched parties and then lost but that's what happened.  And we were just, we were, I was standing on the floor of the Senate and Ted Kennedy (laughter) said something that was, "expletive deleted," and so did Lowell Weicker, a Republican, we couldn't believe it.  And but we lost and we had to come back a year later, 1986, with the sanctions bill.  But Charlie Diggs had tried for his whole life to get sanctions on South Africa and couldn't.  Couldn't even get it out of committee, okay, let alone to the floor.  We got it out of committee to the floor, we attached it to the export import bill and Helms filibustered it.  The next year we came back and this time a lot of Republicans over in the Senate had said to the president, Mr. President we can't sustain a veto or we can't vote no like we did last year 'cause your policy isn't working.  And so we felt pretty confident.  And so but what happened was the South Africans had risen up in opposition to apartheid and there was about a three month period where Americans were watching the South African security forces with these tanks, rolling into Soweto [Johannesburg, South Africa] and the Cape [Cape Town, South Africa], the ghettos, killing black South Africans.  So that when the vote came on the floor, people were so upset, Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums] got up and offered a total embargo, not limited, and it passed by voice vote.  You know, it passed by voice vote.  And then we had a vote and we got over 280 votes which was enough to override a presidential veto in the House.  Then when it went to the Senate, Dick Lugar [Richard Lugar], said, "Look, I will not accept the House total embargo but the limited sanctions of the Solarz, Wolpe, Gray bill [Anti-Apartheid Action Act of 1985], we'll accept that with some modification and if you're willing to accept that, I will oppose the president and I'll guarantee that we'll override a presidential veto."
Speaker 1: And the president then was--
Speaker 2: Reagan, Ronald Reagan.  So his own Republicans said we'll override it if you move from total embargo to those limited sanctions, the ones that Solarz, Wolpe, and I wrote in 1982 with, they--some modification.  And so that's what ended up happening.  The conference committee agreed to that, it was shipped to the president and the president vetoed it.
Story_ID: 313846
Speaker 1: And I was chosen by the Democratic Party to respond nationally.  The president gave a speech on the importance of South Africa and why his policy was correct and the Democrats asked me to respond right afterwards, ten minute, fifteen minute speech on why that was the wrong policy.  The [U.S.] Senate overrode the veto [of the Anti-Apartheid Action Act of 1985] by a huge margin, weren't even close, okay, it weren't even close.  The chairman of Foreign Affairs [U.S Senate Committee on Foreign Relations], Dick Lugar [Richard Lugar], the chairwoman of the Subcommittee on Africa in the Senate [U.S. Senate Subcommittee on African Affairs], Nancy Kassebaum, all Republicans, told [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan, he was crazy.  And that was the first time a, in the modern era that an American president had had a major foreign policy reversal by the [U.S.] Congress.  And right after that they freed Nelson Mandela, right after that they had elections, three or four years after that.  I had the privilege of leading the first congressional delegation to Africa to meet Nelson Mandela in Zambia.  And as, at that time the majority whip, and I invited him to come as speaker in joint session.
Speaker 2: Now, this is in 1991, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was before that, it might have been '90 [1990].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I was the majority whip, but I invited him as a member of the leadership to come and address a joint session.  Now some people got an upset with me, okay (laughter).  And that was, he's not a sitting president.  And I said, "So what, he will be."  And sure enough about a year later he won the election.  And I said, "We've had people who were not sitting presidents before.  If Lech Walesa of Poland can come," they said, "but he's been elected." I said, "But he's not a sitting president."  And I said, "Nelson Mandela's gonna win by a--," so Nelson came and I had the privilege of, along with Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums] of walking him into the [U.S.] House [of Representatives].  And so it was a great victory for, you know, progressive forces.
Story_ID: 313847
Speaker 1: Were you surprised by what it was like to be a congressman in terms of what you expected when you were elected, a person coming in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with no experience as you said and--
Speaker 2: No, I really didn't.  It wasn't surprising and it wasn't difficult.  You know, I had a lot of friends in the Civil Rights Movement, one of 'em was Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young].  You know, Andy and I have been very, very close and I'm a great admirer of Andy Young.  And, you know, Andy was supportive of me getting involved in politics and he used to say, "Bill [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III], it's no more difficult than pastoring a big Baptist church."  He said, "In fact, it's easier."  He said, "You don't have a choir, you don't have a usher board, you don't have a deacon board to fight with," he said.  He said, "And if you can pastor that big church [Bright Hope Baptist Church] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you can be a congressman."  And I did not find it difficult.  I mean, it was hard work.  And you gotta remember I had two fronts going.  I had the striving and the desire to be productive and to move upward here in Washington [D.C.] as a congressman.  And then I was one of the major leaders of the political revolution for empowerment of women and minorities back home.  So I would, I was doing two things at the same time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was it hard, I think, you know, people they look at former congressmen most of them actually live in Washington, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: They're not back in their home.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--
Speaker 1: Is it hard to keep that connection with your home (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.  It is because you get wrapped up, I mean, writing a trillion dollar a year, writing the first one trillion dollar budget, (laughter) you know, that's hard work.  And trying to get members to vote.  Most budget chairmen had to go back two or three times to pass a budget.  They'd go to the floor, lose, come back, lose, come back, then get it passed.  I never had that.  I passed every one of my budgets on the first try.  And the reason is 'cause I do all the hard work and I iron out the problems and build a consensus.  And we had a set of policies which I got all the Democrats to agree to, which is no low income means tested program should be cut, school lunch, Pell Grants, programs for senior citizens, that were based on how much you make.  So if you're poor, they didn't get cut, they got inflation.  The programs over here are the ones that we trim down, okay.  Now that's generally the accepted policy in budgeting in the United States Congress is you don't go after poor people.  But you gotta remember that was not [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan.  Ronald Reagan wanted ketchup as a vegetable, he wanted to get rid of Pell Grants, which is the grant for low income kids to go to college, how are you gonna build a great prosperous nation if you don't train people, okay, and provide doorways of opportunity for poor people to get an education, so they can make America prosperous and secure, not just black people, poor people.  And most of these programs are predominated by white people, you know.  Welfare, 70 percent of the people on welfare are white, they're not black or brown.  Same thing with Pell Grants.  And, of course, we had people who were trying to imply these are minority programs so cut 'em, okay.  So basically we established that principle which was carried out all during the '80s [1980s] and the '90s [1990s] by other Budget Committee [U.S. House Committee on the Budget] chairman.  We said, there have to be cuts in the defense department [U.S. Department of Defense], we can't have thousands of dollars paid for a toilet seat, okay, for a coffee pot and cut senior citizens, okay, from nutrition, that doesn't make sense.  And people agreed.  I mean, it took a long time.  So my first budget I worked out an equal--president said that he wanted $50 billion in deficit reduction, we gave him $50 billion, the same as his budget but different choices, and we did it without taxes.  And so they couldn't say them Democrats will tax and spend, we just gave different choices.  He was increasing defense by 15 percent, we kept defense flat (laughter) and said, you know, we have a strong defense, we got enough missiles, we have enough submarines, we have enough aircraft carriers to blow up the universe, so we don't need to add any more, okay.  And so I was involved in two things, the revolution, political revolution back home, and here.  And so I eventually, when I became chair of the Budget Committee, I did move my family here.
Story_ID: 313848
Speaker 1: While you're in [U.S.] Congress, well we were talking about trying to maintain all your different activities, while you're a congressman in [Washington] D.C. and maintaining activity in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], being a pastor  of a church too, you were, you were a pastor at the same time.
Speaker 2: The same time that I was in Congress, I was pastor of Bright Hope Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], over two thousand members, and I would go back, well the first six years I went back and forth every day, come down in the morning, go down home at night.  Except, usually Wednesday nights we worked past seven o'clock and I couldn't.  But I went back and forth.  And then on the weekends I was being Pastor Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III], doing funerals, weddings, and preaching on Sunday, visiting the sick, and I was also being congressman.  So I had, the whole time I was in Congress I was pastor of Bright Hope Baptist Church.  I preached as often as any other pastor would preach in their church.  And even when I left Congress to become president of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], I was in my pulpit every Sunday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I performed probably 75 percent of the funerals, 50 percent of all the weddings.  So it was kind of a grind but really I loved it.  I loved it because I am a preacher.  I'm a Baptist preacher first, not a politician, not a congressman.  People may have heard of me because of Congress and got to know Bill Gray, but I am a preacher and a teacher.  Preaching and education runs deep in my family.  My father [William H. Gray, Jr.] was the president of two black colleges, my mother [Hazel Yates Gray] was dean of a black college [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], my sister [Marian Gray Secundy] taught at two black colleges, okay.  So my [maternal] grandmother [Bertha Randall Yates] was a high school principal [at Scott Street Elementary School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], my grandfather [Albert Yates] on my mother's side taught at Southern University, okay.  So preaching and teaching is what I really am.  Politics is the aberration in my life.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, when, who were some of the staff people that you had on your congressional staff that really facilitated, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I was very fortunate, I always was lucky to have great staff people.  And, you know, a young man named Steve Pruitt [Steven L. Pruitt] came to work for me when I was running for Budget Committee [U.S. House Committee on the Budget] chairman, and I made him chief of staff of the Budget Committee, the first African American to be chief of staff of a finance committee in the history of the U.S. House of Representatives.  A guy named Alan Bowser straight out of college came and did an internship with me and I kept him (laughter).  And he rose to be my chief of staff of my congressional office.  Steve Murphy, John Plebonnie [ph.] to mention others who were senior members of my team during the time I was here in [U.S.] Congress.  Really outstanding people who made it possible for me to do some outstanding things.  [HistoryMaker] Singleton [B.] McAllister, who was my chief legislative officer, helped me to write the bill for the [U.S.] African Development Foundation.  The first, I became the first freshman in the history of the Congress since the 19th century who created a new agency in the government in his first term.  It was a foundation to help small villages in Africa.  She became general counsel to AID [United States Agency for International Development] under [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton.  So I've been fortunate to have some really great people work for me.  Marian [B.] Tasco in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], who was my campaign manager went to work for me and then we got her to run for city commissioner and then council person.  She's been in the city council now sixteen years.  I, you know, if she's not the senior member of city council she's next to it.  Just a wonderful human being, dedicated to public service.  And I can go on and on and on, the list is so long but they're great people.
Story_ID: 313849
Speaker 1: When you look back on it now, 'cause you resigned from, stepped down from [U.S.] Congress in '91 [1991], right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-one [1991] I was the majority whip, the first African American, not only to chair the Budget Committee [U.S. House Committee on the Budget], first African American not only to chair the Democratic caucus, but also the first African American to be the majority whip, usually the majority whip becomes the majority leader who becomes the speaker [of the house].  And in 1991, I was offered the position of president of the United Negro College Fund [UNCF], an opportunity to go back to education and produce some of the future leaders of America in historically black colleges [HBCUs], you know.  And that was just too appealing 'cause remember, where did I start?  Black church, education, black education, that's my love, education and the church.  And people today say, "Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III] don't you miss politics?"  No.  But I do miss being a preacher.  I retired four years ago and I do miss that.  I do miss the classroom and the educational experience of helping to shape and mold the lives of young men and women.  Nobody has ever walked up to me and said, "Mr. Gray I wanna thank you for the budget you passed in 1988," okay.  But I'll be at an airport and a young person will walk over and say, "Are you Bill Gray?"  And I'll say yeah.  And they'll say, "I went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I wanna thank you, I had a UNCF scholarship but I couldn't have gotten that education."  And I'll say, "What you doing now?"  Oh, I'm vice president of a bank (laughter) or I'm a doctor.  And, man, there's nothing that beats that feeling, you know, to know that you you've opened the doorway.  And so in 1991, the leadership of UNCF came to me, the guy who was retiring was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], guy named Chris Edley [Christopher F. Edley, Sr.], and he knew my background.  And we used to vacation at the same time up on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  And he first asked me about it in 1990 and I said no, no.  And they kept asking me throughout the fall of 1990 and I said no.  And then finally in 1991 I said, let me think about it.  And I talked with my wife [Andrea Dash Gray] and prayed about it and I felt led to do that.  And so at the height of my political career, I guess, I said "Bye, I'm going back to education."
Speaker 1: I wanna go back a little bit to you being majority whip.  Who was majority whip in Congress, the Democratic whip before you?
Speaker 2: Tony Coelho.
Speaker 1: And who was whip after you?
Speaker 2: The whip after me, now I'm trying to remember, because two years after I left the Republicans took over.  So there, the person would not have been majority whip, the person would have been minority whip.  And I believe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were the last majority whip before the Republican Revolution in--
Speaker 2: I was the last majority whip. The Republicans, Newt Gingrich, the Republican revolution won in '94 [1994], okay.  Tom Foley was the speaker, Dick Gephardt was the majority leader, I was the majority whip.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Democrats lost control of the [U.S.] House [of Representatives] and Newt Gingrich became speaker, okay, Dick Armey became the majority leader, okay.  And I don't even remember who the majority whip was on the Republican side at that time.  But I believe what happened is Dick Gephardt became the minority leader, okay.  And the minority whip, I don't remember, it was either Steny Hoyer, I think, or Nancy Pelosi, and, I think, it was Steny, okay, or Nancy.
Speaker 1: Now when you look (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I had left, so if I had stayed two years later I would have been demoted (laughter) I would have been demoted to minority whip.
Story_ID: 313850
Speaker 1: When you look back on your years in [U.S.] Congress, what today in 2012 would you, and think about this, would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't know about what Bill Gray's [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III] legacy is, somebody else has to write that and they have to make a judgment call, look at the body of work.  But if you say to me Bill, what were the most important things to you personally, I would say the South African sanctions and also being budget chair [of the U.S. House Committee on the Budget].  Let me tell you why.  One day Tip O'Neill after he saw me debating on the floor on South Africa, he was sitting on the floor and I walked passed him, he said, "Bill come here, sit down."  And he said, "I wanna talk to you," and I said, "What's up Tip?"  And he said, "I was watching you," and he said, "you know, I thought you were pretty good with the budget, but that's not what you care the most about is it?"  I said, "Why do you say that?"  He said, "Because you are much more emotional about South Africa."  And I said, "You're right."  I said, "That's very personal to me.  I'm a black person, if you haven't noticed."  And I said, "What is happening in South Africa is what I grew up with in Louisiana and in Florida and as a kid in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]."  And I said, "I know that, that's not theory to me."  I said budgets are theory, (laughter) you know, they're numbers and big numbers.  And so that's really probably the thing that I feel the best about that I helped to bring about a policy that led to freeing a whole nation of folk, 80 percent majority who were suffering.  Budget, my second thing.  That basically Democrats had not been in the budget debates, their budgets had always fallen through.  Republicans were leading, and that I was able to pull together a consensus view of what?  The priorities.  'Cause what you talk about when you talk about budget, it's not really numbers, you're talking about what are the priorities of the country.  What are the things that are important?  You know, okay, we need security, defense, but we need education, so we can't cut education.  We need a safety net to take care of people who for whatever reason can't take of themselves.  And we need investment in science and research, and you gotta do that in a thoughtful evenhanded way, 'cause that's the future, okay.  And if you don't start building now, when the future comes, you're gonna have a whole bunch of problems, and you won't have a great nation.  And so being budget chair and being successful in establishing some policies that we don't go after poor people.  Two, that we pass each budget the first time we take it to the floor, we have gotten the votes together, we know the votes are there, and we've made, built a consensus.  It's been difficult.  I remember when I became budget, the head of the Office of Budget and Management [sic. Office of Management and Budget] for the White House [Washington, D.C.] was a former congressman named Stockman, David Stockman.  And David was on 'Face the Nation' or one of the shows, talking to the host about the budget policy of the president [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] and the priorities of the president.  And he said, "Now it'll be up to Mr. Gray to see if can get the Democrats to do anything."  And I was on the show, and I said, "Well we're gonna try."  He didn't know it but I had it in my pocket, a unity agreement by all Democrats on a budget.  And the next day we started what's called the markup, within five hours the Republicans realized that, hey, none of the Democrats are gonna break away and vote on any of these amendments, they are in total, all twenty-two of them are in agreement, that had never happened before.  And the next week we took it to the floor and I got every Democrat to vote for the budget of the Budget Committee in 1985 except for I think thirteen.  So that meant over 250, even though every Republican voted no.  Now the next year, I got even a couple of Republicans and I called it bipartisan.  And they said, "Well two people don't make it bipartisan."  But we did that in '88 [1988], from '85 [1985] to '88 [1988] all four budgets got passed.  The Democrats held together as a team saying these are the priorities.  The most conservative Democrats, the Boll Weevils, to the most liberal Democrats, all gave up something to build a consensus of what America should be.  And that's pretty important I think.  But the South African one is the emotional one because that's attached to me.
Story_ID: 313851
Speaker 1: You mentioned the similarities that [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young pointed out to you between being a pastor and being a congressman.  What leadership qualities did you have to have to do both things and how do you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, you know, I don't know.  People often say, you know, Bill [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III], how did you do these things?  And I thought that I just had this little, what Adam called an audacity, you know.  I had a belief.  I was raised in a family that taught me to believe you can do anything you wanna do if you're willing to apply yourself, do the discipline, get the knowledge, and really work.  And so I believed that I could (laughter).  So that's the first thing.  And they said, "Why would you run for Steering and Policy [U.S. House Committee on Steering, Policy and Scheduling] against these powerful names and you have no experience?  Why would you run for budget chair and you only been here six years?"  I just sort of believed that I could do it.  That's a belief in self.  My parents [Hazel Yates Gray and William H. Gray, Jr.] taught me to believe that.  You know, to believe that you can but you gotta work and you gotta be willing to sacrifice.  Then, I think, the second thing, is that the church taught me, and maybe the first is something that comes from the church to which is faith in self, because there's a higher being that has shaped you and mold you for things you don't know but you gotta try.  The second thing I think, you know, that came out of the church is working with diverse people from diverse backgrounds.  You know, what is a church?  It's a volunteer organization of people from different backgrounds, different points of view that you have to build a consensus for the mission of the church.  What are you doing as budget chair?  Or as a legislator?  Trying to build a consensus of people in the [U.S.] Congress that they will support.  And you have to take in their viewpoints, you have to compromise sometimes, you know.  And knowing when and how to so that you don't lose people over here, and they said yeah that's acceptable.  And I said I think those are skill sets you probably learned from pastoring a three or four thousand member church.
Speaker 1: And when you look at today there is such a polarization between the two parties.  It didn't exist in your day, but--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: How did you negotiate across the aisle?
Speaker 2: Well we had open dialogue.  I mean, some of my best friends in Congress were Republicans.  I'd go to their apartment and eat and we'd go out have a drink and, you know, fellowship.  Now when you see us on the floor we'd be opposing each other's viewpoints but we never made it personal.  It was never, take for instance Del Latta, who was the ranking Republican on the Budget Committee [U.S. House Committee on the Budget], then followed by Lynn [Morley] Martin and then Jack Kemp, famous Republican congressman who ran for vice president, was secretary of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] was a football player at Dartmouth [sic. Occidental College, Los Angeles, California] and Buffalo Bills quarterback, we had wonderful relationships.  You know, we didn't agree on the policy but I never in the wildest moment would think that Del or Lynn were un-American or evil.  And so, therefore, there's always the possibility that you can build a relationship, you can bridge a divide.  But if I say that you're evil and if you think I'm evil, okay, if you think I'm un-American and I think you're un-American we're not gonna ever do it.  What has happened now in America is our political ideology has taken over and people are getting elected to Congress who said, I will not compromise.  Well if you're not gonna compromise, why are you coming here?  This is a legislative body and by definition compromise is the cement that holds the house of democracy together.  With no compromise, there's no cement, with no cement, the walls fall.  And so, you have to be willing to adjust your views to build a stronger and better America.  But the ideology now is so important that it overcomes achievement of doing something.  People would rather do nothing other than to just say, you're un-American.  I mean, you had one congressman who called eighty members of the Democrats communists.  Now how idiotic is that?  I mean communism is dead, okay.  In fact, [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan took credit for it, he killed it.  We ain't seen a communist in the world hardly in the last twenty years and he's talking about there are eighty communists in the [U.S.] House of Representatives who are Democrats.  I mean that kind of language is not good for a democracy.  That kind of extremism, you know, generalization.  So I think we've allowed ideology to take over and we've got to go back to sense and not worry about ideology but what's good for America.  Yeah, debate it, and then reach a conclusion and move forward and implement what the consensus is.  And it may not be everything I want, but we've got to do that in order to solve these problems.  You can't solve the deficit problem, you can't solve the economic growth problem, you can't solve the security problems of America's future holding on to this ideology nonsense.
Story_ID: 313852
Speaker 1: We always ask this question and so I'll ask it of you, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh, that we would continue to understand that it is still a struggle.  We have not reached the promised land of equality yet in America.  We have come a mighty long way since I was a little boy running around barefoot in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, or a kid growing up in the public schools of North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but we still have a long way to go.  There is still not equity for all people in this country, and we gotta continue that struggle.  Secondly, we have got to make sure that young men and women from the minority community receive all the education that they're entitled to and they can tolerate because they're gonna be the future of this country.  And what I'm afraid of is we have classified too many low income blacks and Hispanics to permanent lives of no training, no education, by our disenfranchisement, lack of support for public education and demanding excellence, both on the kids and in the school system.  And we have got to recapture that because when you look at the demographics of this country, in about twenty years, 50 percent of all Americans native born, I'm not talking about illegal immigrants, native born will be people who today we call minorities, Hispanic, African Americans, Asian Americans.  And so this problem of our young people not being educated and trained in math and science and not even knowing where capitals are, okay, and not even knowing basic geography, is gonna kill us as a nation.  We cannot have a few people in America very wealthy, living very well, even if they're black folk, and the majority of Americans stuck in this ditch because eventually everybody will end up in that ditch because what made this country great is when all those immigrants got here, they got an education, they learned skillsets and they had an opportunity to grow.  That opportunity to grow and skillsets has only been given to African Americans the last fifty years.  For Irish and Italians it's been almost two hundred years or a 150 years that they got it, okay.  So what we have got to do all over this country is emphasize educational opportunity and opportunity up the economic ladder.  I think those are the things that we've got to really look at in the future.
Story_ID: 313853
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us something about your family?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I grew up in a wonderful family.  My father [William H. Gray, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: No, I'm talking about your--
Speaker 2: Oh, my family, yeah, oh.
Speaker 1: You've already explained your parents (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I have a wonderful family.  I'm married to a great woman who made the biggest mistake of her life marrying me but it was the greatest achievement for me.  Her name is Andrea [Dash Gray].  I met her as I told you, going to visit a sick member of my church that she was going to visit and then when she was maid of honor at a wedding that I performed in Montclair, New Jersey.  We've been married now forty years.  I have three boys, who are great guys, doing pretty well.  And, you know, I've got a wonderful, wonderful family life.  And it means the most important thing in the world to me, you know, she does and those boys.  I've been blessed.  My father passed away when he was sixty, and my mother [Hazel Yates Gray] is ninety-six, and she's still alive and sharp as a tack, a little frail, but mentally is sharp as a tack.  And my wife has been a housewife and raised those boys while I was running around trying to save the world (laughter).  And she did a magnificent job of doing that.  I was not there all the time and so I'm just very thankful for her and I'm thankful for my three sons.
Story_ID: 313854
Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets about anything?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  I mean, I don't have any regrets about anything at all.  I have been blessed like you would not believe.  I was, my father [William H. Gray, Jr.] was a Ph.D. 1941, University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in education.  In 1930 a master's [degree] in chemistry from Penn [University of Pennsylvania], you know.  How many white families had that?  Let alone black, okay.  My mother [Hazel Yates Gray], graduate of Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in [Baton Rouge] Louisiana, her father [Albert Yates] was a professor of math and Greek at Southern.  Her mother [Bertha Randall Yates] was a principal of the Scott Street [Elementary] School in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  You know, and she has a master's degree from Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  So, I mean, I have led a privileged life.  You know, I'm not, I don't have, I don't pretend that I hit a home run, okay.  I was born on third base.  I only had to run a little bit.  You know, I had advantages that were not even normal for white folk let alone for black folk, okay, to have parents and grandparents with that kind of background, you know.  And so I've always felt that as a result of that blessing, I was taught by my parents and I've always felt that you gotta give back, you owe, and you gotta pull somebody else with you.  And that may be the reason why God gave you advantages, is because you got the mission of brining others along.  It's not for you, it's for service.  And so basically, you know, I was taught service is the way you pay your rent on earth, you know, for space you occupy.  And so I've always lived my life towards service, ministry, public policy, education.
Story_ID: 313855
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  I probably would just like to be remembered by folk as, that was a brother who, you know, was blessed and he tried to give the blessings back and share through service.  That's probably it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I, okay.  No, that's basically, the only way I'd like to be remembered.  And being remembered by your family is the most important thing of all.  I mean what newspapers write about you in the obituary means nothing.  You know, I had a young man the other day, I was on a program and then this young man was a corporate officer at a major company, a Fortune 100, and, you know, I knew him, I had met him a couple times before and he got up to introduce me and he said [HistoryMaker] Mr. [William H.] Gray [III] has, doesn't probably even remember this, but he wrote the recommendation for me to go to graduate school and I didn't (laughter).  And I joked about it, it's a wonder they let you in.  And then I was in Harrisburg [Pennsylvania] the state capital of Pennsylvania last week, to be honored by the state legislature [Pennsylvania General Assembly] who voted a resolution honoring me, and one young lady came up to me, she looked like she was in her early thirties, African American, I mean, she, very young looking thirty, and she said, "You won't remember this, but you got me into the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado]."  And then I said, "Well what have you done?"  She said, "I'm a state representative."  I mean, that is just amazing, you know.  That's what life is about for me, is, you know, helping people, and helping my community go a little bit faster, a little bit further, a little bit higher, and helping the country.  So that's how I'd like to be remembered.  That he helped somebody.
