Story_ID: 652196
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Herman Arthur Gilliam, Jr. [HistoryMaker Art Gilliam, Jr.], H-E-R-M-A-N, A-R-T-H-U-R, G-I-L-L-I-A-M, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Three, six, forty-three [March 6, 1943], Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: And what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the president and the CEO of Gilliam Communications [Gilliam Communications, Inc., Memphis, Tennessee], which owns WLOK Radio.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April the 26th, I believe it is (laughter), I think I got that right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the 26th.
Speaker 2: Okay, 19--(laughter) twenty- 2014.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: April 26, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the studios of WLOK Radio in Memphis, Tennessee.
Story_ID: 652197
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I would say ribs.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like the fall.
Speaker 1: All right. A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere there's a beach.
Speaker 1: All right. And the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I really don't have a particular phrase or saying.
Story_ID: 652198
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. But we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is, her first name is Leola [Leola Caruthers Gilliam], L-E-O-L-A, Hortense, H-O-R-T-E-N-S-E, Caruthers, C-A-R-U-T-H-E-R-S, that's her maiden name, and then Gilliam was her married name.
Speaker 1: All right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth is Nashville, Tennessee. And her date of birth would have been September the 17th, and she would never indicate the year.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So, I would say it was approximately 1910, but I don't--so, somewhere in that range.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: She never liked people to know exactly (laughter) what the age was.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family. How, how far back can you trace that side, and what are the stories and occupations on that side?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother's side of the family, the person that I knew most was her mother, who was my grandmother, Susie Caruthers. And she was born in approximately 1895. And so, I don't really know a lot about that side of the family, other than that. That's roughly her date of birth. She was a hairdresser for a period of time, and she lived with my mother and father [Herman Gilliam, Sr.] and I for a number of years, as I was growing up. But as far as maintaining the history of the family, that side of the family didn't maintain as much of a history as far as who her parents were, and so on. I've seen pictures of them, but didn't really know my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or, my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about them?
Speaker 2: No, not really that I'm, I'm aware of. My father's side of the family kept a little bit more history, but my mother's side of the family didn't have as much of a history. I know that she did have a brother who passed away when she was very young, and he was young. And they were teenagers, so there were two of them. And, but that's about as much as I really know in terms of specifics of the history of her side of the family.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a tradition of that side of the family being from anywhere other than Nashville?
Speaker 2: No. They basically are from Nashville, as far as I know, and as far as my grandmother, you know, is concerned. Now, I did know my grandmother's sisters, or one of them, who's my aunt Janie [ph.]. And she had a total of four sisters--or three sisters, there were four of them all together. And she always, she would say--because her sisters preceded her--but she was the youngest--and she would often say, "Well, we left here in the same order we came here in." So, that the oldest passed first, and the next and next, and so on. So, I did know at least one of her sisters, which was the one closest to her in age, and that was my aunt Janie.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's your mother's sister?
Speaker 2: Yes--no, that was my mother--my grandmother's sister (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Grandmother. Okay.
Speaker 2: No, my mother had only--
Speaker 1: This is your great aunt, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my, Aunt Janie was my great aunt, yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And she lived in public housing actually in Nashville. We would go up and visit her, you know, from time to time, and she lived in Nashville public housing.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: I don't know my grandfather--I did not know my grandfather. He passed away when I was apparently very, very young. So I don't know much history, don't have a recollection of him.
Speaker 1: Do you know what he did for a living?
Speaker 2: I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, I mean your mother never talked about what her father did, or did she really know him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, and I think that she was--
Speaker 1: Did she really know him?
Speaker 2: I don't think she really knew him that much. I think that he passed away maybe even when she was pretty young. I'm just not really sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He may have had some Indian [Native American] heritage, in the sense of American Indian heritage. I know from time to time I heard her mention that. But other than that, I'm really not familiar.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, his name doesn't even come--
Speaker 2: No, I don't really know his name.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: No, let me take that back. I do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His name was Porterfield [Porterfield Caruthers].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, because my grandmother was Mrs. Porterfield Caruthers. So, his name was Porterfield, but I never really knew him other than just to know his name.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I haven't heard many--now, there's a famous, there's an anchor in Chicago [Illinois] named [HistoryMaker] Harry Porterfield.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who's a very well known, you know.
Speaker 2: I'm not familiar with him, yeah.
Speaker 1: Bl- black news anchor (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But this is--yeah, he's--but this was Porterfield as a first name. You know, so, he was Porterfield; Caruthers, last name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 652199
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Leola Caruthers Gilliam] say about growing up in Nash- did she, did, did she grow up in Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did. She went to--of course, at the time she grew up, Nashville and all the South really was segregated. So, she went to Pearl High School [Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School] in Nashville, which is a famous black high school there. And then she went on from there to Tennessee State University [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], which, as you probably know, is a well known black institution of higher learning [HBCU], and the biggest for a long time in the State of Tennessee as far as African Americans are concerned. And then she went on from there to Columbia University [New York, New York]. She had a master's degree in English at Columbia.
Speaker 1: Okay. She's a scholar.
Speaker 2: Well, yes, I guess you could say. I mean, she--of course, you know, when it's your mother, you don't really think of it that way (laughter), in the same way. But yeah, she was, had--for that time and that era, she had an exceptional education.
Speaker 1: Right. So did she teach?
Speaker 2: Yes, she became a schoolteacher. So, she taught in the Nashville public school system [Nashville Public Schools; Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools] for a long time. And then our family moved to Memphis [Tennessee] and she took up teaching, and continued her career here in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did she have any stories about, you know, college life or, you know, growing up in Nashville?
Speaker 2: Not so much college life that I can recall. She had a number of close friends, though, in Nashville. And I remember being young and meeting a lot of her friends. Because we moved to Memphis when I was about seven years old. And, but I do remember her friends. My godmother was from Nashville. Her name was Emma, and she was a close friend of my mother's. Her name was Emma Goodall [ph.]. And so, she had quite a number of close friends in Nashville, many of whom were schoolmates of hers when she was at Pearl High or at Tennessee State.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so many people we've interviewed have a relationship with Pearl High School.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Well, Pearl, there were certain schools, you know, around that time that were just well known. The one here in Memphis is Booker T. Washington High School. There's one up in St. Louis [Missouri] called Vashon [Vashon High School], and so, a number--Chattanooga [Tennessee], Howard High [Howard High School; The Howard School]. So, those were famous schools that were the black schools in those cities, the primary black schools in those cities at that time.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. So, so, do you think that your mother had a relatively easy upbringing, or were things difficult? Or, how, do you have any sense of that?
Speaker 2: I think in my mother's case, it was relatively easy. I mean, it's never easy when you're in the segregated South. I mean it's certain kinds of exclusions that you're going to have, regardless. But within the context of that fact, I would say that her upbringing was relatively easy, compared to probably the average poor black families.
Speaker 1: So, so, was she interested in doing anything other than teaching? Did she have any other talents (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, at that time there wasn't a lot you could do, I mean, beyond teaching and being in the postal service [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] or some things, as far as professional occupations are concerned. And so, her interest, though, was in English. Her, her master's degree was in English. And so, her interest was really in English, although she wasn't really a writer. But she had a lot of interest in English, and that's what she taught.
Speaker 1: Okay. I just wondered if she had any other talents or something, or interests, that she--
Speaker 2: She loved playing bridge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And (laughter) she had a good mathematical mind. So, so she loved really--had the bridge clubs. And I guess in those days, people--that was a pretty popular game. And I think my dad [Herman Gilliam, Sr.] introduced her to poker. I don't think she too (laughter)--very adept at poker. But she enjoyed playing bridge.
Story_ID: 652200
Speaker 1: Let's go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Well, his name is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The same as yours.
Speaker 2: --Herman Arthur Gilliam, Sr. [Herman Gilliam, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, same as mine.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My dad was born in Newberry, South Carolina. And his date of birth is January 4th, 1911.
Speaker 1: Okay. Newberry, now, where is Newberry? What is it close to?
Speaker 2: It's close to Columbia. Newberry is a small community that is somewhat west of Columbia. I've only been there maybe twice, and that was after he'd passed away, I just happened to go to Newberry. But it is near Columbia, South Carolina, a very small community--or it certainly was at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, once again, like, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, my father's father was a builder, I guess you could basically say. And his name was John, John Gilliam. They had a big family, and my father was the--my grandfather, John, whom I did not know, had remarried to my father's mother, Maggie [Maggie Gilliam]. And they had three kids. So, he had two brothers [Tyrus Gilliam and Nathaniel Gilliam], and there were the three of them. But each of them had had six kids before they got married. That is to say John and Maggie had six kids each before they got married. So, my father had, he has a big family, yeah. So, my father had two full brothers and lots and lots of half-brothers and half-sisters. But they were all pretty close, and especially the ones that were relatively closer to him in age. In other words the younger kids of both John and Maggie before they got married, were close, like brothers and sisters to my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But his brothers both passed away. And one of them passed away when he was pretty young.
Speaker 1: So, you say your grandfather was a builder. Was he like a contractor, or--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure if he was a contractor. I know that he was a builder. And I'm a little hazy on exactly, you know, what he did, as far as what his formal title was. But he was apparently good with his hands, and a builder.
Speaker 1: Yeah. I know before--well, you know, he didn't have to be a formal architect, I guess, to bring a building up from the ground.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, that's right. I mean this is back, a long way back, yeah. Because, like I said, my dad was born in 1911. So, I'm not sure when his dad was born.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But it was quite a bit before. Because my dad was a relatively later child, given that there were already six other kids before he came along.
Speaker 1: Any, and discussion about the projects he worked on, your grandfather (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not really about the projects that he worked on. So, I don't really know specifically things that he did.
Story_ID: 652201
Speaker 1: Did your father [Herman Gilliam, Sr.] get a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: No, he did not.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, did he go into the building trades, too?
Speaker 2: No, he, his father [John Gilliam] died apparently when he was relatively young. So, he was raised in his father's sister's house. And that was, (clears throat) excuse me, my, that would have been my great aunt Sarah [Sarah Gilliam]. And so, his teen years, I believe, were spent more with Sarah than with his dad. And then he eventually went to New York [New York]. He played a little baseball up there, in terms of the Negro Leagues.
Speaker 1: What teams did he play for?
Speaker 2: New York Giants (laughter), the Elite Giants [ph.], I guess that's what they were called (laughter). But he, but he played baseball there. And then he eventually stopped playing baseball and became a Pullman porter.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that's a good, good job for those days. At least a stable (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, oh, yeah, yeah, a very good job. As a matter of fact that's where he met, actually, Porterfield [Porterfield Caruthers]. And Porterfield is my, of course, grandfather on my mother's side. And that's how he met my mother [Leola Caruthers Gilliam], was through Porterfield, they were both Pullman porters.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, that's, that's interesting. So, your father goes on to become a businessman.
Speaker 2: Well, yes, that's right. He eventually got into the insurance business and started out as an agent, and moved up in the business and eventually became a vice president and the head of agencies. And so, he had an ever rising career in insurance.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when did he get started in insurance?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know the exact year. It was before the 1950s, but I don't know the exact year and how long he'd been in insurance before we moved to Memphis [Tennessee]. But we moved to Memphis in roughly 1949, 1950. And that was a promotion for him, to come to Memphis. So, he'd been in the business for a few years before that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he worked, he had been in the business as a manager of the Nashville [Tennessee] office of Universal Life Insurance Company [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay. So, is Universal Life Insurance a black, black company?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were--at that time, there were several major black insurance companies, and Universal was one of those. Atlanta Life [Atlanta Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia] was another, North Carolina Mutual [North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, Durham, North Carolina]. Up in Chicago [Illinois], I think it was Supreme Liberty--or Supreme Life [Supreme Life Insurance Company of America]. So, there were several out west, Golden State [Golden State Mutual Life Insurance Company]. So, there were several black owned and operated insurance companies, and he got in that business.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a relationship between Universal Life Insurance and Universal Negro Improvement Association?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No. The, the company is, was headquartered here in Memphis. It doesn't exist presently, but it was headquartered here in Memphis for quite a number of years.
Story_ID: 652202
Speaker 1: Your parents [Leola Caruthers Gilliam and Herman Gilliam, Sr.] met through your, your [maternal] grandfather, Porterfield--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --Caruthers [Porterfield Caruthers].
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And well, is there a story about how they met, and how they first fell in love?
Speaker 2: I don't know the story, but it's interesting--because you're from Dayton. They got married in Dayton, Ohio, I do know that (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that on a trip or something?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know. I just remember they told me they got married in Dayton. Why they went to Dayton, I'm not sure. But they were married, of course, a number of years before I was born, because I was relatively a later child. So, they were married I guess six or seven years before I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you were born in '43 [1943]?
Speaker 2: Forty-three [1943] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were born in the thir- they were married in the '30s [1930s], I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, right.
Speaker 1: Thirties [1930s], yeah. Okay, about 1935, '36 [1936]?
Speaker 2: Probably somewhere in that range, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's interesting; I wonder why they were married in Dayton?
Speaker 2: I have no idea if they just went there to get married, or if they were traveling, or what. I never got the whole story.
Story_ID: 652203
Speaker 1: When you consider your parents' personalities, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, what they look like, their height, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: You know, it's really a little hard to say. I think as, as my age changes, it changes as to which one I look more like, or what have you. My mother [Leola Caruthers Gilliam] spent a lot of time, though, with me in terms of teaching me English, because she's an English teacher. So, she was very good at that. So, I think that they had made a little deal that while I was really young, she would be responsible for my upkeep, meaning up 'til about four or five. And then my dad [Herman Gilliam, Sr.], you know, kind of took over after that, and he was a great role model. So, it was a little bit of both, in terms of how I was raised. But as to who I take after, it's really a little hard to say in terms of just physical looks. But I'm actually a good bit taller than either one of them. But my mother was relatively tall for a woman of her, you know, time. So, I'd say I have a, I'm a blend of, of both of them.
Speaker 1: Now, can you name your siblings for us, from the beginning through--you know, you.
Speaker 2: I have no siblings (laughter). I actually, I have a brother. I do have a brother. But the brother was born prior to my mother and father getting married. So, I don't have any full brothers or sisters, and I have one brother who lives in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: So, was he--I take it he wasn't raised with you?
Speaker 2: No, he was not. In fact, we never met until just a few years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is, he, he has a different mother?
Speaker 2: Yes, he does.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, in your household growing up, it was you, your mother and father, and then your [maternal] grandmother [Susie Caruthers], right?
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For a while.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And you started off in Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.
Story_ID: 652204
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, I do--I can remember things that happened, playing around in Nashville [Tennessee]. And partly because--the way I remember it is because we moved when I was six. So, as a result of that, I know things that happened before I was six years old. I can identify that because of that, you know, change of living circumstance. And as far as early childhood--just a happy childhood, playing a lot. My dad [Herman Gilliam, Sr.] was pretty fun loving, pretty humorous. And so, those are the kinds of things. We just did a lot of things together. We would take a trip really most every summer, which was something that--I guess I learned a lot about the country and about the--from my point of view, the world (laughter). But, we would take a road trip pretty much every summer. And one that I remember in particular though, was that, you know, here in Memphis [Tennessee] there was a Negro League baseball team called the Memphis Red Sox. And that was part of that same league [Negro American League] that the New York team [New York Cubans], Birmingham [Birmingham Black Barons], Kansas City [Kansas City Monarchs]--a number of teams were in that league. And I remember my dad told me we were going to go up to St. Louis [Missouri] to see a professional baseball game. So, I thought the Red Sox--that was about it--I thought that was the professional team. And he said, "No, we're going to see a fellow, a black fellow, who's playing baseball in the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball]." And so I thought, again, I told my dad, "I thought the Red Sox, I thought that was the Major Leagues." He said, "No, we're going to go to St. Louis." So, we went to St. Louis. It turned out he was taking me up there to see Jackie Robinson. And I'll never forget that, you know, now that I know the significance of Jackie Robinson. But he was taking me to St. Louis, because the Dodgers, then Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers], were coming to St. Louis to play the St. Louis Cardinals.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you would have been what, about seven or eight, or--?
Speaker 2: Probably a little over, a little over seven, but maybe in the range of eight or nine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Something like that. Yeah, because the Dodgers--it would have been the late '40s [1940s] or early '50s [1950s], probably the early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: What was it--well, you know--
Speaker 2: May I get, let me get a (cough)--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --quick break here (cough). My voice is--
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, like--what was that, what was that atmosphere like? Now, I've heard stories of when Jackie Robinson would come to town and the black community would turn out en masse, you know. (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, well, we went to Sportsman's Park, which is of course the St. Louis ballpark. I don't know that there were a lot of black people there in the park. I don't remember it that well. But I just remember that what was important for my dad, I think, was just the significance of Jackie Robinson. And he wanted me to have the experience of seeing Jackie Robinson play baseball. And I don't think I fully appreciated, at the time, what the significance was. I probably was a little bit too young to fully appreciate it. But as I got older, then I appreciated it a lot more.
Speaker 1: Okay. I'm thinking too, that St. Louis would have been the southernmost team in the National League (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I believe that's probably right. And I'm sure that Jackie Robinson and other ballplayers with the Dodgers--and I don't remember now, I don't believe there were other black players with the Dodgers, as I recall it. At the time I saw Jackie Robinson, I don't remember other black players. Later on, we went to New York [New York], and we saw Brooklyn play. And by that time they had Campanella [Roy Campanella] and Newcombe [Don Newcombe] and other black players--even Joe Black, later Sandy Amoros. They had a number of black players over time. But as I recall, when I went to St. Louis, I don't believe there was another black player on the Dodger ball club.
Speaker 1: Can you remember the black community showing up and--?
Speaker 2: Well, again, it's a big park. So, I didn't--the black community--I didn't specifically have a recollection or an awareness of showing up to see him play. But we came up from Memphis, to drive and just to go buy a ticket to go into the ballpark.
Speaker 1: I know, that's why I asked. Because often they made black people sit together in the park.
Speaker 2: You know, and I don't remember that. I, I, you know, you're absolutely right. I don't remember whether we were sitting in a segregated section or not. Being in St. Louis, I expect we were. But it just wasn't a part of my awareness at the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know how you feel, because I've experienced certain things--where we'd go to the movies when I was a kid. We'd be in the balcony, but I never thought about it until I started doing these interviews.
Speaker 2: Well, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You might have been--
Speaker 2: --as a matter of fact though--now that, I did think about, and I was aware of. Because Memphis was a segregated city when I was growing up. And so, yeah, we went in the balconies. You had the signs--I don't know if they did that in Dayton [Ohio], your home. But you had white and colored drinking fountains, you had a sign on the bus that said, "Colored passengers occupy rear seats first." In fact, I got put off a Memphis bus once because I wouldn't move back, you know, from the--once I sat down, they wanted to make me move back on the bus. So, this was a segregated area, and you definitely had those elements, and I was very aware of them. But when I went to St. Louis to see the Dodgers, I was not aware necessarily of sitting in a black section.
Story_ID: 652205
Speaker 1: Did your material circumstances improve greatly mo- after the move from Nashville [Tennessee] to Memphis [Tennessee]? Was it a bigger house, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a bigger house. We were able to, to--we, I say my dad [Herman Gilliam, Sr.] and my mom [Leola Caruthers Gilliam] were able to, you know, buy a house, build it, afford it. So, yeah, it was a material improvement, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, was there a name for your neighborhood in Memphis?
Speaker 2: No, not really. I mean it was, Parkway [South Parkway] was the street. And so, just the Parkway neighborhood. But it wasn't really a neighborhood in the sense that--you know, sometimes I see cities where you have--like Atlanta [Georgia] or other cities--that have large black neighborhoods that have a specific name to it. But this, it didn't really have a name. We just lived on Parkway.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And I was reading, it was like basically black middle class, the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes, middle, upper middle, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. We always ask this question. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [Susie Caruthers] was a good cook. My mother was, too. But I would say that one of the things I remember, this is very young, was getting a johnnycake. I don't know if you're familiar with the johnnycake, you know what I mean. You make biscuits, and you cut the biscuits out. Then all the other dough that's left over, you kind of knead that together and put it together, and it becomes kind of one irregular shape. And so, my grandmother would make biscuits, and I always wanted a johnnycake. So, that's something I remember growing up. And playing with kids. I had a dog named Fala; so it was a Scottish Terrier. And my father I think got the dog because President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] had a dog named Fala. So, he got a Scottish Terrier. So, he named him Fala, and I remember growing up with the dog. And that's an early, you know, recollection from real, real early childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, was there a main business strip that was close by?
Speaker 2: A main business trip, you mean in terms of?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, in the--
Speaker 2: We would take trips every summer as far as, but they weren't really business trips.
Speaker 1: No, no, business strip, like a main street (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, like a business area.
Speaker 1: Yeah, near, near where you grew up, or--
Speaker 2: No. Well, when I was, when we moved to Memphis there was a small section, I guess you could call it--what you might call today now, a strip mall. And so, you had places like that. But I do remember growing up and going around--there was a place that was an ice cream place. And they wanted us to go around to the side door to get ice cream--so, we, you know, my friends and I. And so, we, we refused to do it. We went to the front, and they wanted us to go the side. So we went somewhere else, across the street, to a drugstore where we didn't have to go to the side. And we came back and waved the ice cream at them in the place where they were trying to segregate us and make us go around the side. So, but that was in that strip as well. It had a couple of polar bears out front.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, where you lived, was it close to, I mean was it away from the main black community in Memphis? Or how--
Speaker 2: No, it was all part of it. You know, at that time, you had school districts. And so, I went to Hamilton High School [Memphis, Tennessee]. And, of course, the schools were, you know, from first on up to the twelfth grade, although they might be divided within the school itself. But I went to Hamilton High School. So, I was all within the Hamilton district. And so, we were, it was a segregated school, segregated area. So, I was in that area, which is a pretty big area, that was the South Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] area around Hamilton High School.
Speaker 1: Okay, South Mem- and now, where, where was your father's business [Universal Life Insurance Company] located?
Speaker 2: It was more near downtown, in the downtown, Midtown, Memphis area.
Story_ID: 652206
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was just trying to get a sense of the, I guess, the black business community in Memphis [Tennessee], where it was situated at. And I assume that it was all together. I mean, or was it, I don't know?
Speaker 2: Well, I can't say, per se, business community. Because you did have black businesses, but everything was segregated at that time. So, you had businesses--again, you're talking about the South. And to a certain extent, Memphis really is considered the Deep South, although it's referred to as Mid-South. But we're like ten miles from the Mississippi border. And we lived very close to Mississippi, Alabama. And so, you had businesses that were black owned businesses. So, particularly, say, funeral homes; you had the insurance company; you had a black bank. Of course the churches--the black churches, restaurants. Pretty much everywhere that we went was a black owned business, or black establishment.
Speaker 1: Yeah. I just, I was just trying to get a sense of--if there's an area that's likened to Auburn Avenue or--
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean like in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --where you have like a strip, a street where you have like a lot of black businesses clustered together and--
Speaker 2: Well, I think the closest thing to that--I mean I don't know if you would call it a business area, but it was an area that was an identifier for Memphis, would have been Beale Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so Beale would have been that. But Beale is not exactly what I'd call a business area, but it's more of an entertainment district. But, yeah, and in that sense it was a business area as well. So, Beale Street would be more of the identifier. And you had some, a few businesses that were near Beale Street. In fact, the insurance company was not that far from Beale Street, the insurance company that my father [Herman Gilliam, Sr.] worked for, and that I eventually work- began working for some years later.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the same thing is true on Auburn Avenue.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You have the, you've got a church. You might have like a bar, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Anyway, but all the black businesses would be kind of--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, you had that. Now, in the case of Beale Street, though, some of those businesses though were--the clientele was black, but they weren't necessarily black owned businesses. But you did have businesses like Universal Life Insurance Company [Memphis, Tennessee], like the bank [Tri-State Bank, Memphis, Tennessee], funeral homes, and so on that were in the same general area, but weren't necessarily on a given street.
Speaker 1: Right. But yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. But Vance Avenue was a, was a street that was known at that time. And of course, Beale Street. But I would say of all the streets, Beale was probably the best known of the Memphis streets.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And Nashville [Tennessee], when I was there, it would have been Jefferson avenue. There was a street in Nashville called Jefferson Street (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jefferson Street, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jefferson Street, I guess Jefferson Street. It was down near Tennessee State University [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]. So, and then when I go back, as I was older in school and I would visit Nashville. And so, Jefferson was kind of that street in Nashville. But I don't know if Memphis had a street quite the same way that Nashville had Jefferson, or Atlanta may have had Auburn Avenue or Auburn Street, I don't remember the exact name. But Beale would be the closest that I could remember.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, I know Memphis is segregated, was segregated. But was it segregated--I mean some cities are different from others in the sense that some--there's one side of town where mostly black people lived. And then there are others where they're scattered in pockets all around town.
Speaker 2: No, I would say that Memphis was true segregation (laughter). I would say that you didn't have it, you know, where it was more like a checkerboard. I mean, I would say it was more--you had black areas of town, but you had more than one. Memphis is a relatively large city, so you had more than one black area. But I associated the areas more with the schools that were in those areas. So, you had North Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee]; you had a school, Manassas High School. It's one of the older schools. There's one neighborhood here that's well known historically, and that's Orange Mound [Memphis, Tennessee], and you had a school there, Melrose High School. But the Orange Mound neighborhood is a neighborhood that's been historically recognized. But we lived in another South Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] area. Orange Mound is in South Memphis, but we were in another part of South Memphis.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so Parkway [South Parkway]?
Speaker 2: Well, Parkway, but all the--the environs I would say of Hamilton High School [Memphis, Tennessee] would be more how I would describe, you know, where, where we lived.
Story_ID: 652207
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: In Memphis [Tennessee], I started school when I was six years old. So, that would have been 1949. But I was in the fourth grade, so I was--which was--but they kind of--
Speaker 1: You started in Nashville [Tennessee], though, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I started (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or you started grade school--
Speaker 2: No, actually I started--I had gone to a--kind of a kindergarten school, or a school that was near our house in Nashville. And the school was called Miss Bell's Academy [ph.]. And Ms. Bell [ph.] had been a teacher in the public school system [Nashville Public Schools; Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools], and she would just take some kids and teach them. So, it was more of a, more of a kindergarten than it was really a school. It wasn't a formal public school. But by the time we moved to Memphis, at that time they would test you to see what grade you should be in, and they would place you in the grade in accordance with your test. So, I was six years old, but I tested at fourth grade. So, I started school here in Memphis at six, the time you'd normally go to school. So, I started at the normal age, but I was at the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Hamilton.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, Hamilton was--okay, so, it was Hamilton High School [Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: For--okay, so it took all grades?
Speaker 2: Yes, it went really first through twelve at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And did you like school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, I liked Hamilton. And, you know, I guess my parents [Leola Caruthers Gilliam and Herman Gilliam, Sr.], and my mother in particular, made sure I did what I was supposed to do (laughter). And she was a teacher, so, so she had--and by being a teacher, she understood discipline in school and so on. So, she helped me with homework, made sure I did what I was supposed to do.
Story_ID: 652208
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in elementary school [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: I really can't say. I, I had--and a lot of times there, of course, we would stay in the same class for a number of different subjects. But I got to like geography. But we would travel a lot. So, again, those summer trips kind of, you know, made me more aware of the country and the world. And we would, like I said, we, one summer we went all the way out to California. But we were in a, we drove out to California from Memphis [Tennessee]. That's quite a drive. So, so I just got a chance to see the country. And I guess geography became an interesting subject for me.
Speaker 1: So, would you all take a week off in the summer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I guess a week, or even longer. But I mean if you're going to drive to California, that's, you're staying over a couple of days. And so you're, the trip out there is two or three days long. And so, we'd have a week, week and a half or more. So, it was really like a true summer vacation, I guess you could say.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to go to Disneyland [Anaheim, California] out there?
Speaker 2: I don't know if they had Disneyland out there, I'm not sure (laughter). We went, there was something out there they called Knott's Berry Farm [Buena Park, California], I remember that. But I'm not sure Disneyland was even built at that time. I didn't go, I went later. I've been to Disneyland, but no, at that time I didn't. And in fact, even then, we would stay with families. Because in parts of the country, as I'm sure you know, you didn't have public accommodations. So, and again, going back to things like Jackie Robinson and the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers], they wouldn't even allow the Dodger players, the black players, to stay in public accommodations, what we think of now as public accommodations. But so, back then if you were traveling or whatever you were doing, black people would stay with families. And I do remember going over to Hot Springs, because they had the National Baptist Hotel [Woodmen of the Union Building] over there, which was--I guess the Baptists were having a convention in that area. So, I do remember going over there from time to time. But each summer we would take a trip and it was, you know, just a broadening experience.
Speaker 1: So, you and your mother [Leola Caruthers Gilliam] and your father [Herman Gilliam, Sr.], or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, uh-huh. And usually my [maternal] grandmother [Susie Caruthers] didn't normally go. She would keep house, I guess, and so on. But my mom, dad, and myself would take a trip.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you went to California, you went to Hot Springs, Arkansas. Where else?
Speaker 2: Oh, I mean Texas, Missouri. I mean, there were a lot. We went east--Washington, D.C., New York [New York]. My father had relatives in New York, so we would go up and visit his relatives there. So, we went, you know, quite a number of places.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, this is, this is--yeah, sort of like a real, you know, learning experience for you.
Speaker 2: It really was, it was. And then I got to meet a lot of relatives on my father's side. They had really kept a little bit more in touch. And I guess it was just a bigger family. My mother didn't have a real big family, but my father did. And so, they would keep in touch fairly well. So, I remember going up to New York and being there with my aunts and uncles that were, like I said, from my father's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Did they live in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I knew about Harlem, and I think they did live--if they didn't live in it, they lived near Harlem. I wasn't as aware, you know, I was actually relatively younger. Now, I've been to Harlem, but that's when I was up in school [at Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and going to New York on my own. But at that time I think I was relatively younger, and I remember going to Harlem. But I--my re- my memories are more vivid of my family, and not so much of entertainment, or Harlem itself.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your mother went to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], so she--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was familiar with New York as well.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 652209
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in elementary school?
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't say that I had a favorite teacher. But I think we had some great teachers. Because again, you know, during that time in the segregated South, there were very few occupations that was open to blacks as there are today. So, we had teachers who today would be working at major corporations. But they were very, very, well qualified, and so we had some outstanding teachers, both in English, math, all, you know, areas. So, I don't know that I would identify one particular teacher as being a favorite or an inspiration, but they all were. They were very caring, very good teachers. So, I was fortunate to have a lot of good teachers.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the ones that you remember there?
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember Mrs. Owens [ph.] and Miss Flowers [ph.]. Some of them were ladies, Miss Sanders [ph.], Mr. Neale [Henry A. Neale], Neeley [Rochester Neely]; the principal, Harry Cash. Before that, a fellow named Buckner [J.L. Buckner]. And so, you had quite a number of people--a fellow named Calyon [ph.] who was also one of the teachers. And so, just like I said--Lashley [ph.]. There were lots of them. And Mrs. Brinkley [Juanita Brinkley] was my English teacher. So, there were quite a few teachers, and I remember quite a number of them. And that, of course, in those formative years, those teachers have quite an influence, along with my parents [Leola Caruthers Gilliam and Herman Gilliam, Sr.], on your life. And so, I was really lucky to have some good teachers.
Speaker 1: Now, did many of them live in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they, I think they lived nearby. A couple of them lived, one of them was--one or two of them were neighbors, and so they lived nearby. But I can't say that they were all, you know, from the neighborhood, as such.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother teach at Hamilton [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Cough) Excuse me. No, my mother taught at Porter Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was in a different, it was also in South Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee]. It was more of a feeder school to Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 652210
Speaker 1: Now what about church? Now, was church in the neighborhood, or did you have to--
Speaker 2: No, we went to a church called Mississippi Boulevard Christian Church [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was actually founded by the fellow, a fellow named J.E. Walker [Joseph Edison Walker] who had founded the insurance company, Universal Life Insurance [Universal Life Insurance Company, Memphis, Tennessee]. And so, we went to that particular church. And the minister at the church, his name was Blair Hunt [Blair T. Hunt], he was the principal of Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee]. And it's really something. In those days, you know, they even had a great emphasis on being exceptional. And Booker T. Washington--a lot of the kids that went to Booker T. Washington at that time, considered themselves to be very exceptional. And they were, they excelled in sports and other endeavors that they did. So, there was, even within that segregated system and as difficult as that system was, there were people who were emphasizing excellence. And Blair Hunt was one of them, not only as a minister, but also as the principal of that high school.
Speaker 1: And the name of that church again is the Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Mississippi Boulevard Christian Church.
Speaker 1: Boulevard, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And it's still here now, but it had--I was there in the days when it was actually on Mississippi Boulevard. So, it was a smaller church. And now, it's one of the bigger churches in the city. And it's, I guess there are two or three different locations.
Speaker 1: Did the church play a major role in your upbringing?
Speaker 2: I would say that, that going to church was significant. But I would say the biggest role was played more by my parents [Leola Caruthers Gilliam and Herman Gilliam, Sr.] at home, and by my peers and classmates and teachers at school [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee]. Because, you know, we went to church once a week, and usually it was on Sunday. And I wasn't always anxious to go, but I was encouraged, you might say, to go (laughter). My mother made me go to church at that time. And later I was grateful for it, because I would--the minister, Reverend Hunt, was a very good preacher. And he told a lot of stories--made, created parables that you could easily relate to in life. So, I think that some of the stories he told were stories that you could take forward with you in life.
Story_ID: 652211
Speaker 1: Now, did you go, like, to Hamilton [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee] through the eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Actually, I went to Hamilton through the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: (Clears throat) So, I started the fourth grade and I went through, through the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And, well, so, it's 1969 that you've gone to Westminster prep school [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut], right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen--
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen fifty-nine [1959], I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I left--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, all right, so you--
Speaker 2: So, I left and went there in 1956.
Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956], okay.
Speaker 2: So, that was my last year at Hamilton, was 1956.
Speaker 1: Now, how did this come about that you end up going to a prep school? I mean how was that?
Speaker 2: My father just believed that that would be in my best interest to leave the South. I mean, ironically, the year before I left was the year that Emmett Till was murdered in Mississippi. And so, I think that my parents [Leola Caruthers Gilliam and Herman Gilliam, Sr.] believed that, you know, living in the, staying in the South was just not going to be something that was going to be as conducive to my development, and he had the vision of going away to school and leaving the Deep South.
Speaker 1: Okay. What are your memories of the Emmett Till situation?
Speaker 2: Well, I just recently wrote a book ['One America: Moving Beyond the Issue of Race,' Art Gilliam]. And in doing, in writing the book, I realized that the effect--because you know, you're writing, and you go back and you'll think about the effect that the particular things may have had on you. And no question, it had a huge effect. I remembered, as I kind of brought those memories back up, seeing the picture of Emmett Till in Jet magazine--and that it was a horribly disfigured picture--and the juxtaposition of how he looked before he was brutally beaten and murdered in Mississippi. And that had an impact, because I was only, I guess twelve or thirteen years old. And so, it had a huge impact. And Emmett Till was maybe fourteen. I did not know him personally, but I was very aware--in particular when I reflected back on it--and realized that it was really a climate of fear that was created by whites in Mississippi, and around other places as well. So, that was basically a lynching. And so, I remember it quite well. But I also remember a lot of the other things, because I grew up in a segregated era. I guess, again, in the book, I wrote a really--I've had the unique experience of having grown up in segregation, and then having the opportunity to see a black man [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] elected as president of the United States. So, my life has spanned a period where it has been really a sea change in this country. But what I, but I have vivid recollections of the segregated South, and the exclusions you faced there. And to your question, I think that that was one of the reasons that they--well, my dad in particular--felt that it would be best for me to leave the South.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's also a story, I think I went past it; I should not have. You witnessed an episode of police brutality as a youth, right?
Speaker 2: Well, in the period when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was here, I did. I didn't necessarily witness any incident of police brutality as a young kid, but I was put off of a Memphis [Tennessee] bus, myself. I mean as far as--you know, you get on the bus and you sit down. And I took a seat on a Memphis bus. And ultimately, I noticed that people were standing on the bus, but there were plenty of seats on the bus. And these were all white people that were standing in front of me. And they wouldn't, they wouldn't sit behind me, because all of the seats that were on the bus were behind me. So, it was sort of a, I guess you could say, the black section of the bus. And so, ultimately they stopped the bus, got a policeman, and wanted to put me off the bus. So, I just walked up to the front of the bus and got off there, and walked to where I was trying to go. But you know, that, I wouldn't say that was an instance of police brutality, of course. But it was an instance that's very vivid in my recollection. Because I was young and, you know, it made me nervous to the fact that, you know, somebody wanted to put me off of a bus.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: Probably fourteen, maybe thirteen, a young teenager.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is in the years preceding you going to prep school, basically? (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I believe actually I may have been back for the summer. I can't remember precisely, but it was in around that same or similar timeframe, because I went away to prep school at thirteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, when I left--I graduated at sixteen, so I left at the end of the tenth grade. So, I really entered the tenth grade at twelve years old. But at the end of the tenth grade, I was thirteen.
Story_ID: 652212
Speaker 1: --Skipped some, some, some (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I didn't actually skip grades. When I first began school--you know, as I was saying earlier--that here in Memphis [Tennessee] at that time they would test you to find out what grade you should be in, and they'd put you in that grade. So, when I came, when I moved to Memphis I was six years old, and I tested out in the fourth grade. So, I just stayed in my right grade from that point on.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so, you started school in Memphis in the fourth grade (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. I started in the fourth grade at six years old [at Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee]. So, that was, that's where I missed, that's where I jumped the grades.
Speaker 1: Okay. I'm sorry, I missed that when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, you know, fourth grade?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's a big jump from--you know, so when you were in school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, when I moved from Nashville [Tennessee], I started here in my--you know, all my schoolmates of course were older, bigger, you know, than I was.
Speaker 1: They were like nine years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're like six.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Nine or ten years old, and I'm six years old, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay. It says something about specialized attention. And you were a good subject for your parents [Leola Caruthers Gilliam and Herman Gilliam, Sr.], I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess so (laughter).
Speaker 1: You were--
Speaker 2: I'm grateful to my classmates that they would look out for me, because I was a little guy. And in those days, you know, you'd have a kid in the fourth grade or fifth grade or sixth grade. And the kids from the other--they'd fight each other on the playground at lunchtime. So, everybody who started out in the other grades, they'd say, "I'm going to get the little guy." Well, that was me, so (laughter). So, I remember that, you know, and I was--. So, there were some disadvantages of being ahead of yourself. I was very athletic, but that didn't come out until later, because you can't compete with kids that, you know, that are that much older than you are when you're real young.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, that's a big difference. That's the biggest, one of the biggest differences I've heard, you know, in these stories.
Speaker 2: It is a big difference. And I mean, it evens itself out over time as you get older. I mean, when I got into my freshman year of college [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], I was, you know, the difference wasn't as much as it was when I was like in the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in those days, like, four years makes a big difference.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, so, when you, you went through the, to the tenth grade. And by that time, you're like--
Speaker 2: Twelve years old. I started the tenth grade at twelve, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And by the time the tenth grade ended I was thirteen. And that's when I went away to a school called Westminster School in Simsbury, Connecticut, just outside of Hartford, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I stayed there three years. So, I made up a year, you might say. I caught up one ye- by one year, because I stayed at Westminster for three years.
Story_ID: 652213
Speaker 1: How did you feel about, you know, leaving, you know, home and going to prep school?
Speaker 2: You know, I didn't really, I don't know that I really thought about it as such, except that it was really a culture shock in the sense that, you know, I was going from an all-black school in Memphis [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee] to essentially an all-white school in Connecticut. And it was a small school; it was like forty students in our classes, all males, small school. And I was the only black student in my class, and there were two or three other black students in the school. So, I would say the biggest thing was the culture shock.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And well, what other elements of that culture shock?
Speaker 2: Well, just really being, feeling a little bit out of place in a way, or not comfortable. Because, again, you're growing up in the South, you're growing up in the segregated South. Whether you recognized it or not at the time, segregation creates what I would call a badge of inferiority, in that you're constantly bombarded with things that are telling you that you're not a first class citizen, you're a second class citizen. So, then going into an environment where you're interacting with the very people who are in the South telling you that you're a second class citizen, that's quite a change. It was fortunate, in that it was a nurturing environment at Westminster [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut]. So, it made it, I guess, the transition a little easier than it otherwise might have been.
Speaker 1: Now, were you the only African American student at Westminster, or were there--
Speaker 2: In my class, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. But there were other students there in other classes, right?
Speaker 2: About one in each class, actually, as it turns out. So, there was, when I went there, there were a couple of students that were there that were ahead of me. And then when I, as I stayed there, one or two came who were behind me, as far as black students are concerned.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And this is--
Speaker 2: (Cough) Excuse me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) this is 1956?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-six [1956] is when I first went there, yeah; and I graduated in '59 [1959].
Story_ID: 652214
Speaker 1: Did people want to know about Elvis Presley in (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, actually some of them did, you know. I didn't know that much about Elvis Presley. I mean Elvis Presley was to me, more--to me Elvis Presley wasn't a black phenomenon. I mean, you know, as you go back now and you look at it, obviously he did borrow a great deal from black music, and he was very much involved in that. But at the time, you know, I was more--I mean there was Jackie Wilson, there were other--The Drift- [The Drifters] I mean, there were other artists, that for me--James Brown, of course, later. But for me--that were more significant than Elvis Presley. But obviously for a lot of the people--they had students there [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut]--and the white community--I mean, Elvis was the rage. So--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, people would ask me, but I didn't know much about Elvis Presley.
Speaker 1: Now, were you much attuned to music, growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was definitely (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was there a lot of music in the home when you--?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I mean, just radio. You know, when you hear--especially in the teen years--you know that's kind of the source of your information that you get, and music and information. So, yeah, I grew up in what you'd call an era where radio was very vibrant.
Speaker 1: Okay. Of course, there was WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yes, WDIA, of course, was the first black oriented radio station in the country. And I grew up--early, in my early years, I would listen to WDIA. And then later I listened to WLOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee], which is this station, of course. And, but that's when I was more of a teenager, and it was, it had more of a younger appeal than WDIA did at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. So, that's how the--okay, because I don't know the character--not being from Memphis [Tennessee], I'm not sure about the character of the stations, in terms of the, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --how people perceived them.
Speaker 2: Well yeah, WDIA was a classic traditional black station, and the first in America as far as being a black oriented radio station. So, so, it was--a lot of people, when I was growing up, listened to WDIA. But then this upstart, WLOK, came along and it kind of appealed to a younger group of people. And I was a teenager, so that became my favorite station, WLOK.
Story_ID: 652215
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about prep school [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut]. Like, who--did, did you have any si- significant teachers or mentors at, in prep school (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, no one person that I would say. But I think that--again the--throughout my life, both in school at Hamilton [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee] before I went to prep school, and then prep school, there were, you know, excellent teachers. So, I don't know that I would single out any one particular person. But there were several that were, you know, very good, and they were very caring people. And that was important, because I was making a transition that was an extremely significant transition, you know, in my life, in terms of the transition from a segregated South to a community like Simsbury, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, all right, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I developed an interest in writing. So, I--probably English. But I liked, I really didn't have any one subject that I would just say stood out over all the others.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now, Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] was the president in those days; the Civil Rights Movement is kind of heating up. Did they broadcast some of the scenes of the Civil Rights Movement, the Montgomery Bus Boycott, and all that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I became much more aware when I went to college [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. Again, prep school was a more isolated environment. And, but when I went to college, that was, I started college in '59 [1959]. And so, that's when I became much more aware of and active, in terms of the Civil Rights Movement, and being aware of it. But I was out of the South, so most of that was taking place in the South. So, during that time I was in Connecticut, which was, you know, a very different environment than what I was aware of in the South. But I knew that something was going to be happening in the South, because by that time I'd gotten away from the South, I understood enough about life to realize that the South was a problem waiting to happen. And that's when it happened, I mean, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Rosa Parks. I don't remember the exact year, but that gave rise, you know, not going, going to the back of the bus. And that gave rise to Dr. King. And this is the Kennedy years, and Malcolm X. So, I mean there were just a lot of different things going on in the country in the '60s [1960s]. So, it was an interesting time to be a student.
Story_ID: 652216
Speaker 1: Do you remember if your incident on the bus occurred before the Mon- Montgomery Bus Boycott or after you found out--you knew about it?
Speaker 2: Oh no, before.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Definitely before.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I mean I didn't know anything about Rosa Parks. The Montgomery Bus Boycott was so profound that you would know about that. I mean, I did not know anything about Montgomery [Alabama] or Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. I mean, I just knew I wasn't going to move back on the bus. But it didn't provoke an incident as such, because I did get off the bus. And so I don't know all the details of what happened, in precise terms, with Rosa Parks, other than obviously she wouldn't move. And I don't know if they put her off, I can't remember the details of it. But--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they arrested her.
Speaker 2: They, okay, she was arrested then. Well, and that gave rise to it. I didn't get arrested. I just walked to the front of the bus and got off the front, instead of being, going out the back or being put back on the bus. What they wanted to do was move me back to a seat further back on the bus. And I knew I wasn't going to do that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there were lots--well, I've heard lots of stories of people who didn't move--you know, that didn't make the news, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And some were arrested, some were not. So, it depended on the situation at the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I was not arrested and, you know, I didn't, I never even thought about it one way or the other. All I knew is that I guess I was just too proud to move once I sat down on the bus--because I'm black, move to the back of the bus? So, I had no intention of moving. But I was young, so I was pretty nervous about it. And, but in any case, it didn't provoke anything more than I just got off the bus at the front.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know we heard the story from a man from Houston [Texas], who, when he was a kid, was actually called up to the driver. And he walked up to the driver and the driver kicked him off the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --with his foot, kicked him right--
Speaker 2: Well, they would do that, they would try to do that. In my case they, the driver stopped, the bus stopped. I didn't know, I was just trying to get to my destination. I saw white people standing up on the bus. They all looked at me, you know, because I'm sitting here in this seat. And so, I just started looking out the window, you know. I just hoped the bus would get to my destination, because I wasn't going to move. And then it stopped, and they'd gotten a policeman to come on the bus to try to get me to move back. So, I just got up and I just walked through all the white people to the front of the bus, and got off down there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so that was the--but they didn't, it wasn't any more of an incident than that. I mean, they didn't arrest me or anything like that.
Speaker 1: This is the customs of the South, right.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was unbelievable, really, when you think about it now in the context of today. But like I said, in writing a book about it ['One America: Moving Beyond the Issue of Race,' Art Gilliam], I had to recall these things, and I recalled one of them very vividly. And in juxtaposition to what we have today, particularly with a black president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]--you know, I mean, in coming from like the back of a bus to see a black man elected president of the United States within a lifetime, is something that I would never have imagined would happen when I was, you know, a youngster.
Story_ID: 652217
Speaker 1: Did you have any academic difficulty at Westminster [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: No, I did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and in fact, I went on to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. I was, I had been a top student in my class at Hamilton [Hamilton High School, Memphis, Tennessee]. And I was among the top students in my class at Westminster, and got accepted at Yale, so, as a result of that. So, I didn't really have academic difficulty.
Speaker 1: Okay. And when you were preparing to go to Yale, I mean, were you, what were your aspirations? What did you think you would do when you grew up and finished college?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time, because my father [Herman Gilliam, Sr.] was in the insurance business [at Universal Life Insurance Company, Memphis, Tennessee], I was interested in business and insurance. And when I--ultimately when I came back to Memphis [Tennessee], I worked in the insurance industry for a few years. So, my thought at that time was that I was going to be involved in the insurance business. And again, as it was, and Yale was just a great place to go. So, that was my only real thought about it. I didn't really think about it a great deal beyond just going to Yale, and eventually I'll probably go back to Memphis and get involved in the insurance business.
Speaker 1: Okay. You know, okay, so your father's in insurance--because there aren't too many youth that think of, dream of the insurance business.
Speaker 2: No, no, because my father was in the insurance business, that's why. And he had convinced me that it would be great as a career move to become an actuary, which is insurance mathematics. And I did in fact go on to graduate school [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and get a master's in actuarial math. So, so I did pursue that career path for a while.
Story_ID: 652218
Speaker 1: So, 1959, you enrolled in Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what was--so, you had already been prepared for it in some ways, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, in some ways, yes.
Speaker 1: Were, were some of your Westminster [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut]--
Speaker 2: About two or three (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) classmates--
Speaker 2: --yeah, that--maybe at least two, probably three, of the Westminster classmates also went to Yale.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was Yale like? How did you like Yale?
Speaker 2: I liked Yale quite a bit. It was after I had matured--at least through what I would call those buffer years, from the Deep South to the North--and being black and going to a prep school--I think you really have--it was an adjustment, I mean an emotional adjustment. So that by the time I got to Yale as a freshman, I had adjusted more, you know, to the circumstance. And I think Yale was great for me. I realized that, you know, I think among the things that I began to have more of, was positive self esteem, better self esteem. Because I think it's difficult to really live in the South and be black in the South, and particularly in the time of segregation, and not have an assault on your self esteem. And so, I think that over time, one of the things that began to change was that I had a better image of myself--not as good as maybe I ultimately would hope I've developed. But that's one of the transitional things that happened. And so, I was--once my sophomore, I believe, year at Yale, I came back home. And I had a girlfriend. And I went, and we drove and we were sitting in a park just looking at the river. And it was Overton Park [Memphis, Tennessee], I believe it was. Not Overton, maybe it was, I don't remember which park. But it was a park that was near the river, the Mississippi River. And we were just sitting there, and a policeman drove up and wanted to know what we were doing in the park. And I said, "We're just sitting here looking at the river." And he said, "Well, you can't sit here. You're going to have to go to a niggra," they called it niggra park. You know, "You're going to have to go a niggra park, you can't sit here." And so, they put us out of the park just for sitting there in the park. I mean, this was like in the afternoon. So, at that point--and I was a student at Yale at that time. And so, one of the things that I recognized--and again reflecting on--back on this as I was doing the writing that I did [for 'One America: Moving Beyond the Issue of Race,' Art Gilliam]--is that the South hadn't changed, it still hadn't changed. But I had changed, you know. And at that point I knew then, you know, this is not going to work here. This is not going to stay the way it is. And of course, you were having the Civil Rights Movement beginning to boom more at that time. But, you could, you knew then that there was something incongruous within the country, when you had the South having a whole different set of values than the rest of the country.
Story_ID: 652219
Speaker 1: At Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], now, so there were like a thousand students at Yale, and about four blacks?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, a thousand students in my class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And about four blacks, right.
Speaker 1: Did, did the blacks stay together in the--
Speaker 2: Well, we--not really. I wouldn't just say we stayed together, but we all knew each other well, and we would interrelate. But see, at Yale, once you're--after your freshman year, you're assigned to different residential colleges, so we were not assigned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so, were you integrated into the rest of the--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --population. Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, very--definitely.
Speaker 1: There were a lot of colleges in those days that either didn't let blacks live on the campus, or clustered them all together in the same campus.
Speaker 2: Well, no, I don't think there were enough of us to make a cluster (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, one made of four (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, it would have been a cluster, it would have been a cluster of four. No, no, we were--no, my roommates, I was assigned I guess randomly to roommates. In my freshman year, I had two roommates. And one was from Texas, the other was from Lithuania--or no, Latvia, not Lithuania, Latvia. I'd never heard of Latvia, but I mean. So, one thing about Yale is that you get such a diverse experience. But my roommate, one was from Dallas, Texas. And like I said, Ivars [ph.] was his name, was from Latvia.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, there wasn't those kind of issues at Yale?
Speaker 2: No, no, not, no, it really was not; it really was not those kinds of issues at Yale.
Speaker 1: All right, okay. Now, who's, I'm trying to think--who were some of the other black students? Was Calvin Hill there, or had he--
Speaker 2: No, that was later. Calvin Hill came later.
Speaker 1: After you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was after me.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: And a few years after me, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I was trying to think of somebody that I had heard of that--
Speaker 2: Right. No, before me there was an athlete there named Levi Jackson, and he was in the '40s [1940s], and a well known athlete. But I did not know him personally, nor did I know Calvin Hill. He was, I think well after--I don't know what his graduation year was, but he was well after me.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, the four black students in your class, they really didn't make an attempt to associate with each other?
Speaker 2: Well, we knew each other, you know, well. And so, we would get together and sometimes we would--at least one in particular--this fellow from New York [New York], his name was Rod Weekes. And Rod and I would get together sometime. We'd go up in the black section of New Haven [Connecticut] and, you know, go to some of the clubs and that sort of thing. So, we would, we did some things like that. But we didn't, there was no black student union or black cultural, you know, group there. So, there was no real place where you would, you know, congregate.
Speaker 1: Now, I would imagine there weren't any black professors at Yale then. Is that true or?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any, and I don't believe there were any that I can recall. I can't say there weren't. But there were not any that, that I took any courses from.
Story_ID: 652220
Speaker 1: Who were some of your pr- professors that stand out? Were there any special teachers?
Speaker 2: You know, again, throughout my career I've been fortunate to have good teachers, and that was true at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. So that in--it was literature, science, history, art, and then there were--those are, there are people that I recall from that period--psychology. I mean, so, but no one particular person that I would just say that person influenced me more than anybody else.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. What was your, now, you majored in business, or--
Speaker 2: Actually I majored in economics. They didn't have a business major. I majored in economics and minored in psychology.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, were you involved in--you were involved in athletics. I was--
Speaker 2: I was not involved in sports. I mean, no more so than the intramural level.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because--
Speaker 1: I couldn't tell. I was looking in the yearbook and I saw the basketball, and I wasn't sure if--
Speaker 2: Yeah. No, I was involved--no, I was involved in athletics at Westminster [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut], to a degree. But at Yale--because Yale is broken up into residential colleges. So, you'll have--at that time there were ten, they call them colleges. And the intramural sports were played among the different colleges. So, I got involved in sports that way, but not in Yale varsity sports.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. So, who came to campus to speak when you were there? I know I--
Speaker 2: My biggest recollection of someone coming onto the campus was John Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. And that was during the campaign, and he came down to the New Haven Green [New Haven, Connecticut]. And so, he would be the person that was there that I most remember. And the, I had more recollection of speakers actually when I went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]. At least that was the beginning of the--the civil rights era was beginning to pick up more, (cough) excuse me. And I remember Malcolm X coming to the University of Michigan to speak. But no, I don't remember him being at Yale. At that time, really, I don't know that the culture had changed as much, because you got to a point where you had more of a drug culture. But I kind of missed a little of that at Yale. But by the time I went to Michigan the next year that was more prevalent. So, you, so, there was a culture change taking place in that way as well. But the main culture change taking place in the country was, in my mind, the racial change.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Were you excited about John Kennedy as a candidate?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely. You know, I would come home and I would work in the summers and go into homes. Because I was, I would be in, I was an insurance agent [at Universal Life Insurance Company, Memphis, Tennessee], so I went to the homes. And a lot of homes in black neighborhoods, you'd see Jesus, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and John F. Kennedy on the wall. So, a lot of people admired Kennedy, a lot of black people. Because, and I said that he was, Kennedy was really the only white person at that point that I had ever seen really forcibly speak out for the rights of black people. So, I was very, very positively impressed by John Kennedy.
Speaker 1: Okay. He was elected--
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: Yeah, and this is--yeah, so you're at Yale when the election takes place?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I mean, do you know anybody--or did you work for the campaign at all?
Speaker 2: No, I did not. There were some who were working for the campaign who were schoolmates. But I didn't work specifically for the campaign.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I noticed, I'm looking through your yearbook. I saw a picture of John Kerry. I don't know if he was in the same class with you, but did you know him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, John Kerry, no, I did not know John Kerry at Yale. I know that John Kerry went to Yale, but I believe he would have come a bit later, because Kerry I associate with the Vietnam War. And that effort began, I guess it materialized more and came more into the forefront later than the period when I graduated.
Speaker 1: In your yearbook, he's in the Liberal Club [Yale Liberal Club]. He's standing there--
Speaker 2: Okay, John?
Speaker 1: Yeah, John Kerry, that's him.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't, you know--
Speaker 1: He may have been a senior when you were going there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't, I don't remember him at all from Yale, and he may very well not have been. I wasn't even aware that he was there during the same period that I was there, to tell you the truth.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's standing there. His face is very distinguishable, the hair, you know, that's him.
Speaker 2: Right, right. Uh-huh, uh-huh, no, I hadn't really--but he was not a classmate.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And there's another photo of a visit by Barry Goldwater.
Speaker 2: Okay, I don't remember that visit.
Speaker 1: And a visit by James Meredith.
Speaker 2: I don't remember James Meredith visiting Yale. But I, of course, knew a lot about James Meredith in the integration of the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay, and a lot of pi- pictures of folk singers--Joan Baez is there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now Joan Baez, I remember, yeah, as being there.
Story_ID: 652221
Speaker 1: So you were--you're treated fairly well all, all through (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I really, I have no real complaint as far as the university itself is concerned. And so, yeah, I can't, I don't have a complaint as far--about Yale University, no.
Speaker 1: And New Haven [Connecticut] had a black community that you would visit?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, most definitely, yeah. Dixwell Avenue, go down--because you kind of like felt like you were going home (laughter). You know, you go down and there was just us. I mean, in Connecticut I couldn't go home that often, as far as coming to Memphis [Tennessee]. So, I remember going down to Dixwell Avenue. And sometimes in these churches, you know, like the Church of God in Christ, they'd have all the music and tambourines going. And that was something you could hear in Memphis. It kind of reminded you of, you know, kind of going back home. You'd see the clubs and, of course, barbershops and so on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I had to go, I'd always go down there to get my hair cut. Because, not because it was segregated, but because they could, they knew how to cut my hair.
Story_ID: 652222
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when it came time to graduation--I mean to, to, to graduate, as stated before, you--your, your aspirations were to go to graduate school and then to go join your father's insurance [Universal Life Insurance Company, Memphis, Tennessee] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's right. And of course then, at that time, also I took a year out of school after I went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] in '63 [1963], '64 [1964], then I took a year out of school. Well, at that point I had to figure out what I was going to do about the draft, because you had the draft in that period. And then I volunteered to go into the reserves. And so, I didn't really, I wasn't interested in going into the [U.S.] military. I certainly didn't believe in Vietnam [Vietnam War] and going through the war, because obviously a lot of people differed. So, there was a lot of differences of opinion. Mine was that, you know, I didn't want to really be a part of a war in Vietnam when there was so much going on in the South. You know, to me the war should have--if there was going to be a war, it ought to be over what's going on in the South in the United States, not what's going on, you know, across the Pacific Ocean in Vietnam. So, I, but at the same time, I didn't want to be a draft dodger. So, I ended up joining the Air Force reserves [U.S. Air Force Reserve]. And at that time, the reserves didn't really get called up, so it was different than today.
Speaker 1: This is after the University of Michigan, I mean--?
Speaker 2: This was--one year I--one year at the University of Michigan, then I was out of school. Then I went back to the University of Michigan to finish my master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I had a two year period at the University of Michigan, '63 [1963], '64 [1964], right after I graduated from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. And then '66 [1966], '67 [1967], I went back and finished.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was anything special about graduating from Yale? Did you get any special honors or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, I did not. I was a good student, but I realized my--one thing about going to Yale, you get in that freshman class--and especially, one of my roommates was one of the smartest people I'd ever met. So, I was scared I was going to flunk out. And I was thinking about, I don't want to flunk out of Yale. So, I studied very, very hard that first year, the first semester I was there. And I made the dean's list, I did real well, and was in special studies types of programs. But once I think I realized I was going to be okay, I kind of (laughter), I laid back a little bit, which I think a lot of colleges, you know, are doing things that you, social things or cultural things that you really learn a lot more than just studying. But that first semester I was studying out of fear. And so after that, I realized okay, I'm going to be able to stay here. And so, I didn't receive academic honors except in that very first semester.
Story_ID: 652223
Speaker 1: So, University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] in '63 [1963]. Now, you start in the fall of '63 [1963]. Now, this is the, the fall that John Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] killed, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 2: That's right. I was in a lecture at the University of Michigan, a lecture on business law. You know, it's one of the things you remember, certain events. And I remember where I was when Kennedy was killed, and I was in that lecture. And this guy just, he told the class Kennedy had been killed in Dallas [Texas], and he just kept on lecturing. And I got up and I walked out. And I was crying, really, and I got up walked out.
Speaker 1: I take it he wasn't really a Kennedy--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know, I don't know if it was--if he, I didn't really try to read his politics. I just knew that I didn't want to be there, and it impacted me, so--because of what Kennedy meant to black people, and I--and my sense of it, to the country as well, to young people. So, it was an era of great change.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it brings us--backtrack a little bit--that spring after you graduated from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I mean the Civil Rights Movement, I think more than any other year, '63 [1963], things really cranked up, to where there're activities all over the country.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: North and south.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, the March on Washington was sort of a culmination of--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --a lot of activity, you know. James Meredith gets shot in the spring of, you know. There's, you know--
Speaker 2: Right. And I was actually, again, I was in Ann Arbor [Michigan]. Throughout a good part of the Civil Rights Movement, I was outside of the South and coming back, you know, just during the summers. But I was in the South--of course, again, I was at Michigan when John Kennedy was killed. I was in Memphis [Tennessee] when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed. And that, and it was--there was so much brutality. This was before he was killed. It was actually a tremendous amount of brutality because of the march itself that preceded his death [Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike]. And I witnessed a lot of that, you know, brutality from the police, in particular.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then, of course, Dr. King was killed.
Speaker 1: I remember a Time magazine article about police just jumping out and beating black people on porches.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yeah. There were many, I mean there were people--I witnessed directly from a place--I was actually at the insurance company [Universal Life Insurance Company, Memphis, Tennessee], and you could see across the street. There was a kind of a club there, restaurant, club, and they were pulling people out and just beating them up. I mean it was, it was awful. I mean you could, you know, you--of course as black people in the South, we already knew, you know, what the police were about. So, you know, I don't know if I could say I was shocked. But, to see it on that massive level--you know, you get lots of people getting beat all at the same time and, you know, Billy clubbed and that kind of thing. So, so, yeah, it was definitely a terrible day and period in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Were your parents [Leola Caruthers Gilliam and Herman Gilliam, Sr.] involved in any of the civil rights organizations at all in Memphis?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: I know there was a strong group of lawyers here, A.W. Willis [A.W. Willis, Jr.] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I knew them.
Speaker 1: Russell Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon].
Speaker 2: And I know A.W. And Russell's still living, and I know him. Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks], you know, was one. There were a number of lawyers at that time. The Memphis chapter of the NAACP was one of the most active. Memphis has always been an active city as far as civil rights are concerned, and the Memphis NAACP [NAACP Memphis Branch, Memphis, Tennessee] was one of the most active branches in the country. Also, the Memphis chapter of Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] was one of the most active branches in the country. And PUSH at that time was really considered more militant in many ways, compared to the NAACP. And--
Speaker 1: Now, this is in the '70s [1970s], you know. We don't want to get too far ahead. (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Well, that, that--you're right. That is getting up into the '70s [1970s], you're right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '69 [1969], '70 [1970].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 652224
Speaker 1: We had you at the U- University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], '63 [1963]. So, you were there when, when Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] killed. You're there, you go, you go into, to the reserves [U.S. Air Force Reserve] the next year.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: In '64 [1964]. Then you come back I guess in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Actually I didn't go--I went into the reserves probably in--yeah, late '64 [1964], early '65 [1965], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I came back here. That's, yeah, that's a rough chronology, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Where did you serve in the reserves?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to basic training down at Lackland Air Force Base in Texas [Bexar County, Texas]. And then they had a reserve unit here in Memphis [Tennessee]. So, I was assigned to a reserve unit in Memphis. And your obligation really was you did basic training, then you did six months, I believe, total active duty. And then you, one weekend a month, you had an obligation.
Speaker 1: Okay. And I know you mentioned you heard Malcolm X speak at the University of Michigan.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What did you think about Malcolm X then?
Speaker 2: Really at the time I thought Malcolm X had more of a solution than Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] did, at the time. Yeah, you know, in retrospect that's probably not true. But certainly I felt that Malcolm X appealed more to the basic instincts of people who were downtrodden and who had been discriminated against. And although I wasn't downtrodden in the economic sense, but, you know, I felt I would number myself in that group because of experiences in the South. And so, yeah, I thought Malcolm X and that the movement of the Nation of Islam at the time--Muhammad Ali, of course, became a Muslim. And so, I think that, you know, attracted interest and attention as well. But Malcolm X was the spokesperson, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did you hear him before he left the Nation of Islam, or after?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, this is before he left the Nation of Islam.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well before. And well, I don't know the exact year he left but--no, he was with the Nation of Islam at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He left right after the assassination of John F. Kennedy. You know, because the remarks created a rift between him and--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember the exact years--
Speaker 1: --it exacerbated--
Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure I was at Michigan, and not Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], when I heard Malcolm X.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in sixty--it would be '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so '63 [1963]--but I heard--and Malcolm X was definitely a part of the Nation of Islam at the time I heard him.
Speaker 1: There was a period of limbo where they didn't know if he was going to go back or not.
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember that, I remember that. I mean, I think that I didn't know much about the international Islamic community. But in reading the autobiography ['The Autobiography of Malcolm X,' Malcolm X and Alex Haley], I guess it was there or later--and I realized that el-Hajj Malik [el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz], which he became, it referred to the fact that he'd been to the hajj and transformed, because he saw that Muslims were of all colors, and all had a commonality. And so, I guess that transformed him. But, but at the time that I heard him, it was before that change.
Story_ID: 652225
Speaker 1: You were back in Memphis [Tennessee] by 1965, right, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was, approximately that time I was back. And then I worked in the insurance industry [at Universal Life Insurance Company, Memphis, Tennessee], and then eventually went back to get my, finish my master's degree at the University of Memphis [sic.]. And I went back in September of '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you hadn't finished it at University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: No, I'd done one year. It was a two year program. So, I had done one year, '63 [1963] to '64 [1964], and--the school year, '63 [1963], '64 [1964]. And then, I returned home and then recognized that I was going to have to deal with the draft or either go back to school. I had a deferment as long as I was in school. But either I had to go back to school, or do something in regard to the draft.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you're in the Air Force reserves [U.S. Air Force Reserve], and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that's '64 [1964], was it?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I would say late '64 [1964], early '65 [1965]. I don't remember the exact year, whether it was late '64 [1964] or '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Okay. And then you came back to Memphis and finished your degree at the University of Memphis?
Speaker 2: No, the University of Michigan. I came back to Memphis--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --but I worked in Memphis. So, I wasn't in school at all during that time. And then I went back to the University of Michigan and finished my degree.
Speaker 1: Now, is this an M.B.A.?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is. It's an M.B.A. in actuarial science. It's actually, actuarial science is a specialization.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, so this is 1967?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's when I finished my M.B.A.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you went right into the business with your father [Herman Gilliam, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did. After that, I went right into the insurance business.
Speaker 1: Would it be safe--yeah, I guess you really never left the insurance business, or it seems like it, because you were always (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's right. I was back and forth in the business during that entire period, yes.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you first started helping out with your father?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was a young teenager. I mean, I was actually, I'm not sure of the insurance business, but at that time you had what they call industrial insurance, which is insurance that was paid by weekly premiums. And you had a debit, and you'd go and you collect the debit and sell insurance. So, I was carrying a debit, you know, when I was a teenager.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So, I started out pretty early.
Speaker 1: All right. So, you knew, you knew the business fairly well then (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I knew the business.
Story_ID: 652226
Speaker 1: You talked about what, you know, what was going on when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed. You were, you were here in Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Oh, I was here in Memphis when Dr. King was killed, yeah.
Speaker 1: And now this is--The Commercial Appeal was, at the time, was against the garbage strikers. And--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure they were. Yeah, I mean the--I don't know their specific editorial position, but they were really not reflecting very positively on the rights of black people in general. So, I mean, it wasn't just the garbage strike. They didn't even, at that time, use titles with names and so on. And so, the, and the newspaper actually I think was, had been, or was about to be boycotted. I mean, so there was a lot of animosity between the black community and the paper.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you wrote The Commercial Appeal, right? Or you contacted them about--
Speaker 2: And, when Dr. King was killed, I contacted the paper, indicating to them that there was just no black point of view being expressed at all in the newspaper, and that given that Dr. King had been killed, it was important for black people to have a voice and be able to have expression as to what points of view we as a people have. And so, that's when I began writing that column. It was in, just after Dr. King was killed.
Speaker 1: What was the name (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the first column was about the sanitation strike [Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike].
Speaker 1: So, they, they just called you up and said, "Well, come on down and start"--
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, no, they didn't call me up. I think I just, I talked to--they did ask me to come down and talk to the editor. And I don't know, I may have written them a letter. I can't remember if I wrote them a letter or I called. But I think I probably wrote them a letter. And they asked me to come down and talk to the editor, a fellow named Frank Ahlgren [Frank R. Ahlgren]. And we talked, and he agreed that there needed to be a black point of view in the paper. And I--there was a little caricature in the paper called Hambone [Hambone's Meditations]. It was a little black caricature, and they would have little, you know, "Hambone says this," it was kind of a derogatory caricature. So, I started, and Hambone left at the same time. So, I guess you could say I replaced Hambone in The Commercial Appeal.
Speaker 1: So, this is a cartoon character?
Speaker 2: A cartoon character named Hambone.
Speaker 1: I have to look that up. Oh, boy, Hambone (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right. And he would say little pithy things, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a good word for it, a little pithy--but, but, but, stereotypical kind of things as far as blacks are concerned. So, therefore, Hambone was ignorant, but I guess had a pithy, as you say--
Speaker 1: Natural--
Speaker 2: --sense. Natural, yeah, sort of a, yeah, natural ideas about what happened, what might happen. So, I guess it was along the lines of how you might say 'Amos 'n' Andy' at the time--I don't know if you're familiar with the 'Amos 'n' Andy'--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Although 'Amos 'n' Andy' was a little bit different in that our family would watch 'Amos 'n' Andy.' We considered 'Amos 'n' Andy' to be humorous. But at the same time, it was, they were stereotypical. So, Hambone though, there wasn't any humor, it was just derogatory. To me, 'Amos 'n' Andy' wasn't necessarily derogatory. But in the context of the fact that you didn't have any other black characterizations on television then, it was derogatory in that context.
Speaker 1: Now, what did Hambone look like?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, he didn't have like a black face. It wasn't like blackface, it was--but it was just a caricature that was obviously a black person, a kind of a short statured person it appeared, and more like a working type guy, like, like somebody that did labor, you know. And that, that's what I can recall, you know, about it.
Story_ID: 652227
Speaker 1: Well, how would you think--I mean pre Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], what was the, how did The Commercial Appeal a- actually document black people in the City of Memphis [Tennessee]? I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Commercial Appeal--I can't, I don't--I can say that The Commercial Appeal to a great extent didn't document black people. I mean it was like, you know, if my name is Art [HistoryMaker Art Gilliam, Jr.], they'd just call you Art. I mean, they wouldn't call you Mr. Gilliam or anything like that. And women--they didn't use any titles for black people. White people, you would, but not for black people. I mean this was, the level of segregation and how pervasive it was in the South is something that is difficult to really grasp, if you didn't live in the South as a black person at that time. And so, there was no positive respect at all. Like I said, we had the drinking fountains. And you'd go downtown to a major department store and you'd have colored fountains--colored water and white water that means--so to speak. Colored drinking fountains, white drinking fountains, colored restrooms. You know, one store had colored men, colored women, white men, white women--four doors side by side, four different restrooms. You'd go to the courthouse, and you'd have--and this was, this is a place where you're supposed to get justice--and in the courthouse you've got colored and white drinking fountains. So, you know, how are you going to get justice when the courthouse itself is perpetuating a segregated system?
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, The Commercial Appeal really, really, wasn't--now, supposed someone got shot out in front of the office of WLOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]--two black people got in an argument, and one got shot and killed--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or revealed that someone plotted to murder another black person, would that make The Commercial Appeal?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, yeah, I'm not saying that they wouldn't cover incidents like that. But it was, there was nothing positive about it. And if black people did--they were negative about, of course, as you said, the sanitation strike [Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike]. You know, because the sanitation strike was something black people were trying to do to gain civil rights, or gain rights, or really to gain dignity. It was really about economics more so than civil rights, per se. But in any case, there was a complete disregard of the rights of black people, I'll put it that way.
Story_ID: 652228
Speaker 1: You coming on to, to The Commercial Appeal--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to write was--you were the first black writer--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 1: --for the Memphis Commercial Appeal.
Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. And what did you write about when you first--?
Speaker 2: Issues from the point of view of black people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what I really tried to do to a great extent was make sure that we were humanized. And so, my first story was about the sanitation workers [Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike]. And I interviewed a couple of them, and it was an editorial, actually column. And I interviewed a couple of them and tried to explain to those who were reading--those black people already understood--but white readers who didn't understand what this was all about, you know, and the fact that it was about the rights of people to gain a decent wage. And so, most of the columns, (cough) excuse me, had to do with that whole aspect of race, and making sure that we as a people were humanized and that our points of view were expressed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: An interesting column that--I will share this with you. It was--I would, sometimes I would do, (cough) excuse me, interviews. And I was interviewing Reverend Lawson, James Lawson, who was one of the very active people in the Civil Rights Movement. And I was really kind of writing, I'm quoting him. And the story was about religion. And so, Reverend Lawson said, "You know, Jesus was black anyway." And of course, I just wrote that on--because I never thought about it one way or the other, that Jesus was black didn't strike me as being necessarily a note that would affect so many people. That was in that column. The Commercial never got so many letters from the white audience about Jesus being black. So, you know, and I say that to say that it reflects the tone of the times. It was unpalatable to a white audience, or white people, that Jesus might in fact be black. And so, they got a tremendous number of letters about that particular column.
Speaker 1: That's something. Did they think it was like sacrilegious to say that, to suggest that he might not be white?
Speaker 2: You know, who knows what hatred--you know, what motivates hatred? I mean, I'm not sure that it was the religious aspect or the arrogance aspect that Jesus just had to be white. You know, I can't say for sure what aspect of it was, but most definitely it was born out of the rac- institutionalized racism of the South, and of--and really, not--that, that wouldn't be just limited to the South. I mean I think that at, at that time a lot of people would have, you know, felt that way about, on that subject.
Story_ID: 652229
Speaker 1: It wasn't long thereafter that you had contacted--did--now, did they, WMC-TV [Memphis, Tennessee] (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, television station, right.
Speaker 1: Did they contact you, or--?
Speaker 2: They did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They did, they called me out. I was writing the article in the newspaper, and they called me because they were looking to integrate their news staff, their on air news staff. And of course, I was writing the newspaper. I never, I always worked for a black business. So, as a result, I had an independence in the sense that I wasn't dependent upon The Commercial Appeal for my income. I was working at Universal Life Insurance and contributing an article to Commercial Appeal. (Cough) Excuse me. So, when WMC-TV called me, they apparently thought I was working for The Commercial Appeal. But I told them, "I've already, I've got a job and I'm, you know, I would be willing to consider doing something on the weekends as a weekend anchor, possibly. But I'm already working at Universal Life Insurance Company [Memphis, Tennessee], and I don't work at The Commercial Appeal." And they wanted to hire me as a weekend anchor, so I became a weekend anchor.
Speaker 1: Now, you write here that being a television news anchor changed your life.
Speaker 2: Well, it did, in the sense that it got me more into electronic media. And that's what ultimately got me into radio. So, I would say that that was a significant turning point.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, they, I think they were both lucky, considered themselves probably lucky to have you. Here's a--there in Memphis [Tennessee], here's a young man, just came out of Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], you know--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, right, right.
Speaker 1: --his family is established here. I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, he's a tall guy, you know; he's got a head full of hair, you know--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You know, so they, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, I guess maybe so. I never particularly thought of myself, you know, in that way. But, yeah, I guess that's true.
Speaker 1: Had an English teacher for a mother [Leola Caruthers Gilliam].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: You come and you speak, you know, proper English, you know.
Speaker 2: Well yeah, and so, being able to articulate. So, all of those things, you know, played a role in it, I'm sure. And like I said, I--and I guess my upbringing taught me to be pretty humble. And so, I never really thought about it other than just I was trying to do my job.
Speaker 1: I just wonder if you were resented by the whites at The Commercial Appeal, and at the news station. It seems like you, you probably out credentialed--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, if they did resent it, I didn't let them show it. I just, I went and I did my job. And, you know, I guess my point of view is that they do what they do. But I went and I did my job, and tried to do it well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But I wasn't ever dependent upon them for my income. So, I could walk away from that at any time. And so, that was something that I considered very important. Because if you're writing a column, for example, in a newspaper, and you want to be true to who you are and to who the people are that you're representing in that column, you can't have the newspaper then dictating what you write. And so, and while I wouldn't of had them dictate what I wrote, even if I had been employed--but it's a lot easier economically to not be an employee. So, I've always really throughout my life worked in a black business.
Speaker 1: Okay. I would just bet money that you were resented by--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure there were--there were those who did. I was only there--as far as the television, I was a weekend anchor. I developed some friendships there. So, some of the, some of the--(cough) excuse me. Television was more the purview of the young. And so, many of the people that I was associated with, at least some of them, were about my age. And there was a change, and they weren't all from the South, necessarily. So, there was a change going on in the country. So, you didn't get quite the level of resentment. Yet, there were some old hands that were there that, you know, did undoubtedly have some negative views.
Story_ID: 652230
Speaker 1: So, you were on, on, on the weekends?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Saturday? Sunday?
Speaker 2: No, just Saturday.
Speaker 1: Just Saturday (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Saturday night. I would do six and ten o'clock news Saturday night.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, were you the first in Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The first black person to do the news?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was the highest rated newscast in the city because of that. Not because I was great, but because it was such a novelty. I didn't realize that until the manager of the television station told me that their Saturday night newscast was the highest rated newscast in Memphis.
Speaker 1: This would be probably because all the black people turned to that station.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, yeah. And I--but there was a lot of white people, just out of curiosity, tuned in. So, I don't know, but I know that the ratings were very high on those shows. And absolutely, it was, again, I never thought of it in that way. But I was, in looking back on it, I guess I probably should have. But a certain amount of celebrity comes with that, local celebrity, because of the fact--so, I was being invited to schools and, you know, kind of being I guess thought of as a role model by a lot of kids. So, there is a certain recognition that I had not fully anticipated, you know, from being a part of that.
Speaker 1: Now, Memphis is what, what was it in those days in terms of the percentage of the black population?
Speaker 2: Forty percent.
Speaker 1: Forty percent.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because there was a program that WMC [WMC-TV, Memphis, Tennessee] presented at that time. It was called 'The 40 Percent Speak.' (Laughter) So, it was 40 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And now, of course, it's well over 60 something; and it's a different situation now. But it was 40 percent, but not very many representatives in terms of government.
Speaker 1: And even then, if 15 percent of white viewers watched the station--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and all of the black. And you know it's going to be all of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That would make you the highest rated.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So, the newscast itself was a very high rated newscast.
Speaker 1: Okay. And later, I think the station brought in [HistoryMaker] Myron Lowery?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Myron--I'd been there maybe a couple of years, I don't remember the exact timeframe. But Myron came in shortly after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, how long did you serve as a part time anchor at the station?
Speaker 2: From late 1968 until 1974, latter part, about six years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And some of it was anchoring and some of it, though, I ultimately started doing features, like film features and that sort of thing, so. And at one point, I started to do editorials. So, I was doing several different things. Because I was never, I never was a guy that was completely comfortable with anchoring in the way that, you know, some people who were true journalists or true news people do. I never considered myself really a television newsperson. And while I was, of course, a television newsperson, but not in the traditional sense of coming through and having that as a career aspiration. So, I eventually left that in, toward the end of '74 [1974].
Story_ID: 652231
Speaker 1: Meanwhile, though, you're still working at Universal Life Insurance [Universal Life Insurance Company, Memphis, Tennessee] and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you're appointed vice president, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And, and you're, you're eventually going to be the president (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I can't say that. But, but I was, you know, I was obviously on a pretty good career path.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And in 1970, that same year, WLOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] hires its first black station manager.
Speaker 2: Harvey Lynch, uh-huh, right. And I knew Harvey, and yeah, we talked a lot and spent a lot of time at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] began broadcasting in '72 [1972] on LOK.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Myron Lowery joins in '73 [1973], he joins the station--
Speaker 2: He joined W- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) M--
Speaker 2: --MC [WMC-TV, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: MC.
Speaker 2: PUSH began broadcasting on WLOK.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No, I'm not saying they were at the same--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's the year Myron Lowery--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --comes. So, in '75 [1975], you were the assistant to Congressman Harold Ford, Sr.
Speaker 2: Right, I left Memphis [Tennessee]. I decided to leave that. I had--I was doing, you know, the newspaper article, I was doing television, and I was at the insurance company as well. But I decided that I wanted to make a career change, and I made the decision to go to Washington [D.C.] when Harold Ford, Sr. was elected to [U.S.] Congress.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, was it tough, leaving all these activities behind?
Speaker 2: Well, not really. I mean, I didn't think that I wanted to spend the rest of my life doing those three things together. I needed to do one particular thing. I did not want to go into television news full time. I was offered, I could have gone to either television news or I could have gone to The Commercial Appeal; I could have taken full time positions there. And I determined that I really didn't want to do that. And again, like I said, I always worked in a black business. But at the same time, I guess my aspirations and horizons had gone beyond the insurance business. So, I was looking for a change there, but I didn't really want to go full time with either the television station or the newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, how did you become involved with Congressman Ha- Harold Ford, Sr.'s organization?
Speaker 2: Really, I, they, I believe--as I recall it, they contacted me about the possibility of being an administrative assistant. At the time, I had written a column about the significance of his campaign to the City of Memphis. And (cough) excuse me, so, I believe that--as I recall it, they, he actually contacted me. I didn't know him really very well personally; I didn't know him that well personally, but I knew some of his family pretty well.
Speaker 1: Okay. And Myron Lowery joined the staff, too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, Myron later did that, but not during the same time that I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 652232
Speaker 1: Benjamin Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] was commissioner of the Federal Communications Commission, the FCC?
Speaker 2: Right. He was there as an FCC commissioner. And it was during that time that I became really interested in the radio business. I had, as you mentioned earlier, Harvey Lynch was the manager here at WLOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]; Harvey and I would talk a lot. I got an interest in radio, got interested in radio. And, (cough) excuse me again, so, I had become interested in the radio industry more so than television. And when I went to Washington [D.C.], Ben Hooks was there. And I went over to talk with him about the possibility of eventually getting into radio, and just get advice. And he gave me some advice about brokers, lawyers and so on. And I went to see the broker, and it turns out the broker knew that WLOK was for sale. And that wouldn't have been known here in Memphis [Tennessee], it would only--I mean that's not something that the station would have made known to, either to employees or to the community. So, I found out that WLOK was for sale. And it turns out, like I said, this was my favorite station at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was the sale--were you able to take advantage of--or was it in existence at the time, the tax benefits, to--
Speaker 2: No, the minority certificates--
Speaker 1: Minority certificates, yeah.
Speaker 2: --I don't--it didn't exist at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but, you also didn't have a consolidation of the industries the way you do today. So, you could really literally go around and try to put your financing together in a way, I mean that--so, it was, it was in some ways simpler than it would be today, in the sense that today if someone was going to sell a media outlet, they want somebody that's going to buy it right away, got cash on the table and they're ready to move forward. Then, because of the restrictions in ownership, you had more time to be able to put together your financing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, how did you assemble your financing for it?
Speaker 2: I actually took at least a year off from working and travel. I bought a motorhome, so I'd get to move around (laughter). Because I didn't have so much money that I could just go and travel--so, I got a motorhome, which was a very convenient way to live. And when I needed to be in, let's say Washington, if I had to be there, I could drive to Washington, stay in the motorhome--have my suits--at that time my suits on one side, and my knick nits on the other side. And so you're--and so when I had to have my business hat on, I could go and get my suits, and go wherever I needed to go. But I went around the country, and ultimately put together what were called MESBICs, Minority Enterprise Business Investment Companies, I believe, or Small Business Investment Companies. In any case, a combination of MESBIC funding and bank funding here in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But it took--and of course I had to also do a lot of travelling just to put the contract together.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, did any of the initiatives of the Nixon administration [President Richard Milhous Nixon], the black capitalism initiatives and small business loans and that sort of thing, did any of that help, help you?
Speaker 2: Well, the Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Companies, those were companies that did provide part of the financing.
Speaker 1: They grew out of that?
Speaker 2: Yes. And I don't know, I don't recall exactly which initiative they grew out of, specifically, but they were set up to benefit minorities directly.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. This age of--Black Enterprise has launched. You know, Tony Brown is talking--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, is on television. I mean, there--you know--
Speaker 2: A lot going on, yes, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: In black business in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, yeah. Did Black Enterprise play any role in your moves?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I mean in terms of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I mean no more than I was familiar with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But not, not in any substantial way.
Speaker 1: Okay. You formed Gilliam Communications [Gilliam Communications, Inc., Memphis, Tennessee]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it was that, that year that you bought, you know, WLOK, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay. How much did you pay for it?
Speaker 2: Seven hundred and twenty-five thousand dollars was the cost.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Public record.
Story_ID: 652233
Speaker 1: So, WLOK. I have a note here that WLOK's Melvin "Cookin'" Jones [Melvin Jones]--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --is named Billboard magazine's number one deejay of the year--
Speaker 2: Absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the year, the year that you bought the station.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah. Melvin was the program director. In fact, I would have to say Melvin is one of the persons I would credit with teaching me a lot about the radio business. Because as you know, my background was not really in radio. So, he taught me a lot about radio programming. Melvin is still here with us today as a consultant. So, he started working with us again, about a year ago as a consultant. But Melvin "Cookin'" Jones, he was a top deejay, absolutely.
Speaker 1: That's right, in the nation.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, it says.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay. So, what's some of the history of WLOK? LOK and DIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] I guess were the two stations that--
Speaker 2: Well, we were rivals at that time. Of course, that's when the AM band was more dominant. And those were the two rival stations. And DIA was a bit more adult, it was more of the established station. And I guess WLOK was more of the upstart that appealed to the younger audience at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, at the time, I guess if you wanted to hear the blues, you'd probably turn to DIA and maybe--
Speaker 2: More, more likely, yeah, that's right. Although in those days, you know, you would have situations where different radio stations might play different types of formats, particularly black stations during the day. So, a station might play some blues or might play, you know, a typical R and B. Most all black stations played some gospel, and usually early in the morning, or at some point usually on Sundays as well. So, you did have variations of format among stations that at that time didn't have competition in specific format types. For example, now, if you had a station that was going to play all blues, they would just play blues; it wouldn't play, you know, partly blues. Or, maybe more pertinent would be if it's contemporary, if it's a contemporary urban station it's going to just play all of that. It's not normally going to play part of, you know, their (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Today--yeah, that would be rap, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right, something like that, sure.
Speaker 1: Then you have the hits and dusties station, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, which is R and B and old--
Speaker 2: Right. You have, you have very specific--you know, you have adult formats, you'll have gospel, which we are. You'll have your rap in a format. So, each format is a little separate but it--at that time, years ago, you could listen to a black station and you could hear different types of formats throughout the day.
Speaker 1: So, what did WLOK, what was its format then, when you think of it?
Speaker 2: Well, it was an R and B, what was called an R and B format, and it was more of a younger end R and B format. So, you would hear the, the audience would be more of a younger audience for WLOK.
Speaker 1: Okay, so then like funk I guess in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: Maybe some disco or something?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, eventually disco as it came into vogue. But yeah, more--but I guess I remember a lot of funk, you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Give us a little history of WLOK. They started after DIA, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, WLOK did start after DIA. And DIA for a long time was the only black oriented station. And then LOK became a competing black oriented station, and it was owned by Starr Broadcasting [Starr Broadcasting Group], which was owned by William Buckley, a well known conservative.
Speaker 1: Oh, William, the same William F. Buckley [William F. Buckley, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: William F. Buckley.
Speaker 1: Of 'Firing Line'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Firing Line.' William F. Buckley was the owner of Starr Broadcasting, which owned WLOK Radio [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's something. Now, was he a, he wasn't a Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] man, was he? Or--
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: He was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was (laughter). I didn't know him. I mean, he was I think probably before me. But, but yeah, he was a Yale graduate.
Story_ID: 652234
Speaker 1: Melvin "Cookin'" Jones [Melvin Jones] was the deejay of the year, like I said. But in--you changed the format of the station [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee], I guess, from, from--
Speaker 2: Over time.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not, not, not in that timeframe. It was much later that the format actually changed. So, we stayed in the same format for a number of years, which was really what we call an R and B format.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I know it was '83 [1983] that you changed your format.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's yeah, five years later. But what was going on? I mean why did you change?
Speaker 2: Well, during that period of time, FM was coming more into vogue. And so, the format changes--AM stations were becoming--more pressure--more pressure to develop a format that could compete with FM. And a lot of the R and B format, or urban format, was going to FM stations. So, we had been playing gospel all the time. We don't, we didn't--well, gospel wasn't new, but we just only played it at certain times of the day. So, we decided to extend it and play it for longer parts of the day. And we found that it was successful for us, so we stayed with it.
Speaker 1: So, the station that was, the FM station that was taking R and B listeners was what?
Speaker 2: WHRK [WHRK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee], or K97.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, all right. So, and so you go to a gospel for- format in '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And well, okay. And so, it's been, it's basically been like that since--
Speaker 2: Yes. We've been gospel ever since, yeah. We were actually the--oh, excuse me for a second. I've got a slight cold, but. We were the first black owned radio station in Memphis [Tennessee] as well.
Speaker 1: Right, when you bought it, right? That's something (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. And also, first locally owned at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. (Unclear) William F. Buckley [William F. Buckley, Jr.] owned--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 652235
Speaker 1: By 1987, on your tenth anniversary--'cause you were saying you were the only local, you know, owned radio station (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, right, yeah. We were locally owned, black owned, and we were the only one at the time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Out of twenty stations in Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: None of them were owned by anyone local, so--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In, well, in '89 [1989], I guess when the station was twelve years old, you turned over the management duties to the general manager, the general sales manager, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, I mean, so what did it take to get, you know, to make the station successful? Or what did you have to do in those twelve years, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was really a matter of understanding the market, and try to work--I guess the key thing is, though, is always going to be personnel and trying to get good people, as you mentioned, Melvin Jones and many others that we've had. So, we've been very fortunate over the years to have good staff and very positive people working with us. And that's been, I would say, the key for helping us to be successful.
Speaker 1: Okay. Who are some of the personalities that would have been on the air?
Speaker 2: WLOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] as a station has had a number of historical personalities. Bill Terrell was one that was actually before us. A fellow named C.J. Morgan who's actually back here with us now was one of the top announcers in the country. So, there have been, there have been just a number of announcers who've come through. Melvin--many of them have careers where they've gone to other markets, and some have come back to Memphis. So, there's quite a large number of radio personalities.
Speaker 1: Is there any particular figure who stayed here longer, you know, who's kind of like identified with the station over time?
Speaker 2: I would have to say that if there was one figure, it would be Melvin Jones. But that's, but he was here at the beginning. He was away for a while, he's back now as a consultant. So, I would have to identify him as the figure that is probably the most consistent through that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did, okay, when the mayoral election was taking place in '91 [1991], did WLOK play any role in--?
Speaker 2: Oh, limited. I mean we had quite a bit of on air, you know, things that were, that we did. But of course, you're restricted to some degree in terms of, you know, involvement in politics. So, we had some involvement, but it was not in the sense of endorsement as such, except in some instances where you had talk programs, you would have endorsements and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay. Does LOK run any talk shows?
Speaker 2: Yes, we do, and we've always run a talk show. We were on a talk show today, which is a ten o'clock talk show, one hour, called 'Let's Talk About It.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we have always been a community oriented station. I mean, I think probably first and foremost, even though--whether we were a gospel station or whether we were an R and B station--whatever our music format might have been, we've always been very community oriented.
Story_ID: 652236
Speaker 1: We talk about issues that are pertinent to our community. And we've done that, you know, over the years. I even mentioned, you know, we talked a moment ago about Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois]. Operation PUSH had been on WLOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] for a few years. The previous owners [Starr Broadcasting Group] had put them off the air, because some of their advertisers had said that, you know, "Yeah, if you put these, keep these people on the air, we're not going to advertise on your station anymore." So, they put PUSH off the air. And so, this is 1977. So, the first thing I did when we came in was we put PUSH back on the air, because we understood what PUSH meant to the black community, and what the aspirations were of the black community. And so, that was the first thing that we did when we first came in, was put PUSH back on the air.
Speaker 2: I guess, I imagine it wouldn't have been hard to sell, you know, ads for that time slot. I mean, you know--
Speaker 1: Hard to sell?
Speaker 2: No, it would not have been hard. I mean, it would be fairly easy in a black community to sell ads for that time period, I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, except most of your ads were coming, most of your revenue was coming from white businesses, not from black businesses.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But yeah, you're right as far as whether there's empathy for PUSH in the black community, absolutely. But it was really, from an economic standpoint, I would say that we, there was no benefit (laughter) economically in putting PUSH back on the air.
Speaker 2: Then did you take a hit, a financial hit, from--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --doing so?
Speaker 1: Not really. At the time I don't believe we did, actually. I didn't know whether we were going to take a hit or not. Because you know, obviously, some of the advertisers had previously indicated they were going to boycott the station from the standpoint of advertising, if the previous owners had left them on. So, I had no idea, really. It was really more a matter of principle for me as far as putting PUSH on, because I knew what they had to say. It would have, you know, in my mind, you know, what would be the benefit of black ownership if you're going to do the same thing that the previous owners are doing, in terms of those things that express the aspirations of the black community? So, really, I didn't think about it from an economic standpoint. But I think in the end we probably ended up not taking a hit, because a lot of people started listening to WLOK as well. And so, we, our ratings improved. And so, that probably affected us positively.
Speaker 2: Now, is there like a black community chamber of commerce type organization in Memphis [Tennessee] since--
Speaker 1: Well, not really. Not in the same way that you have the chamber [Greater Memphis Chamber]. You do have some organizations that are, you know, that are black oriented. But at that time, you really didn't have that to the same degree, to the extent that it would make a difference economically. Most of your revenue, it was not going to come from black businesses or organizations.
Speaker 2: Okay. What kind, what businesses really supported, I mean, the station in those days?
Speaker 1: Well, it could be a wide range of it. It could be automobile dealerships, it could be, you know, grocery stores--any, pretty much the same things you might see on the television, radio, you know, any--these, these businesses are pretty well traditionally involved with, with mass media.
Story_ID: 652237
Speaker 1: LOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] since 1977--now, that's the year you started--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --sponsoring the Stone Soul Picnic?
Speaker 2: Oh, well--
Speaker 1: Was that the year (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, actually the Stone Soul Picnic had started--
Speaker 1: --in 1974?
Speaker 2: --a couple of years before. But we continued it, and have carried on a tradition. Most people associate it with us as having, our company [Gilliam Communications, Inc., Memphis, Tennessee] as having started it. But we didn't actually start it, we just continued it. But it had started with a couple of announcers just saying, "Hey, we think we're going to go out in the park and get somebody to bring some hot dogs, get one of the hot dog vendors to bring hot dogs, bring a few, bring some buns, and we'll just spin some records and invite people out to the park." And I mean thousands of people apparently showed up. And so, then they did it the next year. And then we refined it over the years to where now it's a day that we spend--we have, you know, the main stage is down on the river [Mississippi River]. And we have an all day gospel fest, basically.
Speaker 1: Okay. I was going to ask if the format--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we changed it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because Stone Soul was the--
Speaker 2: Yeah. We, well, actually it comes from the song, 5th Dimension [The 5th Dimension] at that time, 'Stoned Soul.' But there's was actually with a D, 'Stoned Soul Picnic.' We took the D off (laughter), and just made it the Stone Soul Picnic.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it's now more of a gospel fest--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --than a soul music fest?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And we, although we're expanding it a little bit--we expanded it a little bit last year to include Stax Records and some things related to Stax. So, it's more, it's gospel, and then we tied it into Memphis [Tennessee], and Memphis music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, Stax was of course, you know, Memphis based at the time, record label.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was Stax more closely associated with--well, I guess neither station really claimed a closer association with Stax, did it? I mean, but--
Speaker 2: Probably WLOK, more so.
Speaker 1: More close.
Speaker 2: Just because WLOK, being the newer kid on the block, was more willing to play records that were not necessarily as established records. And so, there's a, over at the Stax Museum [Stax Museum of American Soul Music, Memphis, Tennessee] there's a, you know, recognition of WLOK. But all of the radio stations--of course, any record company wants to have all the radio stations, you know, playing their material. But WLOK played a big role in the rise of Stax.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think like Rufus Thomas was at both stations, right?
Speaker 2: Yes. Well, Rufus Thomas was actually an announcer at WDIA [WDIA Radio, Memphis, Tennessee]. So, he was actually an employee of WDIA. But we were personal friends, and I knew him. And so he would come over and do things at LOK, as far as outdoor events and things that we were doing.
Story_ID: 652238
Speaker 1: So, the first five years you had access to all those--well, I guess you would, you would want, you know, the soul personalities, and all the o- all the other personalities (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh yeah, many personalities would come by. I was, I was here at the station [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee], and this is just a little bit after I had, our company [Gilliam Communications, Inc., Memphis, Tennessee] had bought the station. And I was here, and somebody who was here, one of the announcers, you know, came in and said, "James Brown wants to see you." So, I said, "James Brown, what James Brown are you talking about?" It was James Brown, the artist. I mean, it was--and he came in. At that time, he had, I think bought a station [WJBE Radio] up in Knoxville, Tennessee. And he just came in, sat down and chatted. And so, you really got to meet a lot of people who were artists. And of course, James Brown was soul brother number one, so was a major, major, artist and someone I admired, you know, quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, as a gospel station, are they, well, are there different types of gospel shows?
Speaker 2: Definitely. Music has changed a lot over the years, in terms of being broken down into various types of music. So, there are various types of gospel music. So, you have contemporary, you have traditional. We play more traditional gospel music, but we blend it, too. So, yeah, we play it, but we are primarily music, though. We're a music station, but we play, like I said, traditional gospel music more so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, what would be traditional, opposed to the--I know some of the contemporary gospel, I mean, I guess you still call it gospel music is--sounds a lot like pop music.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, and a lot of it does. I mean lyrically it may be gospel, but it, in terms of the beat and thing, it would be more like pop. But some of the other more traditional gospel music, much of it sounds like to a certain extent, like the old R and B. I mean, the beat is a little bit different, you know. So, you have both branches--both the gospel--bla- the traditional, you know, and the contemporary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's evolved over, you know, over the years.
Story_ID: 652239
Speaker 1: Ninety-seven [1997], you formed Gilliam Music [Gilliam Music, Inc., Memphis, Tennessee]. Now, this is a--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --this is a publishing company or a record company (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, right. Actually, we did do some recording. We brought some artists on board with that company and did some recording. And so, we had four or five artists that we worked with for a period of time, but we ultimately didn't stay in the recording business. We ultimately went back into just being strictly radio. But we did have gospel artists that we recorded. And some of them were, had some success, especially in the region.
Speaker 1: Which ones?
Speaker 2: Well, The Violinettes were one group that we had. The Brown Singers, we had them for a period of time. They're very, very popular. They have gone on to some success nationally. So, we've had a young lady named Rosalind Golden [sic. Joan E.W. Golden], who was a very good artist, but she passed away awhile back. But we had several, well, four or five artists that were part of what we did.
Speaker 1: Okay. In '99 [1999], you purchased a station in Savannah [Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did, right, right.
Speaker 1: That's WHGM [WHGM Radio; WSEG Radio]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And is this a gospel station, too?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did do gospel there. And we stayed in that market for a few years. I don't remember exactly how long, but we stayed in Savannah for a few years.
Speaker 1: And in 2002, there's a documentary produced called 'The WLOK Story.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what role did you play in that?
Speaker 2: Well, the, what we were going to do--that was our twenty-fifth anniversary. And so, we decided we would do a, have just a video that we could use as sort of commemorating, you know, the station anniversary. And it turned out that it started growing and growing. And it got turned into a one hour documentary that became a little bit of a classic in a way, in the sense that we, it's still played even today on the PBS stations [Public Broadcasting Service], the local stations here. But it really got into not just that we were having an anniversary, but the context in which there was a sanitation strike [Memphis Sanitation Workers Strike]; Memphis [Tennessee] changed; how black ownership and business--and it followed along that line. And then, what kinds of things those businesses tried to do to help the community. So, it, it became a bigger picture than just WLOK Radio [Memphis, Tennessee] as a twenty-fifth anniversary.
Story_ID: 652240
Speaker 1: Now, have you considered, you know, buy- buying other stations, or?
Speaker 2: Well we, we, we did, but we have no longer gotten involved in that. So, at this point we're just really dealing with WLOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I've got a list of some of the on air personalities, C.J. "Superstar" Morgan [C.J. Morgan].
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Doc Martin [Devin Martin].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Leanna Davis, Sheila Smith.
Speaker 2: Right. Those are our, several of our present on air personalities, that's right.
Speaker 1: Delsa Fleming.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Gary Richmond.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, in an age where a lot of radio stations are on the air without personalities (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Yeah.
Speaker 1: --any local personalities at all. I mean, is this, I mean is this unique, I mean, to have so many?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that it is unique. Some of the stations here do have personalities. But we certainly feel that it's important for a station to be able to relate to the audience, and that you do that best, you know, by having personalities. And so, you know, we've done that traditionally. And so, we've never really stopped, you know, having personalities. The weekends, we will sometimes run, it's just a regular, just an automated format. But during the weekdays, we are typically using personalities on the shows.
Speaker 1: Now, I never understood, in an automated format, do you buy those already made up, or do you make them yourself, or how do you do that?
Speaker 2: Well, actually the way that our format is automated, we--the announcer can actually go in and record their voice in the format. So, on Saturdays, for example, you will hear an announcer talking, but they're not there live. Now, the other days of the week, the announcers are there live for WLOK. So, in an automated format, it's really more, I guess it computerized it in the sense that the music is playing, but you can also insert the announcer voices.
Speaker 1: Okay. And the comer- commercials are also--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the commercials are already there (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 652241
Speaker 1: Mayor Herenton [W.W. Herenton] has a show. I mean the former mayor, sort of a talk show (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, he used to do a show with us [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] for about a year or two. He did a show that was a spot, it was about a five or ten minute, you know, program. And yeah, so he does a very good job. He's, you know, still a very popular personality. He was the longest running mayor in the history of the city, in terms of the time he held office.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was it, that, I mean, I know you talked about the election of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] several times. But how did that affect you, the election of Herenton as mayor?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think the election of Herenton, again, was a symbol, much as the election of Barack Obama. Now, in the case of Willie Herenton, the tide was beginning to move in Memphis [Tennessee] in that direction, because you had a city that was becoming a majority black city. And so, you, (clears throat) you had the opportunity at least for black leadership. And you'd already had Harold Ford, Sr. elected back in '77 [sic.] as a member of [U.S.] Congress. So, that was, the tide was moving, I think in that direction. I mentioned Barack Obama, because that tide nationally required something completely different than to do it in the city and in the South, and all the other parts of the country that might be a majority black, or near majority black city.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did you work in the campaign at all, I mean, no- I mean, not the station (unclear).
Speaker 2: Just to contribute and be a part of that, but not in a major way. I was not a major part of the campaign.
Story_ID: 652242
Speaker 1: What are your--some of your hopes and concerns for the City of Memphis [Tennessee] today?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that, that for, not just the city, but for the country as a whole, that all people can have the opportunity to be able to do the things that their abilities allow them to do, and to be able to have the economic means that would be fair and just for them, given their abilities and given their opportunities. So, I think that the dichotomy you have between rich and poor, not just in Memphis, but all over the country, is something that I think is important for this nation to address.
Story_ID: 652243
Speaker 1: What are your aspirations for WLOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee], I mean, going forward?
Speaker 2: To continue to be a community station, to be--continue, hopefully, to be a factor in being able to address the issues that confront our community. So, pretty much the things that we have done all along to try to be a viable part of our community, and try to help our community go forward and benefit.
Speaker 1: Okay. I noticed on the historical marker outside, it says, "WLOK is considered a family tradition."
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And well, what does that, you know, really--
Speaker 2: Because we've been around for a long time. And we have people who started listening to WLOK when they were kids, and they're adults. And older adults even, today, and families listen to WLOK. And you mentioned the WLOK Stone Soul Picnic, which is our annual free event. We provide that as sort of a promotional event and a thank you to our listeners. And families can come out, it's free. And it's a part, it's symbolic of how we are as a radio station, that we're a community radio station.
Story_ID: 652244
Speaker 1: How has, you know, the changes in the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], like, affected your, your business [Gilliam Communications, Inc., Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say it changes in the--not so much the FCC--well, the FCC in the sense that the FCC, you know, allows more consolidation and those things I think that put pressure on smaller businesses generally, so that you have conglomerates or large corporations that dominate the landscape as far as businesses are concerned, and the media landscape as well. So, not any different from other businesses. You know, the growth of a relatively smaller individual business has a greater challenge.
Speaker 1: Are you in jeopardy of being gobbled up by some bigger--
Speaker 2: No, I don't--that's not our mission. That's not what we're trying to do. So, you know, I think it's a matter of wanting to maintain the independence. But, sure, any, any business could be gobbled up by one of the conglomerates, there's no question about that. But what we plan to do is remain a force for this community and something that's a part of this community, and as an individual independent operator.
Story_ID: 652245
Speaker 1: What are your future plans? What, what do you, do you have a, a big project or a big idea that you want to (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, my future plans, of course, are, are to try to make sure that this station [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] can maintain its independence. As I alluded to earlier, I've written a book. And the book reflects on some of my aspirations and goals, in the sense that--the title of the book is 'One America: Moving Beyond the Issue of Race' [Art Gilliam]. And I think that one of the things that I'm hopeful that we can do in this city and in this country, as I mentioned earlier, is to make sure that all people have positive opportunities to do the things that they're capable of doing. And I think that involves moving beyond race and other things that would divide us.
Speaker 1: Now, have you ever considered politics?
Speaker 2: No, I've really not. That's an area that a number of people encouraged me to do that, but it's not, never been an area that I've had an interest in. More, more, working with the community has been more my interest than politics.
Story_ID: 652246
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back over everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: Not really, in the sense--you know, I heard somebody say, once said, "If you're okay and happy with where you are, then all the things that got you there, whether they were good or bad, are part of what got you there." So, I feel positive now, I feel good about my life today. So, sure, there have been ups and downs. And we all have ups and downs, and things that maybe you wish you'd done this differently or done that differently. But again, if that hadn't happened the way it happened, you might not be where you are now. So, I'm not one that I guess really kind of looks back and frets over the past. I'm kind of in the present, in the now, and in the future.
Story_ID: 652247
Speaker 1: Do you participate on, on corporate boards and that sort of thing in, in the City of Memphis [Tennessee], or?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not involved in corporate boards anymore. I have been on a couple of boards, but I'm not on corporate boards in--at the present time.
Speaker 1: Or, the boards of not for profits in the city?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I have a couple of not for--not for profits that I do, a foundation that I'm very pleased to be associated with. The Society of Entrepreneurs [Memphis, Tennessee] is another association. So, I do things of that kind, that--but they're not corporate boards, they're boards that do things, essentially do things for the community.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite not for profit?
Speaker 2: I would say right now it would be the Assisi Foundation [Assisi Foundation of Memphis, Inc., Memphis, Tennessee], as far as ones that I'm personally associated with.
Story_ID: 652248
Speaker 1: When you look back again at your career, what today would you consider to be your pro- professional legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that even though I don't, I can't per se take credit for it as such, but when you're in a particular place at a particular time, and you happen to be the first in that area, that creates a kind of legacy, even though it doesn't necessarily mean you were that great, it just meant you were in the right place at the right time to happen to have that opportunity. And I think that in doing that comes a responsibility to try to do that in a positive way, so that others who may have a similar opportunity will get those opportunities, and also can be positive about the legacy that you might have left. So, those are, those are the things that I would say. And currently, again, in writing a book ['One America: Moving Beyond the Issue of Race,' Art Gilliam], I'm really--I think that's one of the things that I feel very positive about. It's about to be released. And, and so, that, you know, is kind of a permanent way of I guess presenting those things that are, have been of concern to me over the years.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, your, your book will be released in--
Speaker 2: Shortly, within a matter of days (clears throat). So, and--excuse me again, so, this is April of 2014. So, very soon.
Story_ID: 652249
Speaker 1: Has there been any particular--I know we, we were told several times during these media interviews that it's hard to lose money on a radio station. You know, they will always make money.
Speaker 2: No, you can lose money on a radio station (laughter). I mean I think like any other business, you can definitely lose money, so. I think radio stations, that's kind of been I guess an understanding that some people have had over the years. But the radio industry has become much more competitive than it was, let's say twenty, thirty years ago. So, yeah, you can definitely lose money on a radio station, or any other media business, or business in general. I think that radio--I don't think has any special place that allows you to be more likely or less likely to be profitable than, than many other businesses.
Speaker 1: And what would be the biggest threat I guess to success, you know, in the radio business today?
Speaker 2: Well, the fact that you have so many media out there. I mean, you have not only so many radio stations, but so many media options. And so, when your business income is from advertising--and the advertising options are just myriad. So, you have more media there, and therefore more options for businesses to advertise.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Does WLOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee] bring in interns, you know, from the--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, we do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) colleges in the city?
Speaker 2: We do. Yeah, what we do is we, we bring in interns periodically. Most of them are from college, and we do require that they are getting a college course credit. But we'll bring them in and work with their instructors or professors, in terms to try to set up a curriculum, you know, for them. So, yeah, we do definitely work with interns. Once in a while we've worked with interns from high school as well.
Story_ID: 652250
Speaker 1: Now, do you have children?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay. Ever been married?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm married now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, you're married, all right.
Speaker 2: Right. I've been married almost ten years now.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you meet your wife [Dorrit Dahl Gilliam]?
Speaker 2: On the Internet. My wife is from Denmark, from Copenhagen. And we met on the Internet about eleven years ago, ten or eleven years ago, and got married about a year later.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you persuaded her to come here?
Speaker 2: Well, yes (laughter), I did, I did. And I couldn't go to Denmark anyway. So, so, yeah, she came here. And I'll share a picture with--of her with you when, before you get away.
Story_ID: 652251
Speaker 1: Is there anything we have not discussed that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Nothing that I can think of. You've been pretty thorough, so I can't think of anything.
Speaker 1: All right. Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think just as someone who did their best and hope that it was appreciated, but not really much beyond that. I just think that, again, I come from really a family that's always been relatively humble and relatively service minded. And so, as a part of that family, my way of being remembered would be the way I hope our whole family would be remembered. And that is that we tried to do good for our community, and that we were positive citizens.
Story_ID: 652252
Speaker 1: And just one more thing, I just thought about the--did the insurance business sort of survive? And did, you know--
Speaker 2: No (cough) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and what did your parents think about your, your career?
Speaker 2: Well, Universal Life Insurance [Universal Life Insurance Company, Memphis, Tennessee], I left many years before it eventually was bought out by another company. So, the business itself is no longer there, as has happened with many of the historically black insurance companies. So, no, Universal is not here today as a viable insurance company.
Speaker 1: Okay. And how do your parents feel about your career?
Speaker 2: Well, my dad [Herman Gilliam, Sr.] passed away before I got into media. My mom [Leola Caruthers Gilliam] cried many a tear as I was making the change, because she felt I was on a career path. And so, I was taking some risks. And also, she was nervous about that. But ultimately, I have to say that by the time we got to our twentieth anniversary, she realized that maybe I knew what I was doing. And so, she felt pretty good about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, thank you very much for sharing with us.
Speaker 2: Thank you, I appreciate you coming in.
Story_ID: 652253
Speaker 1: That's my wife Dorrit [Dorrit Dahl Gilliam]. And we just celebrated our ninth wedding anniversary a few months ago; and I met her on the Internet, and she's from Copenhagen, Denmark.
Speaker 2: How, how, how do you spell her name?
Speaker 1: D-O-R-R-I-T, and her maiden name is Dahl, D-A-H-L.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's me and Dorrit on our wedding day.
Speaker 2: That is me at Yale in my freshman year, and one of my freshman roommates.
Speaker 1: That's me many, many years ago, and I don't know exactly what age.
Speaker 2: That would be a little bit before I went away to prep school [Westminster School, Simsbury, Connecticut], I believe. So, I don't know the age, but probably early teen.
Speaker 1: Similar, mid-teen picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It looks the same.
Speaker 1: Yeah, (laughter) it might be the same. Well, it doesn't look like the same photo exactly, but yeah, probably, but maybe the jacket lasted a couple years, I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 2: That is going to be me around college age.
Speaker 1: That is me in college.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That is me as a newscaster for WMC-TV [Memphis, Tennessee], and I was there from 1968 until 1974.
Speaker 2: Similarly, newscaster for WMC-TV, the NBC affiliate here.
Speaker 1: That's me at a banquet shortly after we'd bought the radio station, so it would be a little bit after 1977. And they were honoring me for--related to WLOK [WLOK Radio, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: That is from my prep school yearbook, the year of graduation, 1959. I'm going back for our fifty-fifth reunion in about two weeks (laughter). Hard to believe, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's my college graduation picture from Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut], and that's 1963.
