Story_ID: 22764
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Raymond Giles.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my name is Roscoe Conkling Giles.  It's R-O-S-C-O-E, Conkling is C-O-N-K-L-I-N-G, and Giles is G-I-L-E-S.  And I guess if you want full name, I'm the third.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, there was a famous Roscoe Conkling in New York City.
Speaker 2: Oh, you know about that, do you?.
Speaker 1: Around the time of the Garvey movement [named after Jamaican political leader and Pan-Africanist, Marcus Garvey]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or so.  Daisy Dubois and Garvey and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us something--is that who you were named for?
Speaker 2: I believe that's true.  Well, I, formally, I was named for my father who was named for my grandfather.  But I do believe he was named for that Roscoe Conkling.  His--
Speaker 1: In fact, the person I'm thinking about, I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --is Roscoe Conkling Bruce, who is actually named for Roscoe Conkling as well.
Speaker 2: Ah.
Speaker 1: So there's another, there's a Roscoe Conkling that everybody's being named for, and go ahead and tell us.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was the, my understanding is he was a Senator from the State of New York, responsible actually for the brokering of the Hayes Compromise, I understand.  But as historians, you may know that story better, which is, I'm not sure that--
Speaker 1: Hayes-Tilton Compromise--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 1850--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Eighteen seventy six [1876] is the, is what destroyed Reconstruction.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  So I, I can't believe that my great grandfather named his son after him on, because of that role.  But I, but I do know that my great grandfather was active in politics and in law in Albany [New York].  So he was from Albany and was a--well, he lived in Albany at that point.  He was from North Carolina, and he lived, he was a lawyer and a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I'm guessing that I'm named after that Roscoe, I mean that my grandfather was named after that Roscoe Conkling.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 6, 1949, in Oakland, California, though my parents lived in Berkeley [California], but the hospital was in Oakland.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor of electrical and computer engineering at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is October 12th (laughter), 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at, in a conference room at the Photonic Center at Boston University in the building where my office is located.
Story_ID: 22765
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yep, I, I kind of like seafood and shrimp now.  It used to be hamburgers (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably red.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer, for sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The West for camping.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you--and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I remember a number of them like "What goes around comes around," but I don't have one that I use regularly.
Story_ID: 22766
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, well, now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but mother's side first so we can keep 'em separate.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name, maiden name was Virginia Elizabeth Gaines, G-A-I-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: And Gaines--
Speaker 2: Yeah, G-A-I-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: Oh, G-A-I-N-E-S, okay, all right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was March 7, 1914.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they--what occupations were they performing?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I can trace them back a little, some, you know, partially.  Her mother was Betty Greene, G-R-E-E-N-E.  She was an educator and a principal and came from Alabama.  She was born around 1882 in, I believe in Hayneville, Alabama or Hayneville.  I don't know how to pronounce it and migrated to Chicago.  She was educated at Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts] here in New England and also at Hampton University [Virginia] or, yeah, Hampton.  She went to Hampton.  I'm not sure what she did at Hampton.  She was at Hampton and then Simmons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was she, okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Well, I was just gonna say she was sponsored to come up to New England from Alabama by a white family whose name I don't remember but could probably look up, as, you know, part of the activity in the Reconstruction or post-Reconstruction era.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your grandmother would have been born, what, around 1880?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandmother was born, I think 1882.
Speaker 1: Eighteen eighty-two [1882], okay.
Speaker 2: I think.  It may be 1883, but I believe, I always had it as 1882.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was sponsored to come to Simmons.  Now, is Simmons one of the seven sisters schools or--
Speaker 2: No, no, it's, it's one of the Fenway Colleges as they're called here now.  But it's one of the colleges in Boston [Massachusetts] located in the Fenway area.
Speaker 1: Okay, so here in Boston though?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: The Fenway area is near Fenway Park?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, it's the, it's connected, it's the same general area.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is there a story about how she met the white people that funded her?
Speaker 2: I don't know that story.  You know, I think they were active in her neighborhood and, and, you know, and her community.  But I don't really know.  That's, this is one of the short stubs of the family actually in terms of what I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do have her parents' names somewhere.  I can, again, I have to look that up because we found it by research rather than by family story.
Speaker 1: Now, was your grandmother the first person in her family to go to college?
Speaker 2: I believe so.  I think that is right.  My grandfather on that side, if you're ready for him--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was named Morris Chester Gaines.
Speaker 1: Morris Chester Gaines.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, there seems to be a famous Morris Chester I'm thinking about, but I'm not sure--
Speaker 2: I don't, I do not know who he was named after.
Speaker 1: I think it was a photographer named Morris Chester--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --from the nineteenth century, a black photographer.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.  I don't, I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know what the origin of his name was.  His, he was a plastering contractor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and, in Chicago as was his father and family.  He, he was also one of something like five brothers and sisters who were, who, you know, were all, you know, folks I knew growing up.  And his father was William T. Gaines, who was the first black plastering contractor in Chicago.  And they came up from Henderson, Kentucky.  And I have a cousin who's done a lot of genealogical research on that side of the family.  So I have lots of written data about the Gaines's.
Speaker 1: Okay, first black plasterer in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: W. T. Gaines was his name--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and they called him "The Boss" I understand (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so he had a formal plastering business, and your father got involved.
Speaker 2: My grandfather.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather got involved with that--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --that business.
Story_ID: 22767
Speaker 1: So, now, did your--where did your mother [Virginia Gaines] go to school?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother, well, she went to school in Chicago [Illinois].  She went to Englewood High School.  And then she went to, at some point for a while to Chicago Normal School, I believe.  But then she, she graduated from the University of Chicago [Illinois], and I believe she majored in Spanish at that time, and I guess graduated--when did she graduate?  I wanna say 1938, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she became a teacher and school administrator in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Was she a Spanish teacher?
Speaker 2: No, she, she ended up being a sixth grade teacher and then later a science teacher.  And then in the '60s [1960s], I guess, she, well, she took off from teaching when we were young, when my brother and I were young and then went back as an administrator in the school system and was in charge of Title III reading programs in the early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, now, was your mother doing what she wanted to do in terms of, did she have a--was that her vision of being involved in that profession?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I think so, yeah.  Certainly, her vision to be involved in education, and as I say, she took a break when we were young and, and, you know, was a homemaker during that time--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then when, by the time--only when we were very young.  By the time we were in, you know, middle, you know, grade school or middle school, she had gone back to work as a teacher.  She taught at Willard School in Chicago, which I believe no longer exists.  It was around 49th [Street] and, what, 49th and St. Lawrence [Avenue] maybe?
Story_ID: 22768
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, he's Roscoe Conkling Giles, Jr. (laughter).  So the spelling is the same (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, he was born on March 16, 1919, also in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was born near the time of the Chicago riots of 1919.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess that's true.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm not sure when it took, off hand.  I think it was that summer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that April (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It was the summer when, after he was born.
Speaker 2: It was the summer.  That sounds right, that sounds right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.  It was, so he came in here in March.  The riot, I think was in August.
Speaker 2: I see, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, June 19, okay.  So what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Well, we talked about them a little bit.  So his, his father was Roscoe Conkling Giles the first (laughter), the senior.  He was a surgeon, a doctor and surgeon and was, I think he was born about 1890.  And I don't remember his date of birth actually, but I can look it up.  I have it written around somewhere.
Speaker 1: So this is historic.  This is, he would be I suppose, a part of the historic Provident Hospital.
Speaker 2: Yes, right, he did, he worked at Provident when he came to Chicago [Illinois].  He, he actually was also the first black graduate of Cornell Medical School [New York].  And he went to Cornell, and he was also the second general president of the Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity, though he wasn't a founder.  You know, he wasn't one of the five founders of it.  He was early on involved in it.  I understand he wrote the first ritual for the Alphas.  And there's some history about him that's in the Alpha literature, and also he has a sort of unpublished autobiography that I have.  But there're pieces of that that were, have been excerpted for articles in, in various contexts.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was the second overall president of Alpha Phi Alpha.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) right.
Speaker 1: And you say he, I'm sorry, he was the first black graduate of--
Speaker 2: Cornell Medical School.
Speaker 1: Cornell Medical School, okay.  Now, where did he go to undergraduate school?
Speaker 2: He went to Cornell.
Speaker 1: Oh, he went to Cornell for--
Speaker 2: He went to Cornell for undergraduate as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22769
Speaker 1: All right, so, let's see.  Any other stories, I mean stories about that side?  What about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, let's see.  My grandmother, her name was Frances Reader (ph.), and I don't have much about her.  She is from Keokuk, Iowa.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: I knew you'd say that.  As soon as I said it, I knew you were gonna say that.  K-E-O-K-U-K, I believe.
Speaker 1: It must be an Indian name, I suppose.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I'm sure it was.
Speaker 1: Keokuk, Iowa, okay. Frances Reader and did, did she have an occupation, I mean a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a nurse.  She was a nurse.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I, they may well have met at Provident [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois].  My grandfather [Roscoe Conkling Giles], I mean one of the stories about him, and again, it's--I have his autobiography, so I can get it sort of right if I need to check it.  But, you know, after graduation, he tried to get a job in New York.  I mean that's where, you know, he had grown up in New York City by that time, though he was born up in Albany [New York], I believe.  But anyway, he, he, you know, they wouldn't let, you know, he couldn't get a job.  And there was a big controversy about him, you know, trying to get a job as a, as a black physician.  And while they were waiting to resolve that, he came, he went to Chicago and got started at Provident.  Well, actually, he came to Provident second.  He got started at some Chicago lying-in sanitarium where he ended up with a, having to have some sort of police escort to bring him in the first day because people were trying to riot to keep him out.  And an alderman in Chicago named Oscar DePriest was very helpful in doing that.  And my father's elder brother was named Oscar DePriest Giles.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Oscar DePriest, the first black Congressman, post-Reconstruction, elected in the United States.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So your grandfather was at Provident with George Cleveland Hall and Daniel Hale Williams.
Speaker 2: Yep, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  And my grandfather, I have some, he, he--I have some research papers that he wrote, you know, back in the day.  And he was one of the first to do an open heart massage.  He was the first person to do one of those.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think Cornell [University] actually has a fellowship or something named after him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Chicago has a Provident Historical Society.  It actually has offices in Hyde Park.
Speaker 2: Oh, really, okay.
Speaker 1: They actually preserve the records of Provident.
Speaker 2: There may be some records, I have, I have records of my grandfather as well, and probably I should talk to them as well.  I've talked a little bit to folks in the DuSable Museum [of African American History, Chicago, Illinois], you know, about some day getting these papers done, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22770
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is historical--there are very few places like Provident [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] in the country.  And Freedman's Hospital in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] and then the one in St. Louis, Homer-Phillips--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Provident.
Speaker 2: So my, my grandfather [Roscoe Conkling Giles, I] also spent time at Fort Huachuca in, was that New Mexico, Fort Huachuca [Arizona], yeah, you know.  There was a black medical group there of, of which he was one of the leaders.  He was a colonel in, in the military then.  And I guess one other sort of interesting story about him, well, it had to do more with my father.  I heard it more from my father's point of view, is that they, he had a fellowship in Austria, in Vienna, in 1930, my grandfather did and went over for a year in 1930.  And, you know, my father told me about going to school, you know, in Vienna [Austria] then and, and, you know, being one of the folks to stand up for some of the Jewish kids and getting into fights and so on.  But, you know, it was quite an environment to be in Austria, you know, as Hitler was coming to rise.  So my grandfather had that experience.  All I have is a few pictures of that time, you know, of their trip.  And, you know, remarkably, records, you know, that are now electronically scanned of things like their ship passage.  So I can, you know, find the records, you know, from when they went on some ship in 1930.
Speaker 1: Now, it's true that most of the venom was spewed on Jews in Nazi, Germany for political reasons--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, but did--how did your grandfather, how was his treatment in Vienna?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know a lot about it directly.  I'm, you know, it seemed, you know, I've seen pictures of him, you know, with other people there and so on.  But I have very little insight into how he was treated.  I've, you know, I did hear from my father that, you know, he was in, in this position of having Jewish friends and, and, you know, getting into fights on their behalf or a fight on their behalf.  It probably was just one time, you know, but it, that's all I heard directly.
Speaker 1: Is there a, can you remember the details of the story, about the fight?
Speaker 2: Not really, very well, I mean that, you know, that basically, they were beating up one of his friends, and he jumped in, and intervened.  But I don't have the detail.
Story_ID: 22771
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, all right, now, your father [Roscoe Conkling Giles, Jr.], now, did--he went to school in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went to school in Chicago.  He, he--and, well, certainly my mother [Virginia Gaines] went to Englewood [neighborhood in Chicago, Illinois].  I believe he also at some point went to Englewood [High School].  I'm not a hundred percent sure about that.  Then he went to college at Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and was a graduating Dartmouth undergrad.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he graduated from Dartmouth, and now, what did he pursue?
Speaker 2: Oh, he, he became a--well, he did a number of things, but ultimately, he became a court reporter and ran a court reporting business first in Oakland, California which was when I was born.  They moved back to Chicago when I was four years old, and my brother was, had just been born.  He was one or something.  And then in Chicago, ultimately, he became a court reporter in the federal courts and was, I think the first black official court reporter in, you know, for that district in Northern Illinois.  And until his, his death, he was an official court reporter, first for, I believe Judge Perry and then a sequence of federal judges.  He was reappointed.
Story_ID: 22772
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.  I'm not sure I know all the details.  I think my, my father [Roscoe Conkling, Jr.] actually met my mother's [Virginia Gaines] sister first, my Aunt Louise.  And, but this was, you know, around the, the War [World War II] time, the, you know, the '40s [1940s], you know, early '40s [1940s].  And then he and my mother started going out.  He, he met her, and they got married in 1943.  So I don't have a detailed story about how they met, but that sort of is the general idea.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your dad serve in the war [World War II]?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't.  He had heart problems and did not serve.  His brother did, and my Uncle Oscar was in the war, but my father was not.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you think about your parents' personalities and dispositions and mannerisms, habits, the way they walk, the way they look, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, a little bit of both.  I mean I think I probably look a little bit more like my father [Roscoe Conkling Giles, Jr.] and grandfather.  I think my sort of--some of my personality is more of my mother [Virginia Gaines].  So, as an example, I, I've--and this is something I have on my mind at the moment.  You know, she ended up being the one in her family who took responsibility for managing the elders' affairs and for taking care of things.  And I ended up playing that same role relative to her and my aunt.  I'm sort of (unclear), I mean that responsibility just ended.  They, they both passed on in the last couple of years in their nineties, in their mid-90s.  And I guess I realize now that I don't have, I'm not gonna have that responsibility anymore.  The next time, it'll be my turn, hopefully, and some time in the future to be taken care of (laughter).  But, but I was very much aware that somehow I became the person, as my mother did, you know, who sort of knows about everybody's estate, has everybody's papers and is, you know, working that kind of stuff through.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, what was your father's personality like?
Speaker 2: Well, he was, he was a very, very friendly and outgoing person.  At work, he greeted everybody and everybody knew him.  And everybody had kind words to say about him.  I think that was, you know, the main effect.  He was also a person of lots of enthusiasm for whatever project he was in.  And he, interestingly enough, because I think this is something I certainly share an interest in, he was sort of a technology innovator.  So he was a court reporter, and, for example, he was the first one in, in that federal court building to have tape recording, you know, sessions of court, where--that's so common place now, you don't think of it as something that was ever an innovation.  But he, he was one of the first ones to do that.  He always tried to have the latest equipment and innovative stuff.  The first digital watch I ever saw, my father had, you know.  It had a processor, probably equivalent to what you might now find--I can't, I can't think that there's anyplace you can have as small a processor.  But maybe what's in a card, you know, that you throw away.  And it costs, you know, 500 dollars to have this, you know, little red lights flick on.  It was quite an amazing thing, the first digital watch I saw on his arm.
Story_ID: 22773
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, you have siblings, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a brother, Morris Giles, who lives in Chicago.  He's four years younger than me.
Speaker 1: Okay, Morris Giles?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Morris Chester Giles, named after--
Speaker 1: Morris Chester Giles, right.
Speaker 2: --my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's just the two of you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just the two of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and he was born in what, '53 [1953]?
Speaker 2: '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: '54 [1954], okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, sorry, you're right, '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: I peaked at the paper.  That's why I knew (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  I keep jumping back and forth.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, so, now, what did your brother do?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, he, he--I think the most notable thing about him is, is probably that he was, in his youth he was really an amazing chess master.  So he, you know, he played chess with the best of them.  You know, a story, I mean it doesn't have to do with his professional life or his advanced life as a chess player.  But he, I remember a family story that he was with my mother [Virginia Gaines] in line to go to the theater in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] to go see a movie.  And the people were out playing, you know, speed chess outside.  And he did two games of speed chess outside, winning both while they were waiting in line to get tickets (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's in Harper's Court in Hyde Park.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Harper's Court, exactly, exactly.  That's exactly where it was.  So he, he was really, really, you know, good at that.  Later on he, you know, became a little bit more reclusive.  And he, he lives in Chicago.  He helped take care of my mother.  He's a computer programmer.  He's been working, yeah.
Story_ID: 22774
Speaker 1: All right.  So, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I kind of do, and I brought, I think one picture of it, which is being out in the yard in our house in California.  And so, you know, which I think I played out there a lot, and that's, that's probably the earliest, and it's totally isolated from anything else.  I don't know what I was doing the day before and the day after.  I'm told around that time was when I convinced my visiting godmother who was taking care of me that I normally got a dozen slices of bacon each morning for breakfast one time when my mother [Virginia Gaines] left me with her.  And somehow I managed to persuade her that that was true, apparently.  I don't actually remember this.  I certainly remember liking bacon.  But my mother thought that was the most amazing thing that anybody, any adult would actually believe that I normally had a dozen slices (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well, she probably remarked that you knew what a dozen was, you know--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: You might not have.
Speaker 2: I might not have.  For all I know, I just kept saying more and more until they ran out (laughter).
Story_ID: 22775
Speaker 1: All right, so we always ask--now, you moved to Chicago [Illinois], your family moved to Chicago when you were four?
Speaker 2: When I was four, yeah.
Speaker 1: And your memory's just starting, basically, up and everything.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're about a year into it.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And move to Chicago, and so you basically grew up in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I basically, grew up in Chicago.
Speaker 1: And so, can you describe where you grew up, and I mean the kind of house it was, and the kind of neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, it was sort of two places that I remember.  When we first went to Chicago, my--we went back essentially because my father [Roscoe Giles, Jr.] was having back trouble.  He had a slipped disk, and needed to be basically off work for a year.  So we went back, and that was 1953, '54 [1954] or thereabouts.  And first we lived with my grandparents, my father's family in Chicago, in Hyde Park at, around 53rd [Street] and Greenwood [Avenue].  And so my earliest time was growing up there, maybe for--I don't remember exactly how many years, but, but, you know, three or four years we probably spent there.  I started kindergarten at the, at the Lab school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools] then when we were living there due to some, a little bit of help from one of the families that lived down the street from us who were, who had kids in the Lab School.  And then we moved to 77th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue], which was on the Southside of Chicago, near the--well, it wasn't then, but near where the Dan Ryan Expressway is now.
Speaker 1: Okay, 77th and Indiana.  And that's what we call Chatham, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, it was Chatham.  That's right or Park Manor.  I can never, you know, it was actually--I think it was Park, it was on the edge between Chatham and Park Manor.  I think Chatham started probably at 79th Street, and Park Manor was before that.  I don't know what the boundaries were.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a nice neighborhood, with wide--
Speaker 2: Wide street, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, wide street.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that was, and most of the time we grew up there.  We had a, you know, probably two, three, bedroom house, you know, not a big, nothing big and fancy.  The house in Hyde Park was big and fancy, that my grandparents lived in.
Speaker 1: So this is a, so the house you lived in, in that neighborhood, I would guess was a bungalow because--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, it was a bungalow.  It was two stories, yeah, I guess two stories.  And, you know, we had bedrooms on the second floor, my brother and I and my parents, and, you know, dining room, living room, kitchen, nice big backyard where we used to play in the basement where I'd conduct my experiments (laughter) or, or play is more like it.
Story_ID: 22776
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is, we always ask this question.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And we always ask it in this way.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, you know, there're cooking smells, and, you know, I do identify the bacon smell somehow, but not in large quantities (laughter).  The, what were the sights?  I mean I, we were always playing outside, which it seems somewhat different than, than maybe is common now.  But we were always outside playing.  And so, you know, the sights of the kids on the block, you know, playing and running around in the grass on, across the street and so on is something I remember.  My father [Roscoe Giles, Jr.] was very, very much like, but didn't have access to much until later, sports cars, so he would try to get a Corvette or something and now and again we'd go for a drive, that kind of thing.  Let's see, I would ride my bike around a fair amount once I got big enough to ride.  And, you know, play ball over the summer, that kind of thing.  Going to school, I, I went to the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory School], so that was in Hyde Park where I lived in Park Manor.  And so I always had a bus ride, you know, two buses down South Parkway or King Drive, then it was South Parkway, to 61st Street, and then across, the bus across 61st Street.  That was after, I guess I should say, that was when I was fairly older, probably by the time I was in high school or so.  Before then we had, there was a bus service, a little lady who ran a, you know, a bus.  She and her husband had, you know, two, two vans.  I guess now you'd call 'em like minivans or something.  But they were the school bus, and they came and picked us up and took us to school and back.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, Chicago is a real active place.  Now, that's a quiet neighborhood.  You know, it's not, probably not a lot of activity going on in that neighborhood except for kids playing like you said--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's probably true.
Story_ID: 22777
Speaker 1: And University of Chicago [Laboratory Schools], was that any different, I mean it's a very serious school too (laughter), which is one of the most, most serious in the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have any, what was it like being on the campus every day?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was kind of, so the Lab School itself was, is a separate section of the university.  And so you could go there and not be totally aware of the size and scope of the whole university.  I mean I remember they used to take us, probably when we were in the early grades, we'd go on like a field trip.  And I remember, I guess we were doing something about aquatic life and so we went on a field trip where, you know, we got basically pond scum and then brought it back and looked in microscopes and so on.  But for me, that, when we went to this really exotic place somewhere, where there was a little pond and I couldn't imagine where this pond was.  You know, it was a tiny, little thing, but not much bigger than ten feet across and twenty feet long.  And so later, many years later, I, I realized all they had done is taken this over to the common area of the university where there's a little bit of water out, where they now have some of the concerts and plays (laughter), you know.  But to me, as a little kid, that was this most amazing place, and I had no idea where it was.  So, it was kind of funny.  You didn't have a whole sense of how big the university was and the world was the halls of that section of, of the school.  I guess I also remember that, you know, we were part of, connected to the education department at, at the university that has, the education department had a building right next to us that was connected to the school.  And we'd always have what we called MATs [Master of Arts in Teaching] and only many years later did I understand that meant people who were, you know, in the degree program for Master of Arts in teaching coming to do experiments with us or to help out in the classroom and so on.  So, it was kind of interesting.  But it always was a big change of venue because in the neighborhood, with the kids in the neighborhood, they mostly went to the nearby school, which I wanna say was Ruggles [Elementary School], was our local school, though it's now confusing for me 'cause there's Ruggles Station and all that here in Boston [Massachusetts].  But I believe Ruggles was the school on Prairie [Avenue], around 78th [Street] and Prairie.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Whatever school is at 78th, around, between sort of 77th and 78th and Prairie or Calumet, maybe it's all the way over to Calumet, was the school.
Speaker 1: I think I know where you mean, yeah.
Speaker 2: I wanna say Ruggles, but I may now be wrong because I, later in life, I've run into lots of Ruggles-related things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, anyway, but, so that was kind of an interesting dichotomy that I had, you know, as far as I could see, I had two different worlds of friends, right, the folks at the University of Chicago who were, you know, mostly white and Jewish, and a handful of black kids and the neighborhood which was all black kids, you know.  So, I mean it didn't have a lot of direct tension, but it was definitely a change of context to move from one to the other, just different things to talk about, different things to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about extracurricular activities?  Did you, were you involved in the boy scouts or the--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I was a cub scout for a while, and I didn't go very far in the boy scouts.  But I have a cousin, whose, you know, been a boy--a scout for fifty years and is in various leadership councils.  But I, I sort of went through that, you know, basically, with the neighborhood kids, you know, the, the--two doors down, the cub scout, you know, master or mistress, was one of my friend's mothers, and we sort of all got involved with that at the time.  Other things I did, I mean in sort of extracurricular, in grade school, you know, I think it was mostly just we, we played and, and did things.  I, you know, we had school plays.  We had, you know, sort of school-centered activities.  In high school, I was in, you know, the math club and the science club and, and, you know, things like that.  I also spent a lot of time playing pool.  There was, this was more in high school, but we had pool tables in one of the buildings near the school that we had access to.  And that was one of the after-school activities.  So I do remember, you know, perhaps obsessively, playing pool and bumper pool and, you know, being pretty good at it.  That was high school though.
Story_ID: 22778
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was church a factor in growing up?
Speaker 2: Not very much.  We went to St. Edmunds [Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois].  My parents, you know, really were not active at all in the church and didn't go.  But they sent us as kids, you know, to, to give us that option.  And then, you know, by the time I was around thirteen or so I said I was no longer interested, and they said, well, okay (laughter).  You know, thirteen, I don't know, some age like that.  So we weren't super active.  We certainly went to Sunday school when we were little and, you know, it was all St. Edmunds.
Speaker 1: Was St. Edmunds the school your, I mean the church your grandfather attended?
Speaker 2: Well, he actually, my, my grandfather on, on my father's side was very active with, I believe, let's see what was it?  Was it St. Thomas?  It was another, it was a different church.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, well, St. Thomas is on Wabash Avenue, 51st [Street] and Wabash?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I mean certainly, I have many family members who are very active there.  My aunt and people on the Gaines' side were very active there.  I wanna say my grandfather might have been too, but it might have been still another church.  I can look that up.  I'm sure I can find out what church that was.  But I don't recall offhand what, what church he was most involved with.  Other people in the family were at St. Thomas, and then some were, were St. Edmunds.  My grandparents, my mother's parents, I think were St. Edmunds.  And so my grandmother was there and she, I should say my, you know, one of the memories is--I hadn't thought about it, that we did grow up with my grandmother, with Betty Gaines, you know, and Greene was her maiden name.  She came over five--she, she lived with my aunt and her husband in Hyde Park.  They had a big house in Hyde Park, my, my aunt.  This is my mother's sister, Louise Doherty was her married name.  And she was, she worked in the Chicago school system.  She was a, an assistant superintendent in charge of special Ed [education] during the time of a superintendent named Willis.
Speaker 1: The infamous--
Speaker 2: The infamous Willis of the Willis wagons and so on.  Well, she was--
Speaker 1: Benjamin Willis.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, Benjamin Willis, I didn't, could no longer remember his first name.  So, she was the, she was, lived in Hyde Park and worked there.  And my grandparents, her parents, and my mother's parents, lived in their house.  They had a big house at, what, forty, I wanna say 48th [Street] and Greenwood [Avenue], right down the street from the [President Barack] Obamas, if only we still had that house in the family.  But she traded it in for something more suitable to her elder years a long time ago.
Speaker 1: 48th and Greenwood, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's funny that not too long ago, in the '70s [1970s], that those properties were going cheaper.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's funny how that works, and now they're million dollars places.
Speaker 2: Right, right, that would have been nice.  So I'm trying to think.  She got out of it probably in the, around 1980.  Yeah, it was 4849 Greenwood.  And she got, she left that place in the '80s [1980s] and got a condo down at 400 East Randolph [Street] and a condo in Solano Beach [California] which is still in the family in her trust which I manage.  But anyway, the, the, my grandparents lived with, kind of lived with, at her house.  But my grandmother came over to our house to babysit with my brother and I when my mother had gone back to work for basically, lived there for five days a week and then went back on the weekends.  So that was their arrangement.  My grandfather used to, when he came out to visit at 77th [Street], he would walk usually from 48th and Greenwood up to 77th, which we all thought was an amazing feat (laughter).  You know, but that was his exercise was to walk, you know, through the whole city.
Story_ID: 22779
Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois] was a place then, probably even more so than now, where you could walk.  I mean people do walk to places.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, now, you, the [University of Chicago] Lab School wasn't too far from the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So, I don't know, did you spend a lot of time there?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that we spent a lot.  We certainly visited there all the time.  I mean, you know, probably once a year we would have trips there or, or something there.  So, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And also, I mean the University of Chicago, itself, of course, is the home of atomic research and--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and that famous, oh, gosh, had people working on the Manhattan project [a research and development project that produced the first atomic bombs during World War II].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, Fermi [Enrico Fermi] did the first self-sustaining chain reaction under the fields over at, around, between what, 57th and 58th [streets] and Ellis [Avenue], I think, or maybe it was between 58th and 59th [streets].  There is a Henry Moore statute there now.  When that statute was put in--this may be out of sequence for your sequence, but when that statute was put in, I was an undergrad there.  This was during the Vietnam War, and it was rumored that [Vice President] Hubert Humphrey was gonna come, the vice president was gonna come for the inauguration or the dedication of that statute.  In fact, he did not come, but it was rumored that he was supposed to come.  And so the [United States] Secret Service made us all move out of our apartment.  We had an apartment with a window view of that statue, and so the Secret Service took over our building and made all us students get out of the way for fear, I suppose, that, you know, we would try to shoot at the vice president or something.  But that's how I remembered the address (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, yeah, I was gonna say, there's a big ball, a black ball out there--
Speaker 2: Right, right, that's the statute.
Speaker 1: Of Henry Moore, yeah--
Speaker 2: And then in the--
Speaker 1: --memorial, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the fields, it was done under the football fields, apparently, stands of the stadium which used to be there.  Now, there's a graduate library there and the sculpture and then some other facility is on that space.  But it does make you wonder, of course, that, you know, the first, self-sustaining chain reaction under the football stands is kind of an amazing concept (laughter), you know, for now.  I mean, in other words, what were the safety considerations at the time for doing that, and, you know, how much did people know.  I don't know.
Story_ID: 22780
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, the U-C [University of Chicago] Lab[oratory] School has a tremendous reputation--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --as being a good school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I loved it.  I totally loved it, I think--oh, I wanna say, you know, I, I don't know if every day if you'd asked that while I was there, I would say, I totally loved it.  But in retrospect, you know, I totally did.  And I enjoyed, I mean I did enjoy school very much.  I, I got pretty good grades the whole time, and got very much stimulated to the interests that I've pursued in the ensuing years in math and physics and that kind of stuff.  I really like that.
Speaker 1: Can you, were you interested in math first or science or do you know what came first?
Speaker 2: I, I would sort of say science, but, again, you know, a kid's view of those things is very fuzzy.  So, as you come up--from my perspective, you know, coming up, I didn't make a big distinction between math, science, engineering, you know, things that seemed like broadly different things to us now.  I was interested in all of them.  Now, I have to say if--and, and going through college and graduate school is where you have more of that feeling of separating those two, and, you know, being very distinct and then getting out in the world, even the world of academia, the boundaries become unclear again, you know, where those boundaries are.  So, so in the beginning, I, if I was gonna focus on one, I'd probably actually say, ironically enough, there was probably more like the electricity and engineering stuff.  So one, another one of my early memories, not as early as we talked about before, was getting a pile of electrical stuff--I think probably it must have been when I was seven or eight.  And it was while we were living in Chicago [Illinois], but all I wanted was light bulbs and batteries and wires so I, and switches so I could make little circuits.  And I'd be busy, you know, making these circuits to do stuff.  So that was what I focused on first.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you get the idea to do those things?
Speaker 2: I'm not even sure where that first came from.  Now-a-days, now, it seems like I always was interested in that and so on.  It may well have been some kit or some toy that somebody got me that had features of that.  I know by, I think the time I was in fifth grade, the teacher asked me at school--and this was sort of one of the advantages of going to a school where people were very responsive to people's interests.  She said did I wanna do a project, you know, during lunch hour to make a kind of question and answer board.  So like, it was a board in class on the classroom wall that had, sort of questions with multiple answers and a little light, you know, a little light by the answer, and you'd press, you pressed on, you know, whatever you thought was the answer, and if you were right, the light would light up, right.  So I had to wire this little board, and, you know, that seemed great to me.  I mean it's a totally simple-minded thing, but, but, you know, I really enjoyed doing that kind of thing.  So I would say I, I liked playing with math and, and thinking about the application of math to the physics.  But the first thing that was interesting was the sort of electrical gadgets.
Story_ID: 22781
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you, now, television and radio were powered by vacuum tubes in those days--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and did you get involved in changing the vacuum tubes and troubleshooting?
Speaker 2: Oh, more, yeah, changing them, using them.  By the time I was, you know, in high school age or early high school age, I was, I was big on that stuff.  So I had in the basement, I had a corner of the basement with old radios and TVs and tubes and capacitors.  And, you know, I, I have, I think I still have the book upstairs.  Of course, it reflects the time, 'The Boys Second Book of Radio and Electronics' with an introduction by [David] Sarnoff or somebody, you know, like that, you know, that says--
Speaker 1: David Sarnoff [pioneer of American radio and television], himself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, I mean, I mean not personally, but, yeah, those kind of books.  Of course, it says 'boys', you know, which is, is sort of outrageous in retrospect.  But, you know, saying how we needed to know all, do electronics and so on, had, you know, had projects that, that you could do and so I did some of those.  I'm not sure my parents always understood what the, you know, sort of perimeters were.  So one of my great acquisitions down in the basement was, I had gone up to a store up on 79th Street that was throwing out old junk and got a couple of neon sign transformers, which are, you know, you plug them into the 110 AC, and they step it up to 15,000 volts in order to, you know, to run the neon sign where you have to have gas discharge.  Well, I was using them to make a Jacob's ladder, which is that thing you sometimes see in old science fiction movies where you have to two wires, sort of like the 'v' that come up and the spark forms at the bottom and then goes up because the air is heated and it goes up.  Well, I, I had my 15,000 volt transformers doing that down in the basement or in the backyard with a hand-built glass capacitor, you know, to, to help store some of the energy.  I, to this--well, to this day, but I don't think my mother [Virginia Gaines] ever realized quite what I was doing down there (laughter).  You know, I think she would have had, had some, something to say about me running this 15,000 volt thing that would have killed me in an instant if I had made a mistake (laughter).
Speaker 1: Wow, yeah, that's, now, Chicago [Illinois] is, there's a lot of access to that kind of stuff in Chicago.  I mean just--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was stuff around, and you could--
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's stores that just sell switches.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you could just--
Speaker 2: I remember I used to go over to, gosh, now, what--Newark Electronics used to have an out, an outlet just a little West of us on the other side of State Street.  I don't remember what street it was.  But I remember being very frustrated when they built the Dan Ryan [expressway], and I could no longer walk easily over to Newark Electronics 'cause it was no longer, I mean they had basically a ditch where, you know, they'd knocked down a whole block long, you know, a block wide stretch to build the expressway.  And during that construction, there was no way to get over there anymore.  And so, you know, of course, from my perspective, they cut me off from the electronics store (laughter).
Story_ID: 22782
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, on the consumer side of television, what were you seeing that--were you seeing anything in the media that inspired you?  I mean this was the age of the space race and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all that, all that was, was going there, as well as all the, you know, the science fiction of the time, right, the generic, you know, scientists save us from the giant grasshoppers.  I don't know if you ever saw that movie --the grasshoppers that ate Chicago [Illinois].  What was it called?  'The Beginning of the End', I remember that made a big impression on me.
Speaker 1: Is that the one where the grasshoppers crawling up the Wrigley building?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  That's the one, right, exactly.  It was not, it was all--I use things like that sometimes informally in talking to students now because there's such bad examples of engineering in the sense that the scientists, you know, an hour before total destruction comes, thinks of some idea and then goes implement, and implements it and turns it on and it works, which is not at all the way building any real thing works or any real engineering project.  You have to test and you, you know, whatever you do first is going to have errors or bugs or something, and it's a whole process to get from an idea to a working prototype.  But in those movies, it was just like that [finger snap].  The day you thought of it, you know, and so in that one, they thought of some sound that would attract all the giant grasshoppers to the middle of the lake, thinking that they're gonna mate, and so immediately cleared the place out.  Anyway--
Speaker 1: And be disappointed now, the grasshoppers--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right, yeah, that was just crazy stuff.  I mean so it was very, now, all that would, stuff would look very cheesy as video or as, you know, its quality.  But it, it did give you that feeling that through learning and knowledge and application of it to problems, you could solve giant problems or have great insights and so on.  So that was the message in a certain sense that was carried in that, in all that stuff.
Speaker 1: Did you watch Diana Herbert's 'Watch Mr. Wizard'?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, I forgot about that.  Sure, I loved 'Mr. Wizard', yeah, would not miss that, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you had the advantage of being at the University of Chicago.  You had a grandfather who was a doctor.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And there's, you know, there's, so you had access to science on some level that a lot of little kids wouldn't have had.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, I think that's true though it didn't seem--you know, it's interesting that to a certain extent, my parents raised me up in a bubble where I didn't really realize how privileged I actually was.  I mean so that just all seemed normal to me in a certain sense, all right.  And, and, even in the neighborhood, you had, you know, people, of not necessarily identical background and strivings, but certainly--well, identical strivings, but not identical resources.  So everybody was, you know, seemed when I was growing up to be interested in some of these things.  You know, so it, it didn't seem, looking back I can see that that was very privileged, and even at the, you know, even later, I could look back and say well, you know, there's quite a range of what's happening.  But at the time, it seemed like just sort of the way things are, I guess like any kid growing up feels that way.
Story_ID: 22783
Speaker 1: Okay, so was there a particular teacher at school that was like a mentor or too special time with you?  I know they're all probably good teacher over there, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were, there were a number of them.  I, I guess I would think of the teacher who, who in fifth grade, who helped me with, who had me do that project over the, over the summer and over the--sorry, over the lunch hours.  The, I think in high school, there were a couple, I think of, really a couple of math teachers and one of the science teachers who helped me.  So, Mrs. Ames was this young, vibrant teacher, though I don't think--I, I certainly didn't think of her as young then.  But in retrospect, she was a kid (laughter), right, and, and you know, had us do lots of interesting math problems and, and we really had a good time with her.  I, there was another math teacher, Mr. Molten, I remember.  And his, with him it was, it was a really different story.  I was in, by then I was in the math club.  I think I was the president of the math club, and this was like near senior year or junior year.  And I remember he had, he had posed some puzzle, what was it?  Oh, it was to, it, it had something to do with minimization and optimization, you know, of a, of a quadratic or something.  I mean it doesn't matter in detail what it was, but the point was that I had been reading ahead and, and sort of trying to learn a little calculus from some college books that I had gotten out at the library.  And so he posed this problem where he, what he wanted us to do was to work through using some of the tools that we had available and the ideas that we had been talking about.  And instead, I pulled out all this calculus that I knew or had just learned.  And rather than getting sort of infinite praise, you know, from this guy, which is what I kind of expected, he, he was actually quite critical, and said, you know, you, you--yes, you got to that solution, but you didn't really deal, grapple with the problem that I wanted you to.  And, you know, what's, kind of what I wanted you to do, and it's, it, it pushed me to, to think, you know, that getting the answer fast and getting those, you know, that approbation for that wasn't what it was all about, you know, all the time, 'cause I was very surprised.  I said, what, you know, I did the answer.  I used all this stuff that, that is beyond my grade level, you know, how come you're not totally excited?  So I, I actually, that made a big impact on me to, to, you know, sort of examine in a little bit different way how everything fits together.
Story_ID: 22784
Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, high school.  You went to high school at the University of Chicago Lab[oratory] School [Chicago, Illinois] too.
Speaker 2: Yep, I did, I did.
Speaker 1: Now, I've often wondered.  What is the social life like at U-C Lab School, I mean high school?
Speaker 2: Well, it suited me well which is I didn't go out much.  There actually were a lot of activities and so on that people did do.  You know, and there were cliques of more or less social life.  And I would say that I was on the side of not doing a lot of social life things and not missing it very much.  There certainly was an organized set of activities and a lot of enthusiasm around some of the sports activities, the basketball team and, and the other teams, mainly the basketball is what I remember.  And I had friends who were on that team, you know, and they, they had a whole set of social engagements.  I was in, I was also in the band.  I had forgotten to mention that before, but I, I played trombone in the band and still have a trombone hidden somewhere in the basement.  My probably strongest commentary about my trombone playing was when I was, would come home for the summer and practice, and the dog would run into the other room and hide under something.  But, anyway, I did play and played in the jazz band as well.  So I had those activities going on.  And they, so the areas of social life had to do with, I think with things like that.  I was not a big dater or big, you know, going to dances.  I would sort of grudgingly do that, you know, as the occasion presented itself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have many friends?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I had a reasonable number of friends.  A lot of, I mean basically, as I suggested at some point before, I had kind of a school set of friends and a home set of friends.  And so, and interacted a fair amount with, with all of them.  A lot of the school friends, you know, shared my interests in math or science and this sort of stuff, and, and, you know, maybe we even formed a sub group that was the set of people who weren't as socially engaged as, as others.  But we were engaged with each other, and, you know, doing things together.  And, you know, sort of the Nerd Club in modern language.
Story_ID: 22785
Speaker 1: Science, science being a--and that's a place where you can really focus on science.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you can.  I mean I don't think, I wouldn't wanna leave the impression that that's a necessary thing to do.  But it was an easy thing to do, and it was also at a, at a very special time in the development of science as far as I could see, which is that sort of post-Sputnik [first artificial satellite; launched into orbit in 1957 by the Soviet Union] era where value was placed in general on being able to do science and engineering and things that contributed to the nation in that way, together with a kind of assumption that, that also was around in the media, that if you did that kind of stuff, you didn't have to be normal, okay, or you didn't have to appear like everybody else.  And so what that let you do was that, that if you--and this is my interpretation now, many years later, not something I felt at the time, but what that let you do is that when, as a young person, you faced the social challenges that everybody faces of, well, how do I present myself to others?  How do I learn to date and ask somebody out?  How do I learn to carry on a conversation that is not either a cartoon or somehow prescripted, but just to give, you know, to connect with another person?  Everybody finds that difficult.  But if you're also good at math and science and find that difficult, you get excused right away from even trying.  And so I think that happened to a number of us at that age, and then we had to figure all that stuff out later, a little bit later than, than most people did because, we, nobody asked us to do it.  I, I think that probably has changed a lot since I was a kid, you know, or at least changed to some degree, that, you know, we don't just say to somebody that because you're good at math and science, that therefore, you're excused from human contact.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but science and mathematics is intense from what I've been told, but I mean I've never been a mathematician, but I've been involved in other projects where it was really intense.  And the intensity level, sometimes, you know, blocks a lot of social things, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in a way that it doesn't, you know, for--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think that may be true while you're doing something in math and science, so, yes, you're not gonna easily be able to carry on a conversation with somebody while you're solving some equation or thinking of some great idea.  But, but it doesn't, that doesn't apply like when you then stop doing that to go eat dinner (laughter), right, to say that you have to sit at the table and, you know, stare at your peas (laughter) or something, which I think was excused in, in my time.  You know, that was, if you did that, you were sort of okay.  So I, you know, I, I think of a friend of mine in high school who was, who was really, really advanced mathematically.  I mean this was another piece of it, a piece of that, that culture.  He, he was very, very advanced mathematically.  And he was taking graduate, you know, he was taking junior level undergraduate courses when we were in high school in calculus and math.  So he was really out there in terms of what he could do in math.  But socially, he was, you know, he was at or below grade level, all right.  But that allowed him to, to have sort of an imbalance that I think ultimately wasn't very healthy for him.  So, so later, you know, four years later, four years or three years later, when we're both in college at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], you know, he, he just breaks with all that and becomes, you know, leader of the Progressive Labor Party, and he's talking about Sherman Mile this and that.  I mean, and, and it was, you know, it was sort of like he got propelled in one of his, his directions without having a chance to develop, you know, more of a rounded and capable personality so that when some other direction pulled off, he just went off in that direction.  I mean, I, I'm sure he's fine now, but it was just, you know, it was jarring for him to have all that stored up, I imagine, you know, and to be placed in a more adult situation at an earlier age because of his precociousness in that particular field.  So, so, you know, while I think it's a wonderful thing to be able to be in an environment that nurtures your skills in science and math and engineering, you don't want to also neglect the rest of your personality just because people value that so much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's all I'm saying.
Speaker 1: All right, I hear you.
Story_ID: 22786
Speaker 1: Now, but you must have been in school [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools] with some remarkable people, I'm thinking--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --just the people and atmosphere around there.  I think, wasn't--well, tell me who was in school with you, maybe, or that you remember that--
Speaker 2: Oh, let me see, gosh, probably the most well-known--well, I don't know if she's the most well known, but a well-known person who we all looked to as the early success was a woman in a couple of classes ahead of us named Sherry Lansing, who became the head of Fox and of--you know, Twentieth Century Fox Studios for a while, though I didn't know her well.  But she was the one when people said, "Oh, who did, who, you know, did you all go to school with?"  But there's quite a range of accomplished, you know, folks, who, who we came through with, and who, you know, I get to run into run into later, ranging from somebody like that who went off to, you know, to be in a different part of the world to, you know, artists that I run into now in Hyde Park at the Medici Cafe, who has been in Hyde Park the whole time and is a well-known artist.  Randy Sandke was a good friend of mine who was, who was in the class who's a jazz musician, sort of an avant-garde jazz trumpet player.  You can tell when we were all in the jazz band and I was, you know, tooting along on my trombone, that Randy's level of skill was several orders of magnitude beyond anything else that we could see.  And so people, you know, people were given sort of a good chance in that environment.
Speaker 1: And so many bookstores around there and so many of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, people coming to campus.  Now, this is, you're in school during the height of the Civil Rights Movement or when it got publicized the most.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very, very publicized.  I graduated in '66 [1966].  So it was, you know, a lot of, a lot of things had happened, but, you know, the, the Voting Rights Act and so on got passed my last year--
Speaker 1: March on Washington [for Jobs and Freedom, 1963].
Speaker 2: [President John F.] Kennedy was assassinated, you know, when I was younger.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the March on Washington.
Speaker 2: The March on Washington was in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so all that was happening.  I didn't, I wasn't that directly involved with it at that time, though later with Vietnam [War] stuff in college as well as, you know, everything we do with the Black Students Union and so forth at both, at Chicago [Illinois] and Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California], you know, we were involved with.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But I was sort of a little bit beyond the hard core period.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I benefitted a lot from that attention, as you can imagine.
Story_ID: 22787
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated [from high school at the University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] in 1966--
Speaker 2: From high school.
Speaker 1: From high school, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And from college in '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you stayed at the University of Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, I did.
Speaker 1: Were you tempted to go elsewhere or--
Speaker 2: Well, I looked around a little bit.  I looked around at Michigan and so on, but I, I thought of myself as being really interested in the University of Chicago, and they were very encouraging for me to stay.  I didn't do that for graduate school, and, thank God.  I think, I mean it's, it's advice I give other students now not to, you know, necessarily go to the same place for a Bachelors degree and an advanced degree, just so you get more diversity.  With Chicago, in particular, there was kind of a joke that, that we had running that if you went to the Lab School for high school and younger and the college and also for graduate school, you probably would never leave Hyde Park (laughter) because you're just too in--and there were a number, there were a handful of examples of that life trajectory that by the time they went to graduate school, they'd end up working at the University of Chicago or at least in Hyde Park and, you know, not seeing enough of the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, now, did you live on campus?
Speaker 2: I, I didn't ever live in campus housing.  No, that's not true.  I'm sorry, I did live one year.  We had to.  I lived in Burton Judson dorm at 60th [Street] and Ellis [Avenue], I think it was.  But I did that for one year, then lived in apartments.  I didn't live at home at all during my college years, but I lived in a series of off-campus apartments.
Story_ID: 22788
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you--how did you reconcile your laboratory at home (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Well, by then, let's see, what did I have at home?  Well, I didn't--they had more labs and things around.  And, and I exaggerated a little bit with the lab.  It was my electronic stuff which is transportable.  I had a, you know, drawers of electrical stuff in, in my apartments.  I think probably the neatest thing I had at my apartment that, that made me very popular in certain circles was [from] my father [Roscoe Giles, Jr.] having been a court reporter had cast-off machinery.  And so the thing I had was an automatic ditto machine [duplicator machine; predecessor of modern document-reproduction technology like scanners, copiers, and laser printers].  Now, most people probably don't remember ditto, but it was this--not ditto, yeah, ditto, I'm right.  It's ditto.  I get it sometimes confused with stenograph.  But a ditto machine, which was a thing with the purple ink that we used to have in school that you would, you would write on one side of the paper and having a backing that was a heavy purple ink, and then that, then you take the, the front sheet that you wrote on and press it down against something else and, and make copies.  Well, I had an automated version of that machine.  So, you would still write or make the ditto the same, make the ditto the same way.  But then you'd put it on this drum, and it would then turn our copies.  Well, this was incredibly useful, you know, during the Vietnam [War] era and the Black Students Union.  So I was the duplicating place.
Speaker 1: So you had that equipment in your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had it in my apartment.
Speaker 1: --in your apartment.
Speaker 2: So I was all, as far as I know, I was the only one who had some sort of automatic, you know, printing machine there.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the days before-Xerox [Corporation], didn't come around until, I guess 1968, '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that, and nobody, and certainly no student had something like that.
Speaker 1: Right, and it may have been 1970 before Xerox was in full use.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's probably right.
Speaker 1: People had to use a Thermafax, remember the Thermafax machines?
Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah, there was Thermafax.  There was the, I think it was either Stenograph or something like that, but it was, the other--whatever it was, it was the thing where you cut stencil.  So the two technologies were either you cut stencils and then the ink went through the stencil.  That was very reliable, and you could do many, many copies.  And then the ditto was the cheaper alternative where the ink was on the back of the actual original, and then you could only print a certain number of copies before it faded.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the smell on that--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I remember that smell.  That was in my dining room (laughter) of our apartment, yep, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, what did you decide on as a major there [at the University of Chicago]?
Speaker 2: I was, I was, physics.  You know, I played with, with was it gonna math or physics, but I was a physics major in college.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and you said before, you had started studying calculus in school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had studied, I had started when I was a senior, you know, trying to learn some calculus, which now is commonplace, but then was not usual.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, usually you wouldn't take calculus in, in high school?
Speaker 2: No, not at all, no.  I mean, no, not, I mean back then you wouldn't.  Now, many people do.
Speaker 1: Now, from what I remember people were using slide rules for calculations and did you have--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I have slide, I had slide rules.  I have a handful of them left over somewhere in a box at home.  But, yeah, we had, definitely had slide rules.  And, and you would, you know, you could get very fine and precision-made slide rules that were very nice.  Then you had log scales and other kinds of table son the, probability tables, all kinds of stuff.  And so, yes, we definitely had the, the slide rule.  They even made--I don't know if you recall ever seeing this.  They--I didn't quite have this.  They had holsters that you could put a slide rule on your, it would go on your belt, and then the slide rule would go down here (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Long-gone technology.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the calculators, Texas Instruments, they started coming out in late '60s [1960s], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was a big, it was, it was in that time.  I remember what was the SR-10 and the SR-11 were the first scientific ones.  And I certainly had one of those.  I cannot now remember whether it was like when I was a senior in college or whether it was early grad school, and also the Wang calculators which were desk calculators.  People had, that I saw in one of those, in grad, in college, I guess, we had those.
Speaker 1: And very expensive in those days.
Speaker 2: Very expensive, yeah, I mean they were, they sat on the desktop, and I, I worked in a lab when I was in college where we had one.
Story_ID: 22789
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, who was in the department at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] when you were in, in undergrad school that--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, okay, let's see who do I remember?  I remember Ugo Fano, F-A-N-O, who was an atomic physicist who had, you know, been around since the early days of atomic physics, and, you know, we--so he, we had atomic physics from him.  A fellow named Albert Crewe, was the head, C-R-E-W-E, was the head of, I guess, it was the Fermi Institute, I think he was the head of that.  I worked in his lab for a summer.  Roland Winston, who, at the University of Chicago was a nuclear physicist or, yeah, I think it was nuclear, he was, but what he was looking at was looking for, was exotic signatures of proton decay, I think.  I mean it's either proton decay or some CP [charge parity] violation.  But the point of it was that he was looking for rare events in bubble chamber photographs.  And I don't know if you've ever seen a bubble chamber photograph, but it looks like, you know, the particles, bubble chambers were an old detector technology.  And so what you see is like an image of all these, what for all the world looked like chicken scratches.  And what we were looking at was, for a certain kind of verities [verity: the quality or state of being true or real] in those chicken scratches.  And he basically had available a student job to do that, that paid roughly like, a little bit more than people going to work at the, (unclear) in the library.  So I came and I brought all my friends who were not physicist--not all, but a number, to do, you know, these, these searches with me.  So it was kind of funny.  We, a number of minority students, you know, spent weekends looking at these bubble chamber photographs.  The one scary thing about it was probably most people didn't know really what we were looking at.  We knew what we were looking for in terms of the signature that we were asked to look at, but I mean most people didn't have any sense of excitement or, you know, whatever, about the actual science of it.  So I don't know if we missed any.  Of course, it turned out that, that instability didn't exist and so that was one of those negative experiments ultimately, that didn't find anything and so proved that something did not happen, which is sometimes less exciting than proving something does happen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now did you have an undergraduate thesis that you put together?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have undergraduate theses.  I, I did, you know, as I said, I worked for those experiments.  But basically, it was all based on, you know, coursework and, and grades and that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 22790
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now, this is--you got your bachelor's degree [form the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] in 1970--
Speaker 2: 1970.
Speaker 1: '70 [1970], okay, 1970, okay, that would make sense.  Okay, so Chicago is almost going up in--well, some of it is going up in flames in '68 [1968], after the assassination of Dr. King [Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep, that was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: This is on the Westside, far away from where you are.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, though I was, where was I?  I was out of town visiting a friend of mine from, from high school who went to Coe College in Iowa, Cedar Rapids.  So I was actually in Cedar Rapids when, when Dr. King was assassinated and then came back and all the black students got together and went over to an apartment for, you know, one of the, one of the folks who had a big apartment, you know, and had sort of continuous retreat over there, with gradations in activity across the apartment.  I'm trying to remember which was which.  I think the kitchen was the intense political discussion that people were having.  The living room, at the opposite end, people were playing music and hanging out, and in the corridor between, those of us who were kind of nerdy were doing our homework (laughter), you know, and while participating in some of the other things.
Speaker 1: This is at University of Chicago?
Speaker 2: This is University of Chicago, and I remember my, my wife-to-be, Linda, was one of those people.  Actually, I think I may have, I met her several times, but this was one that I, time that I ran into her that she was the only person there where, or one of the few people there working on, I think her chemistry homework or something, you know, which I had some resonance with, you know, trying to do that while also trying to take care of, of the situation.
Story_ID: 22791
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you graduated in 1970.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you decided to go to, did you go immediately to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, I did.  I, ultimately, I went immediately to Stanford and graduated from there in '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have relatives out in the [San Francisco] bay area at the time?
Speaker 2: No, well, I didn't, I mean I didn't have, you know, somebody that I thought of as a close relative there.  There was a person, we called Aunt Kate, who was the best friend of my grandmother, my mother's [Virginia Gaine] mother, Betty Greene.  I'm not sure if she was actually ever related to us or whether they just grew up together and there's a little bit of mystery there.  But she lived in Oakland.  And so I certain visited her when I went out, and, and my--I, I did get married while I was at Stanford, and my wife and I stayed with her even for a short while in Oakland [California].  But she was the only one that I was aware of that--
Speaker 1: Now, you met your wife in, in Chicago [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: In Chicago, yeah, yeah, at the University of Chicago.  She, she entered Chicago in 19--I was 1966, so she was 1967.  So we met there, and then we both went out to Stanford, and we got married in '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I guess, divorced in 2006, I think, 2005, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but was she enrolled in Stanford too at the time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  She's a biochemist, and she has her Ph.D. in biochemistry.  She's actually an interesting person for you all to talk to too, I would say.  I should have mentioned that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her name is Linda Grisham, G-R-I-S-H-A-M.
Speaker 1: G-R-I--
Speaker 2: --I-S-H-A-M.
Speaker 1: --S-H-A-M, okay.  All right, I'll make a note of that.
Story_ID: 22792
Speaker 1: Now, you're out at Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] at--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at SLAC, they call it, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, right, right.
Speaker 1: Right, the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, most of the scientists we talk to you, they don't even remember what a master's degree is, go right to the Ph.D.  Is this the same case with you?
Speaker 2: Well, no, I remember I got a master's degree 'cause, because that, I didn't get it as a goal, but got it on the pathway to getting a Ph.D., and I believe that was in '73 [1973].  And at that time, the, there, at some time before, there had been general draft deferments for people who were graduate students.  That was no longer true when I was a grad student.  I was actually in the first draft lottery and had what turned out to be a relatively high number.  But the general practice in the department was when people passed their qualifiers, to use that as the signature of giving them a master's degree, so that if they did end up being drafted, they would, you know, have a, have a, have attained a certain level that you could point to, as opposed to just saying, "I'm halfway through my Ph.D. and had to take time off to go to the military."
Speaker 1: Okay, well, who were some of your advisors at Stanford?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, so, let me see.  I have, well, my advisor, my thesis advisor was Sidney Drell, Sid Drell, D-R-E-L-L, and he was the head of the theoretical physics group at SLAC at that time, and for a long time.  And he, I mean he was a great guy.  He, you know, did a lot to help mentor me and, and help me, you know, through things.  I also worked, when I first came out [to Stanford University], for Burt [Burton] Richter, who later became the director of the lab.  He was doing experiments with electron posi--with an electron positron ring for which he later got the Nobel Prize [in 1976], you know, some number of years later.  But he was just designing that facility when I came out my first summer.  And so the first summer I worked with him doing some little computer simulations of the magnetic detector, at least trying to, mostly learning how, how things worked.  Also, at Stanford, on campus, I guess we started this program to try to help them identify promising underrepresented minority candidates for admission to the, to the graduate school.  And now, I'm having a senior moment, Dave, the department administrator there whose name I wanna say was Dave, Dave Hanson, but I'm not totally sure of his last name.  I apologize.  But anyway, he was a real force in helping make that happen and welcoming me and getting me set up.  I think I was the second black student admitted to the Ph.D. program.  The first student was a fellow named Bennett Robinson, who was an experimentalist, a solid-state experimentalist.  And he's passed on now, but he, he was the first admitted.  I, by virtue of being a theorist and not having to do so much with actual equipment that had to work, was the first to graduate by, you know, by six months or a year.  So I, I sort of scooted past him in terms of that sequence.  But the interesting story on that side was that over the years Stanford has graduated more than fifty Ph.D.s in physics and applied physics and, which is, at least the time that I knew the statistic, which I have to say was now a decade ago in 1999 or so, that was the largest number of African American physicists from a single institution in the country, by far.  And I don't know how that statistic stands now, but, but it, it was--maybe one more word about it.  The thing that was interesting about it is that in 1999 when the National Society of Black Physicists met at Stanford and, and we had this discussion about where Stanford stood, that program had been going for something like thirty years.  In any one year, you never graduated more than one or two or maybe three black physicists.  But the trickle effect over thirty years of doing that was enough to put it in the lead across the country without any drama.  And, in fact, I believe that the chair of the department in Stanford generally was not aware that it was the lead in the country until, you know, it was, we had the discussion there after the thirty years.  I mean in the middle of the process, whenever they passed whoever was second, which I think was Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], they, nobody even noticed, you know, until--because it was so much beneath the, the cloud cover kind of activity.  So it was interesting how that worked over time.
Story_ID: 22793
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about your dissertation [at Stanford University, Palo Alto, California]?  Your advisor was Sidney Drell?
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so I was in theoretical physics, and the problem at that time that everybody was trying to understand or to get some insight into, was the nature of the forces that accounted for how quarks came together or interacted in order to make heavy particles like protons and neutrons, what were called the hadrons and their relationship to the quarks which seemed to make them up.  And there was--
Speaker 1: I just wanna ask a simple question.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: First of all, I know that--I have a note here that the first evidence of quarks were discovered in 1968.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So this is all like recent--
Speaker 2: It's all recent--
Speaker 1: --and this is all exciting.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it, it, this, yeah, it goes exactly to the kind of stuff that we're talking about, right, right.
Speaker 1: And then the other question I have is as a layman is, what's a quark (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so, okay, so this is the idea.  There was an idea, there was a concept that evolved during this time from what it used to be.  So if you think of atoms where atoms, sort of everybody learns in school, are made up of nucleus and electrons that, that go around that nucleus or sometimes you say they go around, but they actually are more like a cloud around the nucleus.  And one of the ways you know that an atom is made up of those parts is if you hit atoms hard enough, either by heating them up or by shooting something at them, you can break the parts in piece, to pieces, okay.  So an easy way to know that something's made of parts is that you can do something to it and it, it comes out as those two parts.  Another way you can tell that something's made of pieces or has something going on inside it, is more indirect where you do some experiment outside and you see the evidence of the parts, but without actually having the parts come out.  So a simple-minded example is if you have like an old-fashioned rattle, which has like a seed inside a gourd, and you shake the rattle, you can hear the seeds inside moving around.  And you could pretty well hypothesize that, oh, there are seeds and there are things inside, even though I haven't broken the rattle open.  Now, of course, the second part is, if you really wanted to, you could smash the rattle and see the seeds and so on.  So the, the problem with quarks or the issue with quarks was that they were first hypothesized in the earlier '60s [1960s] based on something like the periodic table, an analogy to--it was called the eight-fold way--, but an analogy to the periodic table in chemistry, where you saw certain properties of the different elements, but you didn't know what they were made of, but you could see these regularities.  And one way of accounting for the regularities was to say that everything was slightly different combinations of these quarks.  So originally--and quarks was this sort of fanciful name taken from a James Joyce novel, you know, that Murray Gell-Mann [won the Nobel Prize in physics in 1969] at Cal-Tech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California] used to describe these hypothetical entities.  So the first evidence for such a thing was very indirect, and you could almost call an accounting-like procedure, to say, well, if we, if the particles we observe, if we say they're made up of these three things, three kinds of things and we combine them in various ways, then we can account for the properties we see.  The next evidence was more like the rattle evidence, and that's something that SLAC [Stanford Linear Accelerator Center], the lab that I was at, was very much involved with, which was taking a very high-energy electron beam and banging it into protons and seeing how things scattered out.  And in the analogy, what they heard was the rattle of something inside the, the protons.  That's not literally what happened.  What happened was that, you know, the electron scatter as though they were scattering from something hard and point--you know, something hard and small.  So, so, and you can tell that from how the electrons reacted.  If you think of, you know, throwing a baseball against a wall, it bounces off hard and goes off somewhere.  If you throw it in a, into a pile of sand, it sort of either it goes in the sand and stops or maybe it goes through the sand, slowed down.  But it definitely doesn't bounce back hard.  And what was discovered at SLAC was, and many other places this was verified, was that when you smash things into protons and neutrons, it bounced back hard as though it had bounced off of something hard inside.  But the mystery was that no matter how hard you seem to hit the electron into the proton, you never saw the quarks coming out by themselves.  You would see maybe jets of other particles that would go in a direction you would have expected the quark to go in, but you never saw the quark.  And the harder you hit, the more other crap you would produce.  So it's like you would see all this junk coming off, in a direction that is the direction you would have thought the quark would have gone.  But you would never see the quark.  So the mystery was, how could that be?  How could you have something made of constituent pieces which you can indirectly see, but which you can't seem to separate out?  And so that was the mystery at the time.  It was, the mystery was called confinement then, how--quark confinement.  How come quarks don't get out, more or less.  You could account for it qualitatively if you made up a kind of mysterious forest, at that time mysterious, now, pretty well understood, that got stronger the further apart things were instead of it getting weaker.  So if you had, the thing to imagine is, is if the quarks are happily inside the proton, they're sort of going around relatively loosely.  When you hit them, that's, when you bounce off, at the moment you bounce off, that's what it, you know, is reflected.  You just hit a hard little, little seed and bounced off in some direction.  But then that little seed, when it recoils, as it gets further away from the other quarks that are there, the forces that pull it back or want it not to get out, get stronger, rather than weaker  And instead, you get a jet of particles out in that direction, but the quark itself never gets loose.  So that was confinement that was a mystery--the mystery was to figure out how to, both how to model that and how to, and its origin.
Story_ID: 22794
Speaker 1: But the, what my thesis about, was about the modeling of that, not necessarily explaining how it worked, but building a model that had that feature, and there was something, a group of models, one version at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], that was done at MIT, one version at SLAC [Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, at Stanford University, Palo Alto, California], called 'Bag Models', where the idea was that, that in addition to the quarks, there was some kind of medium, a bag, you know, "bag", that held the quarks, and when you did one of these experiments, when the quark tried to get away, it, it got, you know, trapped in the bag, so to say.  So that didn't try to explain what happened, but it tried to make a model for what happened, and I worked on such a model called the SLAC Bag Model.  The SLAC bag was one where, I mean it, and I should say, it had some more foundation than what I'm saying in words, and it had mathematical foundation.  But the quarks ended up being trapped on a moving two-dimensional surface that was the proton.  And so, my thesis was about that, and it was called 'Quarks and Bags, a Field Theory Model of Hadron Structure' [sic, Quarks and Bubbles: The Dynamics of a Field Theory Model of Hadron Structure], I think, but what that was about was, was modeling, doing this, the mathematics of such a model, where quarks existed, moved along a moving, two-dimensional surface.  That surface evolved and responded to them.  In some ways it's connected to modern string theory.  I mean that kind of model string theory was a similar kind of model, but in a different dimensionality and some different properties.  And later when we did, worked for the group at MIT on some string theory stuff.  But anyway, that was the, the model.  It turned out that, you know, there was that model, there was the MIT model and ultimately, it, it has come to be understood how the forces could act this way and modern gauge theories have this property.  And so that's the way they're described now.  But at that time, it was quite a mystery of how you could predict how something like that would behave, and we tried to do that.
Story_ID: 22795
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, you submitted a publication to the American Physical Society in '74 [1974] called 'Semi-Classical Dynamics of the SLAC Bag' and that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep, that's, that's my thesis, basically.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean that was a piece of my thesis.  I think that was the main publication that came out of it, and semi-classical method, the quantum mechanics was not taken into account for the bag itself.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us now, what's the significance of some of these developments here?  In '72 [1972], the Stanford Positron Electron Accelerating Ring operations began.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, what are we talking about there?  What's going on?
Speaker 2: Well, okay, so, originally, SLAC was this linear, I mean the name almost says it, the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center.  The joke was that somebody originally wanted to call it the Stanford High Intensity Tube, but thought better of it.  Anyway, sorry, don't think about that too long (laughter).  But, anyway, so the linear accelerator would take, you know, it was based on the klystron tubes that, you know, had been invented in the context of radar, micro, basically took microwave radiation, accelerated electrons along a two-mile path and smashed them into things.  The, the colliding ring was [Burton] Richter's idea that was a variant of that where instead of colliding electrons with positrons, you use the electron beam to create a positron beam and then had a single ring that, that--well, or double ring, that made the electrons go one way, the positrons go the other way and smashed them into each other.  The, the neat thing about that experiment is that because they're a matter and anti-matter, the positrons and electrons, when they interact, it's possible for them to annihilate each other and create many more varieties of things or at least a different variety of new particles, compared to colliding electrons and protons because of the way, I mean they're just different things.  So it's colliding one--it's like two different kinds of chemicals, you know, make different outcomes.  So, that was the, the history.  The thing that, the idea of it, of what started then.  The expectation at that time was that this was another way to look into the zoo of elementary particles and just get a slightly different angle.  What happened, I think around '74 [1974], '73 [1973], '74 [1974], was there was a very big surprise in those experiments where a single new particle was produced out of that or essentially, a single new particle, rather than just another spray of high-energy particle garbage, you know, like the thing we were talking about before, the jets.  So a new particle was formed that seemed to last a relatively long time.  That was then reflected a new kind of quark being discovered.  Basically, it was a new kind of quark and its anti-quark that were being produced, which is now called the charm quark.  They, this was also discovered and with the, you know, a lot of discussion, shall we say, between the CERN [The European Organization for Nuclear Research, Switzerland] lab and Sam Ting [Samuel Chao Chung Ting] as MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] versus Richter and SLAC.  Ting called it the 'J particle' and, and Richter called it the 'psi' and they got the Nobel Prize [in physics in 1976], I guess together for that, though it's not clear that either side ever agreed who was really first.  And, but anyway, that, that was the big discovery in SLAC, and during the time that I was there.  One quick little anecdote, the first time I went out to talk about my thesis, I went to the University of Oregon, Eugene [Oregon], and then up to the University of Washington, Seattle, to talk about that research that I did.  And the, the time I went was about three weeks after the discovery of the 'psi' particle.  And so you can imagine how much people in Oregon or anywhere else wanted to hear about my little bag model compared to having me give them a talk about the latest SLAC discovery.  So I had to brush up relatively quickly on all the experimental discoveries so that people would sit still long enough for me to tell them about the bag model.
Story_ID: 22796
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so you finished your Ph.D. in '74 [1974] or '75 [1975]?
Speaker 2: '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: '75 [1975], okay.  And you went on to become a Hertz Foundation fellow?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a Hertz fellow before.
Speaker 1: Oh, before, okay.
Speaker 2: That was, that's who supported me in graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So that's not a post-doc, it's not a really a post-doc--
Speaker 2: That's not a post-doc.  That was a, that was a graduate fellowship, which still exists actually.  The Hertz Foundation, you know, still, I shouldn't even say still exists.  They're going as strong as they ever were.  And, you know, it was an interesting fellowship.  I actually, in getting that fellowship, part of it was having to interview with someone from the Hertz Foundation Board.  And the person who interviewed me was Edward Teller, you know, the father of the H-Bomb [hydrogen bomb], so to say (laughter).  He was in Chicago [Illinois] out at some place near O'Hare airport back in, whatever year it was, 1970.  And I had to go out to the airport to be interviewed by, in person, by Teller.
Speaker 1: Now, who have you met?  Now, you knew Richter, Teller, you met Teller.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I met Teller for that interview.
Speaker 1: You ever meet [J. Robert] Oppenheimer or--
Speaker 2: No, no, I never--I, Oppenheimer, well, I don't know if it was ever, have been physically possible for me to meet Oppenheimer 'cause, I, I don't remember when he died versus, I mean I think I was probably still in high school or something or grade school.
Speaker 1: Okay, I wasn't sure.  I wasn't sure about when he died.  I--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not totally sure either.  But I think it was well before my time (laughter) of being in physics.
Speaker 1: Yeah, J. William Oppenheimer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, yeah, so that was interesting.  Teller asked me about, we ended up talking about vacuum technology on the moon for some reason.  And they, the people, the Hertz people, if you read, if you read the, you know, sort of the, certainly, at that time, the orientation of the Hertz fellowship was very much towards getting people involved in things like nuclear research and things that applied to, you know, the defense of the nation.  And so I got a lot of suggestion at various times from Hertz, you know, while I was deciding to go to graduate school, but did not wanna go someplace closer to one of the national labs like the [Lawrence] Livermore [National Laboratory, Livermore, California] or to, you know, to [University of California] Davis or Berkeley or somewhere near Livermore, which is where, you know, they were doing a lot of the nuclear research, which I didn't end up doing.  I was just, I stayed being, you know, this theorist.
Story_ID: 22797
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now you went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in '76 [1976]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that, I did a year at SLAC [Stanford Linear Acceleration Center, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California], and then the year after that, I went to MIT as a post-doc.
Speaker 1: This is the Center for Theoretical Physics--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --at MIT.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And, now, what is the--now, you were in both places.  What was the difference between the program at MIT and the program at Stanford?  You've got [Samuel C.C.] Ting at MIT--
Speaker 2: Right, he's the experimentalist.
Speaker 1: --he was co-Nobel Prize winner along with--
Speaker 2: With, with [Burton] Richter, though that happened ten years later [in 1976]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, later, but they're--
Speaker 2: --that they got the Nobel Prize.
Speaker 1: --they're moving on this stuff.  They're working on--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, all, this was the hot stuff then.  It turned out my, well, I don't know quite how you say it, you know, but my, one of the Sid's [Sidney Drell] other students, Bob Jaffe had just gone to MIT the year before, two years before I did.  So, you know, I knew him.  He was in the theory group there.  And, you know, there were a number of, a number of people were there that, that, you know, I worked with or interacted with.  Ultimately, I left that group and then came over to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts].  And, you know, so I wasn't, you know, ultimately as productive as, as I would have liked to have been at that, at that time, though I was promoted from a post-doc to assistant professor at MIT.  And I, you know, and, you know, was involved.  You know, there I met, you know, for example, I served on a committee with Deutsche, John Deutsche, who, you know, who'd been the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] Director  and had come back.  Well, was he CIA director then or did he become--he was, he was then the provost, I think, or, or at least some high academic official.  But he was running the committee on, you know, to try to encourage African American faculty and son on in terms of applications and so forth.  The head of the theory group when I came was Francis Lowe who was, you know, who was a nuclear physicist and particle physicist.  And an interesting thing about him, it turned out--it took a while to notice this.  But his mother was the first female graduate of Cornell Medical School [New York], and we figured that his mother must have known my grandfather [who was the first African American graduate from the Cornell Medical School] (laughter).  So it's just, you know, small world, you know, weird connection things.
Speaker 1: Dr. Francis Lowe.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now, were there--let's see, now was there a big difference between the two programs?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: And why did you--did you have the opportunity to stay at Stanford and--
Speaker 2: Well, well, I mean so, so at that moment, it, you know, you've made the transition after graduating from looking for places to learn, really to looking for jobs, right.  So, so, and, and with the post-doc, it's sort of a mezzanine or transitional sort of statement.  It would be, you know, it's, it's, in the same way I discourage people from staying at the same place for graduate, you know, for undergraduate and graduate, you know, it's typical to go out into the world rather than stay where you were a graduate student.  I mean it's not un--and MIT, that was actually one of the differences in culture with MIT, is that MIT liked to keep its own students much more than other places I've been.  But anyway, it was, it was sort of a natural kind of thing to try to do, to do that move.  Also, Linda [Grisham], of course, I was married by then, and so, you know, we had the two-body problem.  And Linda came out as a post-doc to Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts] the year, you know, basically at the same time I did.  Of course, I, my year at Stanford, additional year as a post-doc, more or less coincided with her last year as a graduate student.  So we were sort of syncing up our timing then because we were a year apart.  And so, so we came out here.  And, you know, at, at MIT, I was a post-doc.  They asked me to stay on as an assistant professor, which I did for an appointment, one appointment as assistant professor.  And then I came over to BU and changed fields again.
Story_ID: 22798
Speaker 1: Now, this is, so is there anything about MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] we need to talk about?  I know you published a paper there with Larry McLerran--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  So, so we had, we had a set of, different sets of papers.  So one set of things had to do with, with discretized string theory which those are the things with Charles Thorne, with, I'm trying to think who else was on the string theory papers, but what we did is we did a discrete version of what was then string theory, looking at the anomalies.  So, so this was a situation where the, the mathematics was very subtle.  And if you tried to take into account all size and distance scales, it was very challenging.  And so you ended up in anybody's version of the theory, doing some limiting process or something to figure out what happens when, as you try to take into account the theory over many distant scales.  And what we looked at was one way of doing that limiting process that had not been tried for string theory at that time, which was, we were trying to make a version of the model where space is discreet and then look at the limit as the, the, by the space and goes to zero.  And it turned out to give some interesting results for that string theory.  The, the stuff with Larry McLaren was looking at the decay of, of--and looking at patterns of interactions and, and weak interactions with some of the stuff.  So we did that.  So I would say, and, and then the other thing that was there that I worked on at that time was we used the bag model, really now, the MIT bag model, to make a model for what it would be like, what I think was the first semi-realistic model, though it's hard to talk about a realistic model of something that's not real, of what it would be like to have unconfined quarks and gluons.  And so, in other words, if confinement was only approximate, this phenomenon, you know, of the force getting strong, if eventually the bag could break and things could spill out, what, what would a model of that be like?  And so we made a model of that, that could be used sort of as a counter model to see if, if nature behaved that way.  So we would have all been rich and famous if it had turned out confinement didn't work, and, but it was only approximate. But that was Alvera Derivala (ph.) and Bob Jaffe and myself.
Story_ID: 22799
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so you go to Boston U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] in 1985.  Now, and you decided to switch careers really and become (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: --well, it's related, I guess, but it's not--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.  So, so what happened is, it was first switching labels and then switching actual activities over a much longer time.  So what, what I had been working on with Rich Brauer who's also here in, in this department at BU, was a theory called Lattice Gauge Theory, which was a discretized form of the sort of underlying theory for the strong interactions, the thing that would have, that was behind the bag.  And--bag models, and previously, Michael Creutz and a number of people had used the discretized version of the theory to show that, that you could have the forces that get strong when you pull things further apart in gauge theories.  And so that idea of using a discrete form in order to advance the calculations was a very powerful idea at that time.  And that intrinsically was a computer simulation problem.  It's not something that you could do much with analytically, but it was very amenable to doing large-scale computer simulations.  And also, at that time, you had the onset of, of high performance, what was then called high-performance arithmetic chips and component parts to, you know, of computers.  So that the idea of making a specialized computer that would do the arithmetic needed to simulate discrete versions of quantum field theory was really catching on.  So there was a strong group at Columbia [University, New York] that was doing that.  Richard and I were interested in that and doing the same thing.  So we were building a computer whose purpose was to be a specialized machine to do the Lattice Gauge Theory calculations.  So that's what we were working on at the time of the switch.  And so in a certain sense, you know, I went from sitting over at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] trying to work on computer simulations of, of, you know, quantum field theory, calling my, you know, with the official label of theoretical physicist to moving over to BU, doing essentially the same thing--
Speaker 1: But as a--
Speaker 2: --but with an official label of computer engineer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, over time, that, you know, that evolved, but that was what was going on at that transition.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, but you taught physics and electrical engineering?
Speaker 2: Yep, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Same thing, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So it was interesting, when I first came here, when I was at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], I had taught the graduate course in, basically, electrodynamics and, you know, electricity and magnetism for graduate students at MIT, which was a highly theoretical course.  I remember we spent three weeks, three weeks, two weeks, worrying about how to do the mathematics of scattering of a plain wave over a semi-infinite, finite conducting strip, right, and it involved complex analysis and, and various theorems and complex variables, and calculus of complex variables.  And I came over to BU and ended up teaching relatively early on, the junior level electromagnetic course, which is the same subject, electricity and magnetism, now for engineers now, rather than graduate level at undergraduate level.  And I remember always having the reaction when somebody asked, could you explain more.  I would throw out more equations, and it turned out that explaining more by throwing out more equations was not the way to communicate with junior engineers.  You know, it was to say how it compared to circuit theory 'cause they all at sophomore had had circuit theory.  So this was just kind of, you know, teaching the similar subject matter originally, but then switching the context a lot.  And, of course, I was very interested in computing, so that, you know, had, was, was something that I was always interested in.  And I should, at some point, I didn't think of it as we were talking before, but that's, that's a thread from when I was in high school.  We did, we did programming on a computer in the basement of the ed. School [education school], when I was in high school, an old IBM-1620 [International Business Machines, Incorporated] with core memory.
Speaker 1: This is a machine that is, is that the kind that looks like a refrigerator or is that--
Speaker 2: Well, it looked, it would, it was actually considered a compact desk size.  So it was, it was, you know, it was the size of a, of a--well, it doesn't help any of the viewers, but a table in this room.  You know, it was maybe ten feet, you know, six feet long and three or four feet back.  And so it was considered a, sort of modern size.  It had a memory which was made out of magnetic core.  So each bit of memory which now-a-days, a bit of memory is a few transistors or a capac--or just a capacitor and a, and a transistor on an integrated circuit, and, you know, you would need a microscope to see it.  Then these were little cores that were like beads, strung together on an array of wires.  And there were, there were two blocks of 20,000 of these in a block that made the memory of this computer, and then you talked with, talked to it with cards, and it was kind of amazing.  So, you know, I had done that.  I had done my thesis, I typed my own thesis into the computer at SLAC [Stanford Linear Acceleration Center, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California] and printed it out on an old IBM typewriter.  It was called the mobile terminal then, but it was an IBM typewriter with an acoustic modem that I brought over to the house and typed my entire thesis, page by page, you know, had it print out on the thesis paper there.  So I had, I had been using computers for a long time, had an email address before there was an Internet at, you know, at the system at SLAC (laughter).
Story_ID: 22800
Speaker 1: Okay, and before the internet was open to the public.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Well, before there was an internet.  I mean there were separate nets before there was an internet.
Speaker 1: Well, I just had, the question, why would you need an email address before the internet, but I mean how can you--
Speaker 2: Well, you exchange email with other people in, in the scientific community--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at SLAC [Stanford Linear Acceleration Center] and--
Speaker 1: The internet being, so I'm missing something because the internet being something young--
Speaker 2: Okay, so the internet, so the "inter" part of the internet was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You all had an intranet--
Speaker 2: --connections between multiple--well, we're talking about the internet and intranets--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but then there were separate, multiple, separate networks, like there was a Mill.net, there was Arpe.net and, you know, Arpe.net maybe seven universities on it, something or maybe it was only seven sites originally.  But the internet was the idea of connect--and there were commercial networks of various sorts.  And the internet grew up as a, as an expansion in connection of various of these networks and then got that name.  So it was before the "inter" part of the internet, but not before the technology of Arpe.net and Mill.net were invented.
Story_ID: 22801
Speaker 1: All right, Boston University, now, 1992, you won the Boston University Scholar Teacher of the Year Award.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yeah.
Speaker 1: So things must have been pretty good here.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I, I think so.  So I, at the time I came over, BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] was building up its science and engineering.  And though it was in the time of John Silver, who was a very sort of strong willed and quite a character at the university.
Speaker 1: Is he the president?
Speaker 2: He was the president of the university.  He just died a few days ago.  But he, you know, and he, and he was known for molding things to his like, particularly in departments where he had a personal knowledge or interest.  But in the sciences and engineering, particularly, physics and engineering and so on, he was, seemed to be interested in just building up that capability at the university and using his power over the university resources to help recruit and hire good people and so forth.  And I think the area that I was in was a beneficiary of that ultimately.
Story_ID: 22802
Speaker 1: Now, that's around the same time that the deputy director of the Boston University Center for Computational Science.
Speaker 2: Yeah, about the same time.  So when we came over, Richard [Brauer] and I came over in '85 [1985], when my daughter, Stephanie, was born.  That was that year.  We worked here, Claudio Rebbi came, who is a physicist and just retired as head of the physics department for the last couple of years.  And he was the director of the Center for Computational Science and the founding director of it, but they, but he was brought to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] in part to found that center and get things going.  So the Center for Computational Science in those early days recognized that there was a commonality among different disciplines, traditionally different disciplines in the sciences and engineering in attempting to use powerful computer to develop understanding, to model systems and so forth.  But it was not a field where most practitioners, researchers in those fields had expertise in the computing.  And so there's a need for a combination, you know, for, for building that capability up.  And the Center for Computational Science was focused on that.  That was a time when you began to see in the language of science the idea that computation was sort of the third leg of a stool that represented the scientific enterprise, where the other two legs were theory and experiment.  So theory, experiment and computations simulation modeling as the three legs on which the scientific enterprise stands.  And that has become more and more true over time, I think.  What also has been true is that there's now much more integration of computation into all the other disciplines than there was at that time.  So what we were most interested in was bringing to bear the most powerful computers that existed and to helping spur the development of new generations of computers that were suited to the needs that we had.  And, particularly, what that involved at that time was understanding how to design and program and utilize parallel computers, which at that time was a new thing.  So there, the idea is that you have a computer that's made of many processing units which work together to solve a problem and that, in some ways, has some qualitative differences than, compared to having a single-processor working on the problem because of the need for the different processors to be able to share data with one another and communicate and the need of the programmer to orchestrate a solution where no one entity is, you know, doing the whole job.  So it's easy for a human being to imagine programming a single computer, a single processor to do a task.  You essentially think of yourself as telling the computer what to do next.  But if you have many processors working on the tasks, it can look much less like that.  You tell, you do still have to tell every processor or all the processors in groups what to do, but what that, the relationship of what they do to getting to solving the task may not be so direct.
Speaker 1: Okay, so those parallel processors are working with each other--
Speaker 2: --to solve the single problem, right.
Speaker 1: --to the solve the problem, one taking maybe one aspect of it that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there're many ways to break it up.  So a lot of, a lot of--there're many kinds of science problems where the ways of breaking a problem into pieces so that you can share the work is very obvious or which may or may not be effective, but it's very obvious.  So, for example, if you're doing a problem that involves simulating a million particles that are interacting, you might say well, we're gonna divide that up among a thousand processors.  Will each processor take a thousand particles and be responsible for them?  That may or may not be a good idea, depending on the actual problem.  So it's a good idea if the, if everybody can have a thousand particles that don't interact with all the other million a lot.  It's kind of a terrible idea if all the particles are interacting with each other in random ways because you, all the processors would have to talk to each other.  So it, it's very problem dependent.  And so what we spent a lot of time doing at that time was working with researchers to try to make, to help them understand how their problems fit and to exploit the parallel computers we were able to bring to the university through grants and building things up in that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is in the early '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Um-hum, the early '90s [1990s], and that activity went through, you know, probably for, well, the center still exists and so it's been over twenty years now that the center exists.  That activity of developing the first large-scale parallelism was probably from that early '90s [1990s] when we started, I would say up until the early 2000s, that was probably the main focus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The, also I should just mention for completeness that Richard Brauer and I came here with the idea of building our own parallel computer.  And as the Center developed and as we, in, I believe, around 1989--I would have to look, 1987 or '89 [1989], we started bringing the parallel, big parallel computer to the university, which was a connection machine, super computer.  As that happened, our focus changed from building our own machine of our design to figuring out how to work effectively with this new style of machine.  So the machine that we brought to the university at that time had 32,000 processors, you know, each one very--not very powerful, but every many of them, and how to use a giant swarm or ray of processors of that is a really interesting question.  How do you use it effectively to solve a problem?  With something, when, if you think of it in that way of being 32,000 processors, it's kind of obvious that you're not gonna program each one individually, right?  In fact, you program them all with essentially the same program, but different data, and that was the kind of model that we were working on.
Story_ID: 22803
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, you were active in the early '90s [1990s] with the American Physical Society [APS] as an officer, I think, as a publications committee chair and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess I was on, I was on a committee there.  I'd been active, I tried to think about the list of societies I've been active with.  I did play some role with the APS [American Physical Society], I think with the Division of Computational Physics in, in reviewing, you know, publications.
Speaker 1: APS is "the" society physicists--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: --in the United States.
Speaker 2: That's (unclear) (simultaneous), yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I also was a councilmember for the council of the ACM, the Association of Computing Machinery, which was--that was later.  But I probably was more, a little bit more active with them.  That's the, one of the two major societies in the U.S. for computing.
Story_ID: 22804
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in '94 [1994] and '95 [1995], you won a [U.S.] Department of Energy Computational Science Education Award, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  We, we were developing curriculum in computational science.  We also got some support from the National Science Foundation [NSF] for that curriculum.  And we won an award from the Department of Energy at that time from the people associated with the Advanced Scientific Computing research area, in, for that education program.  So we [at Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] developed courses in parallel computing in the disciplines, you know, not just in computer engineering, but in computational physics, computational chemistry, across the board.  And those, we had a curriculum of linked courses that featured parallel computing and high-performance computing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that was in '94 [1994] and '95 [1995].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 22805
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about project, the MARINER project?
Speaker 2: Oh, so, MARINER [Metacenter-Affiliated Resource in the New England Region], so what happened here [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] was that we were building up the computing facilities.  We had the Center for Computational Science and MARINER was an outreach project that we tried to link those together with the educational resources and provide a framework for doing computational science research, education and so on within the local area.  It was supported by an NSF [National Science Foundation] outreach award.  What was true then was that the National Science Foundation for scientific computing ran a group of super computer centers.  And associated with them, they wanted partners in regional areas to help bring computational science out to universities and so on.  MARINER was such a partnership with the super computer centers.  That all evolved over time to a new, within the world of NSF-supported activities, to something called the Partnerships for Advanced Computational Infrastructure which tried to group the outreach activities and the regional activities with the actual main super computer, you know, funding into a large umbrella grant.  And we later worked on that.  So the thing called the NCSA [National Cyber Security Alliance] alliance and the part that I was associated with was called EOT PACI.  The PACI is Partnerships for Advanced Computational Infrastructure and the EOT is Education Outreach Training which was the kind of language then.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you worked with Claudio Rebbi and Glenn Bresnahan?
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.  So Claudio is the director or was the director of the Center for Computational Science and Glenn Bresnahan is the director of the Scientific Computing and Visualization Facility here at BU [Boston University].  So that's a part of the sort of information technology and systems division of the university.  And so all of us worked together to, to lead that MARINER effort and then worked on the subsequent efforts.  And always that, that set of people were involved in the infrastructure grants at the university that brought new computer systems.  So we had at that time a series of large-scale computers that were brought to the university.  You know, every four years or so, we would get a new machine by matching university resources with grant resources that we'd get, you know, through competitive grants with the National Science Foundation.
Story_ID: 22806
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were, during this period of time away from school, you were involved on the board of directors of the Fayerweather Street School?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Fayerweather Street School which is K-8 school in Cambridge [Massachusetts], and, yeah.  So we, that was where our kids went.  And, in fact, we still have some connection.  My son works there now, actually, and is also a board member.  So, we've had a connection with Fayerweather for a long time.
Speaker 1: Does it remind you of the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory School, Chicago, Illinois, where Giles attended school]?
Speaker 2: In some ways, yes, very much.  The open sort of educational framework, the dedication to exploration and active learning is very much like what I was used to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Also the tuition (laughter).
Speaker 1: Which is steep like the Lab School, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and comparable (laughter)--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --but well worth it (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is true.
Story_ID: 22807
Speaker 1: You just talked about EOT PACI [PACI is Partnerships for Advanced Computational Infrastructure; EOT is Education Outreach Training].
Speaker 2: Right, I mentioned it.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: That was a different scale from what we were doing.  So EOT PACI was a collaboration, originally--let me take a step back.  Originally, each, there were four super computer centers from NSF [National Science Foundation].  They each proposed a partnership.  Three of the partnerships, sorry, two of, two of those four centers were chosen as lead organizations for these big partnerships which were the San Diego Super Computer Center and the National Center for Super Computing Applications in Illinois.  They each had education outreach proposals and plans.  And what the National Science Foundation said was, let's join these two outreach plans together to a single entity that would interact with both of the large partnerships.  And that was EOT PACI.  It had a budget of about $3 million a year, two one and a half million dollar chunks.  And that fluctuated over time, but I, and I was the lead for the NCSA part of that.  And I had a colleague at the University of Wisconsin [Madison, Wisconsin], Greg Moses, who was the lead for the San Diego piece.  And then we were joined with Richard Tapia who was in both proposals from Rice University [Houston, Texas], and the three of us were the sort of overall leads for that combined national activity.
Story_ID: 22808
Speaker 1: Now, you became full professor in 1999, right?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: That sounds about right, dim, it feels like dim distant history, so I have to trust that we both have the right thing, I guess, but that's about right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're a full professor of electrical and computer engineering here at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, let's see, and you, you know, we have a number of conferences here that you presented at, and one is the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I did some work with them.  A major conference that I've worked with is the Supercomputing Conference, high, which is a conference on high-performance, networking, international conference.  And I chaired that, I was the general chair of that in 2002.  That's a conference that brings people from around the world every year to, you know, celebrate and learn about the activities and high performance computing, parallel computing, networking, data storage and data analytics.  And so it's something I was very proud to, to be the leader of that year.  It's a proj--it's a conference that's put together by volunteers and, for the most part, volunteers and some contractors.  And leading it was a very interesting experience from that perspective.  So the idea of getting a committee on the order at that time of seventy volunteers to all work together to put this big conference together was quite something.  It's, it's an interesting role to play where you can't, you know, you're responsible for getting something done, but you can't order anybody around because everybody is a volunteer.  You want to inspire, motivate and, you know, get things to happen.  So I learned a lot from that experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were the first African American chairman of that--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, by miles.
Speaker 1: --conference in 2002.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, the conference was founded, the very first conference was in 1990--I'm sorry, 1988 was the first year of the conference.  So it's, it's, you know, the premier conference in this area, but the area is a relatively recent area.
Speaker 1: So the first conference was held in 19--
Speaker 2: '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: '88 [1988], okay.
Speaker 2: I think it was 1988.  It may have been 1989, but I think it was '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: Now, this is a time when the first, I mean desktops are still new, relatively.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, so it, it started out with a group of people--so it's, you know, a really interesting conference.  It started out with a group of people who were working at national labs, and some of the institutions that had the highest end computers at that time.  And so that was, and at that time, it was a relatively small group.  But it grew.  The other thing that was interesting about it was its overall philosophy was that the conference chair is sort of an absolute authority in deciding what's in and out of a given year's program, which is different than many conferences.  So many conferences have very strong traditions or areas where, you know, there's somebody traditionally in charge of each area.  This one is sort of remade at some level every year.  That understates perhaps the culture of the conference where, of course, there's continuity in the culture because the community is the same, but the actual details of every year's conference is up to the chair that year.  And so you get, the reason for that was to try to be able to do a good job of keeping up with such a rapidly developing field.  So, as an example, the first conference I went to was something like 1991.  And I remember there were very few African Americans at that conference.  That was one thing.  I remember I met, I saw the other one as far as I was concerned when we were going on the staircase, and I was going up the staircase, and he was going down, and we saw each other, you know, I said, oh, my gosh, you know.  So, it, it (laughter), it was something like that, to now, where it's at least gotten a lot better.  In fact, one of the things I tried to help pioneer were programs to bring a wider diversity to the conference.  And so now that number is in hundreds, not in ones and twos.  But the other thing is in the computing field itself.  So at that time, the biggest super computers were Cray [supercomputing system manufactured by Cray, Incorporated] machines, which is still true, that Cray makes the most power-, some of the most powerful computers in the world.  But that, the most powerful eight-processor computer at that time was comparable, ultimately, to a 2006 Sony PlayStation, okay, except that that computer, you know, took, you know, a hundred thousand watts of power or something like that, I don't remember the exact number, but on that scale, you know, of a hundred kilowatts of power, costs, you know, ten million dollars and so on.  And the Play Station ran on five watts and, you know, cost a hundred or two-hundred dollars.  And so it's a rapidly evolving field, which is why you want to be able to do a lot of change with the technology and so forth.  But anyway, I've been very involved, I was very involved at that time with SC [supercomputing].  It's called the SC conference, supercomputing.  And I have some involvement.  I chaired the broader engagement activity last year for the conference.  I'm not, I'm on some committees this year, but not as involved, but it's something that, you know, it took a lot of effort.  It was, it was almost a full-time job that last year of the conference.  Running that conference is about a two-and-a-half or three-year commitment of time to get it ready and up and running.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and that conference, the 2002 conference was in Baltimore--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Maryland, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, at the same time, I guess, now, were you--you were the deputy director of the Boston University Center for Computational Science--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been that forever--
Speaker 1: --you had had been that for--
Speaker 2: --forever, more or less.
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought that would be--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think I just retired, I think I just retired, but I'm not sure it has stuck yet, but--(laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22809
Speaker 1: All right, now, oh, tell us about the--this is something you did that I think is really unique.  And the Institute for African American E-culture--
Speaker 2: Yep, right.
Speaker 1: That was founded in 2001.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was something we founded in 2001.  It's, it's not active anymore, but the idea was to try to bring together computing professionals, African American computing professionals to try to use the evolving electronic and computing environments to advance the diversity of the field to connect people with one another, to focus a bit on human computer interfaces in that area, to use them for teaching and learning.  And though it's not operational now, it was something that we were very excited to found and get started.  Members of that have gone on to be leaders in, in this field.  So Juan Gilbert was one of the people that we did a lot of work with, you know, who started and, and was a leading light of that organization.  And he's really gone on to do well with the Stars Alliance.  He's at Clemson [University, Clemson, South Carolina] now and was at Auburn [University, Auburn, Alabama] for a long time.  But he's a real leader in human computer interaction, and again, somebody, if you haven't already talked to him, you might talk with him.  I mean he's a generation younger than I am, but that's a good thing.  Valerie Taylor--
Speaker 1: Juan Gilbert, okay.
Speaker 2: Juan Gilbert, Bryant York was one of the founders with me, so Bryant York is now at Portland State University [Portland, Oregon].  His name is Bryant, B-R-Y-A-N-T, York.  And he's, he's been a real leader.  He's a computer scientist and has been a real leader in advancing folks in computer science.  You can actually get a number of these people's name off of that list for the Haberman Award because I think they, I, I'm not sure if--I believe Juan has won the Haberman Award.  Certainly Bryant and Valerie Taylor, whose the other person.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Valerie Taylor at Texas A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas].  We--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Texas A and M.
Speaker 1: We interviewed her a month ago.
Speaker 2: Ah, okay, good.
Speaker 1: And I saw a video of you and her on the same program last night.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's right, that's right.  So I first ran into her when she, I guess she was a post-doc.  I think she was a post-doc.  She might have been a graduate student doing parallel computing studies back in the good old days.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I have a question about the name of the organization.  The small "i" in the beginning (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, it's--
Speaker 1: Why is it a small "i"?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it was, we thought it was kind of catchy, and we wanted to emphasize the African American e-culture part, so the "i" was small.  So--
Speaker 1: It's interesting.  It is, it makes for an interesting signature there on the logo.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 22810
Speaker 1: Now, this is a question here, I'm, and I remember in those days, people that were using computers had a sense of desperation about sharing computer use with the rest of the community.  I know one of the things that would get any, you know, most donors excited about giving money was to talk about putting computers in the schools, and inner-city schools.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --developing a computer lab, providing a computer lab for kids--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing.  And it seems now, and correct me if I'm wrong, that the kids have caught up to the technology to the point where they're beyond what we could teach 'em in a classroom in a lot of ways.  They seem to be--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I know what you mean though--
Speaker 1: --out there, you know, with the phones that have more capacity than some of the computer that were on the desk.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, so yes and no.  So I think, well, I'm gonna, yes, they're beyond the things that we would deploy often using normal acquisition mechanism, 'cause that's a problem, that things move so slow.  But at least what I would say, thinking about it, is that people, they're multi--it's easy to understand in a way, if you think about the multiple ways of learning.  So there's, there're ways of learning and, and modes of learning that come from touch and experience and so on.  And kids and young people are masters of that.  So, in thinking about things like the use of the cell phone, mobile technology, social media and so on, a lot of what people have learned and what they're expert at, is learned through those modalities, the modality of experience, of touching of, you know, dealing with it at that level.  What is less ubiquitous and well-organized is the understanding of the technol-, underlying technologies, the systems behind it and so on.  Right, I used to joke, you know, with, I think joke with my kids and they can verify or not, that they all understood how to use all these things but nobody could read a manual (laughter), okay.  And so what you, what you would get--I mean that's actually a kind of a test or a measure, though not a good one, about the underlying technology, but of the nature of the understanding, is if you could read a manual about something.  If there was something you couldn't do in whatever your favorite application is, whether it's Microsoft Word or, you know, whatever, on the computer, if you--if there's a manual that acts as a resource for you or not, it's sort of a hint of which of those trajectories you're coming on.  So it's like you're, you know, very good in some respects, but it's, you know, there are challenges, and there's certainly something to teach people, even people who are experts in the hands-on part about the underlying technology and what's going on.  And I, I see that in my own classes in a way that, that I have lots of people who have experience with a lot of the technologies, but as you go deeper into how they work and how various things are connected, it's not as deep an understanding as you would might have thought from the performance.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I'm gratified to find that there are few things that are just historical artifacts that I can teach some of my students about the technologies they use every day.
Story_ID: 22811
Speaker 1: In 2004, the Career Communications Group selected you as one of the fifty most important blacks in research science.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So, okay, now, was that expected or--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I, actually, I did not know I was in their sights at all.  So it was, it was very delightful to do that, gave me a chance--that was at a time when we were building up our education and outreach efforts.  So it gave me a chance to talk to new people and, you know, have some good interaction.  So I was very appreciative of that, you know, yeah.
Story_ID: 22812
Speaker 1: In 2005, you and your colleague, Greg Moses, of the University of Wisconsin, Madison, helped to launch, EPIC [Engaging People in Cyber-infrastructure], right--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Engaging People in--
Speaker 2: --in Cyber-infrastructure.  So, cyber-infrastructure was a word for big, powerful computers and networking technology that NSF [National Science Foundation] was and still is to some degree a promulgator of.  And this was a project which was a kind of natural follow on to the ETO PACI [EOT is Education Outreach Training; PACI is Partnerships for Advanced Computational Infrastructure] project which had come to an end.  The, kind of the way NSF worked, it tried those partnerships for five years with the idea that you'd have another five years extension.  But it really only got extended two years till they made a new program.  And then they made a new program after that.  So EPIC was our project to continue and build on the education outreach efforts that we had done for EOT PACI.  I think, you know, the language also evolved.  I think we now tend to say education and, not so much outreach as inclusion, was one of the words that we used to try to describe what we were doing because otherwise, the outreach, the idea of the outreach kept very much a picture of control by the resource providers rather than as much meeting the needs of people and including people you wanted to bring in, in the, defining the direction that the technologies and activities go. So we did that, and it had many of the same components.  So we, kinds of things that we worked on in those projects were familiar, trying to familiarize people, of course, with, you know, the computing and so on.  That's the training piece, including diverse communities and working with the [Richard] Tapia conference, with Grace Hopper conference which are all activities that bring together, in the case of Grace Hopper, women who have been underrepresented in the computing and the, and in the case of the Tapia conference, underrepresented minorities in computing and trying to engage them.  So we did that kind of activity.  And then a lot of education activities all along the pipeline from undergraduate curriculum to trying to work in the EOT PACI and then to some degree in EPIC with schools of education with the idea that a high-leverage activity would be to see if there're ways to include more comprehensive and deep computer understanding in the education of the next generation of teachers and then have the downstream effect.  So, not saying that the focus is putting computer labs in schools or bringing teachers in to help them develop on their own enrichment curriculum, but if they, just as part of their normal education, learn more about computing and computational science, which was our effort, that that would, you know, show up later in many ways.
Story_ID: 22813
Speaker 1: Now, you were part of the [U.S.] Department of Energy's Advanced Scientific Computer Advisory Committee, right?
Speaker 2: Yep, that's right.
Speaker 1: That's something--, you were chair in 2010, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I became chair in 2010, so this is the federal advisory committee that reports to the director of the Office of Science or the undersecretary of science in the Department of Energy for it, and we review the advanced scientific computing research efforts.  That's the part of the Department of Energy, Office of Science that runs and all the big computer, the big computers that do science, not the military--not the ones that do weapons research, but the science side, in the Department of Energy labs and is also responsible for research in computer science that supports those kind of applications and in applied math.  So it does--and in networking.  So it does networking, applied math, computer science and facilities at the large scale.  This is a federal, one of the federally regulated advisory committees.  So, for example, all of our meetings are in public and the public is invited, you know, because they're open, there're transparency laws that govern this.  We are all special federal employees during the meetings, and our advice is taken quite seriously by the Department of Energy.  So I, I'm on my, I just started my second term as chair of this committee.  And after that, I'll be retiring.  There has been a general sort of practice of having people on these committees only have two terms, two, three-year terms.  And I'm on my fourth, so it's quite time to retire.  I'm now the senior member, not in age, but in, in longevity on the committee.  So they wanted help for a while to keep it going and keep it on a steady course.  So I've been doing that, but then I'll, I will also be retiring in 2014, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22814
Speaker 1: I have a few items here they asked me to ask you about in terms of the dates and details of your involvement.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: One is Phi Beta Kappa.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's right.  I was, I was initiated Phi Beta Kappa in my junior year back in the day, at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  So that would have been 1969.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about the NCSA [National Cyber Security Alliance]Alliance Executive Committee?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that one was associated with EOT PACI [EOT is Education Outreach Training; PACI is Partnerships for Advanced Computational Infrastructure].  So the NCSA Alliance was the larger partnership.  And so, and I was on that executive committee.  So that coincided with PACI and ended when PACI ended in, let's 1990--it started in 1997, so it ended in 2005, maybe, 2004.  But I can verify that.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about the Board of Associated Universities, Incorporated [AUI].
Speaker 2: Okay, so I, let's see, when did I start in the AUI board.  I'm on my, I started--I guess I'm still on my second term.  So AU--the Associated Universities Incorporated is a research management organization, a private, non-profit that runs the National Radio Observatory, Radio Astronomy Observatory, which consists of several laboratories here in the country.  It has been managing the construction of the ALMA, A-L-M-A, which is the Atacama Large Millimeter Array, radio telescope in [the Atacama desert of northern] Chile which is just coming on line and will actually be dedicated in March, I believe, either February or March of next year, and also is involved with the virtual astronomy observatory.  So at this point, AUI is focused in managing very large research projects in radio astronomy.  And it's probably a little, you know, my evolution in this area, if you will, has been through, I guess in a way supercomputing, that in starting with being the director, you know, the general chair of supercomputing.  That was a large organization to be involved with and to help lead.  I'm not sure if I can get all the chronology right, but, you know, and doing EOT PACI was something similar.  The, something in there that's not on the research side was being chair of the faculty council here at BU [Boston University] and a member at the board of trustees.  I ended up being the first faculty member, first faculty council chair to become a part of the board of trustees, while I was chair.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: That was in, let's see, it must have been in 2005, 2006, I think.  And so this was, BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] was going, had some issues and so on and changed, and got our new president in 2006, but in the lead up to that, the board reformed itself and made some changes to its rules and made the, for the very first time, made the chair of the faculty council an ex officio--well, a voting board member, but an ex-officio in the sense of, you know, by virtue of that position.  So I, I was the first one, I was the faculty council chair at that time and actually participated with the faculty council members in the chair search on the board--I'm sorry, the presidential search for the current president.  But, anyway, that, so that was an activity of this, of this kind of trying, of learning more about leading large organizations.  And then, you know, AUI and to some degree, the DOE [U.S. Department of Energy] committee or feel like those kind of, same responsibilities.  So I'm still very much involved with AUI.  I'm off to a board meeting next week actually with them, and, you know, we, that continues.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you start with AUI?
Speaker 2: Now, I have to try to remember.  That's a good question.  It's probably, I wanna say something like 2007, but I should look up the actual date of my, but I think it's around 2007.  It might have been 2008.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22815
Speaker 1: Now, today, you know, what does, as you look, and you see things coming that we don't see coming right now, most of us anyway, what is the future of advanced scientific computing?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think the biggest--there're a couple of big things happening right now, very big things that are happening that will change the face.  But it's hard to know exactly how it'll go.  But let me mention two.  One is, and it's related to something that we did on the DOE [U.S. Department of Energy] which is the EXA-scale initiative.  So that's E-X-A, which is a Greek prefix that basically means ten to the eighteenth power (laughter), okay.
Speaker 1: So the EXA--
Speaker 2: EXA-scale initiative, but the idea is to build supercomputers that work effectively with millions of cores, so millions of individual processors.  So I mentioned before that we had, you know, something here with 32,000 very tiny processors on it.  This is now talking about millions of processors running, you know, with billion-wave parallelism and with very low, with much lower power than we're used to.  So, so in the first instance, the discussion is about what's the next generation of supercomputers that are coming in the 2020 timeframe?  And the goal is, has been to make a machine that can do, ten, you know, ten to the eighteenth arithmetic operations a second which--and now the state-of-the-art is about ten to the sixteenth.  So another factor of a hundred.  And the ten to the sixteenth was, the first time it was achieved was this year.  So another factor of a hundred, but without a like increase in the power requirements.  So the idea would be to build a machine that, that could run on something like twenty megawatts, which seems like a lot of power, right?  Twenty megawatts, twenty million watts of power, given your hundred watt light bulb or you, you know, is still quite a bit.  For scale, sort of average nuclear power plant is 2,000 megawatts.  So this would, you know, this is running on a hundredth of a nuclear power plant or another way to put it, is that power bills are a million dollars a year per megawatt.  Okay, so it's a big amount in powering and so on.  But anyway, so that, developing computers of that scale is one of the problems, and what it will mean though for computing--so obviously, you're not gonna be, you know, probably you will never be in the presence of a computer that uses twenty million watts of power.  But the underlying technology of it, the EXA-scale technology is something that will mean that at a factor of a million down, which is still at trillion operations a second, that'll be in something like your mobile phone or hand-held calculator.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So you'll be doing things with hand-held devices that have the same computing power as--in terms of arithmetic ability, that we had in the world's fastest supercomputers of the early 2000s, okay, will be in your cell phone.
Speaker 1: So all this will be made possible by nano-technology and material science analogy?
Speaker 2: Well, it's a combination of technologies, but it's the shrinking silicon that's nano technology.  It's battery technology is gonna come into it, and however, so, a caveat though, that it probably will change the way we think about doing computing because right now we're spending energy, sort of equally for all the digital, like, you know, your computer adds together twenty-digit numbers.  And we spend as much power getting that twentieth decimal place as we do getting the first decimal place.  But in many applications, the first decimal place and the first ten or the first five matter a lot more than the twentieth.  But we're spending equal power on all of 'em, if you will.  In order to build computers that satisfy the power requirements, the size requirements and the energy requirements, you probably have to relax some of those conditions.  So instead of computing everything completely exactly, you'll end up probably with computers that have the ability to get good approximate answers, and then you spend some more energy to get the exact answer.  But you won't necessarily have computers which are all, you think of completely precise all the time.  And that's your goal.  So that'll be a change in how you, and what you think computers can do and how you interact with them.  That, that it is possible is kind of obvious if you take a step back 'cause after all, our brains, if you wanna think of them as being analogous to computers, are incredibly error prone on the microscopic scale, consists of billions of components, you know, neurons, and do amazing things.  And they also have very slow clock speeds like, you know, milliseconds instead of nanoseconds.  So it, that something interesting is possible is quite obvious.  What it, you know, how it will work is probably a little different than what we're used to now in terms of the way we think about precisions.  That's one, one trend.  The other is, and which is very evident now, is integrated powerful computing into very large date, large-scale data systems.  And so all this stuff we're talking about, about large data now and data mining and, and, you know, knowledge discovery from data, including things like social media and text and language, all those things will play a role.
Story_ID: 22816
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I, you know, I hope that, obviously, we are able to keep moving people forward in education and in, you know, access to all the things that we're talking.  So I spent a lot of my life working on that issue of diversification and bringing people into the system.  And now at a time when, in some ways, there's less attention to that as an issue or even negative attention to that as an issue, it's harder, you know, it becomes a harder problem to get, I think to get, to get change to happen.  People tend to fall back into the patterns that they've been in or slide a little bit backward.  So I'm very concerned that that not be the, the whole story.  I'm quite optimistic that some of the technologies and some of the ways we have of communicating will, are able to enhance that or enhance our ability to reach out, to communicate, to cross boundaries.  But I think we just, we do have to make sure that it really happens.  So I think that's a big peace.  I think the, the impact of everything that's going on in the economy on it is a giant question of, you know, how that's gonna go.  And we're talking, I mean it's very, you know, it's very much in this moment some of the things that are happening.  But asking what's gonna happen with government investment in science and in education is a big, you know, concern, that that go ahead.  So like in, things like my, the committee I'm on, you know, looking at scientific computing, there're sort of two completely orthogonal world views, right?  So there's a world view of what's gonna happen within the normal to and fro of the budget process, and then there's, well, what if, you know, domestic spending gets cut by some large amount as, where basically, I almost have an impression that a bunch of people I work with will suddenly decide it's time for them to retire (laughter) if that happens, and, you know, it'll be somebody else's problem 'cause they just can't cope with the level of some of the things that are being discussed.  So we'll, you know, that'll get ironed out, you know, the, you know, if we survived post-Reconstruction, you know, none of this is such a big deal compared to it, though it seems like it now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22817
Speaker 1: What advice would you give to aspiring electrical engineers today or computer scientists?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the biggest one may be, well, to stick with it and to keep going when you, when you reach bumpy roads, to, probably more than I did, to build a community of support, I think.  And, you know, to have, to have real enthusiasm about being engaged and taking advantage of opportunities and, you know, trying to move forward.  I mean what, one of the things that always, you know, strikes me is the interplay between your confidence and your ability to overcome obstacles.  So, you know, I sometimes contrast, you know, the attitude of the empowered student versus the disempowered student.  So the disempowered student, you know, in my class comes to me and is having a hard time with some aspect of what they're doing.  And they say, you know, "Professor, Professor, you know, I don't understand what's going on.  What's wrong with me?"  And you have to go through some exercise, and they're in the middle of trying to decide if the fact that they're having difficulty means they don't really belong.  The empowered student comes to me and says, "Professor, Professor, I'm having a problem understanding what's going on with this class.  What's wrong with you?" (laughter).  Now, not that I want that challenge, but in some ways, that's a better, for that student's self confidence, that's a better prescription that, well, you know, of course, I'm okay.  You know, and I can learn.  This is what the student is saying, but if I'm not learning, then there must be something wrong with the externalities rather than with myself to account for it.  And so I would love to give a, you know, not that I--as again, I don't like the students saying, "What's wrong with you?  You didn't teach me."  But I, you know, I like to give a little bit of that kind of energy to so many people who feel like outsiders and who doubt themselves when they run into difficulty rather than looking to change the externalities to help them learn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22818
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would go back and change if you could or change direction?
Speaker 2: Not, not seriously.  I mean if, you know, because you sort of, you are what your experiences are.  So if I, you know, I couldn't imagine turning into somebody different.  Of course, obviously, the obvious thing to identify is that I was in Silicon Valley [California] about two years before it became Silicon Valley, right?  I left in '75 [1975].  And so if I could look back, one thing that, one obvious thing to say would be, "Boy, if I just was gonna decide to be in computing, why didn't I do it right then?"  You know, and you'd be coming to me at some big office in Cupertino [California] or something, you know (laughter).  But, you know, but that's not really serious.  I mean if I did that I wouldn't know my kids.  I wouldn't, you know, I mean it's just too big a thing.  So I'm actually pretty happy where I am now, but (laughter).
Speaker 1: You can't help thinking.
Speaker 2: You can't helping thinking, yeah, if I'd say, well, you know, if I, if instead of a decade later going into computing I had decided to follow that thing, you know, while I was still in the heart of it all because I did, I did have a very early Apple computer before the Mac, you know.  I was into computing at that time to some degree, but just not at the level that I am, that I ultimately became.
Story_ID: 22819
Speaker 1: It just occurred to me.  I may not, I may never have another chance to ask this question, but what operating systems do you prefer?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, so what operating system do I prefer?  Well, right now I have a Mac, and I like that.  I had, you know, did Windows for a long time.  I did Unix long before that.  And I mean there're kind of reasons for preferring one over another, but it's not--mostly, if you're talking about it, if you're talking about it as a user, what you really are responding to is the human computer interface, not really the operating system.  And the style now, in some ways is for you not to even know what the operating system is doing, okay.  So the things that you, you know, the operating system is constructing a bunch of metaphors for you, like files and folders and so on.  I mean, you know, and we're so used to that, and it is very important, but I tend to think of that as the human computer interface.  So, for example, that it's all about metaphor is evident when you think about the files, right, if you ever tried to drag a file off your screen and drop it onto your actual desktop, right, that doesn't work.  And what you're reacting, interacting with is a metaphor for the information that's stored on the computer.  And the computer is a big layer of those metaphors.  You know, so--and, and, you know, so it's hard to know how to answer your question at a particular level.  I mean I think, I think I like--right now, I like the Mac human computer interface very much.  But I was fine with the Windows one, you know, before that, and I was also fine back in the day using only a text-based interface to the operating system.  But what I could do was very different, and who I was as a user was very different.  So it's a hard one to answer, and I probably will like the next one best after that (laughter).  And there're also a few in there I didn't mention like, you know, Lisp [programming language] interface, Lisp machine interface and some of the others that, you know, are out there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22820
Speaker 1: Now, looking back again on everything you've done today, until today, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, what's my legacy?  Well, I hope, it's a hard one to answer very directly 'cause I didn't invent, you know, the one new idea that everybody uses.  But I actually think probably the longest-term legacy is the set of people that I helped come along over the years.  And I guess I'm being reminded now when I run into somebody, you know, who was either a student of mine here in engineering or who was somebody who, you know, I helped get started in computational science long ago who's doing really well, who looks at me, and, and comes up and thanks me at some conference or something.  That's a really nice feeling, and I think that's probably in some ways quite a long-lasting legacy, but one that's not visible every day, you know, in, in some respects.  I, any one thing I was gonna point out, I think it would be that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22821
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your children and your family?
Speaker 2: Okay, so I have, well, I had a wife, Linda [Grisham].  We were married for thirty years and two kids, Raymond and Stephanie.  Raymond, my son, is, actually works at the grade school he went to, as an information technology director, and he's also an entrepreneur.  Maybe we'll all be rich and famous if his patents hit and maybe not, we'll find out.  Stephanie is working in veterinary field.  She followed her mother in her interests in biochemistry and biology and animals.  She's, well, for me, she's most famous as the family keeper of snakes.  So she has pet boas that I, at one point or another, had to take care of for a year, which was my experience trying to feed small animals to big snakes.  And I'm grateful that's over with.  And she's in her mid-twenties and working in that kind of stuff.  So.
Story_ID: 22822
Speaker 1: Now, I was asked to ask you if you could come up with a question for young people that they can probably answer, but was challenging in the area of computer science and electrical engineering?
Speaker 2: Ah, okay, let me see.  Basically, I'd like to ask them a question in the general area of how does a computer work?  Okay, how can the computer do arithmetic without making a mistake?  That's a hard question.  What's the difference--or maybe, maybe now-a-days for kids, what is a computer program?  I was gonna say a more technical question is what's the difference between a program and data?  Maybe a good question for them is where is their Facebook page?  (Laughter)  All right, and how does the computer know it's you that's signing on?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Each one of those is more a discussion topic than it is a question with a simple answer.  But that's a handful.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, is there any--oh, I'm sorry, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Well, one more that is one that I ask my students when they first come in, which is, how many computers do you have on your body or in your pocket, in your pockets?  How many computers do you have on you?  (laughter)
Story_ID: 22823
Speaker 1: And the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  Well, it's probably not videotape?  (laughter)  But, sorry, I just had to throw that in there.  I guess I'd like to be, you know, remembered, you know, as a teacher and a thinker, you know, in some of the things that I did.  Different people, different ways.  I hope I get remembered as a not-too-awful father and, you know, family leader, that kind of thing.  But I don't know.
