Story_ID: 572020
Speaker 1: This morning we are interviewing Lucius Perry Gregg [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Lucius P. Gregg].  Good morning, Mr. Gregg.
Speaker 2: Good morning.
Speaker 1: And, we could start our interview.  I would like to start by asking you to give us your full name and to spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It is Lucius Perry Gregg, Jr., and that's spelled L-U-C-I-U-S, P-E-R-R-Y, G-R-E-G-G, junior, J-R.
Speaker 1: All right, and I'm going to ask you where are we doing this interview?  You don't have to give us the address, but the area--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and city.
Speaker 2: We're in the Marina del Rey section of Los Angeles [Los Angeles County, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, a very hard question--what is today's date?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's April 17th, 2007.
Story_ID: 572021
Speaker 1: They tell us that if we ask the next few questions, that it relaxes the interviewer and the interviewee.  And so, I'm going to ask you some questions, People magazine type questions.  The first one is, what is your favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's not one location.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It is boating.  We have a, we have a boat here and I spent a lot of my life, let's say thirty-five years, boating initially up and down the East Coast, and then when I got a chance to join Hughes [Hughes Aircraft Company] here in Los Angeles [California], we had our boat brought around through the Panama Canal and brought here to California.  So, our favorite pastime, if I can call it that, for vacation, is to be on that boat and cruising different ports in California, up and down the West Coast.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Let me ask you, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: It's blue.
Speaker 1: Blue, all right.  And your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, it's crab cakes, and you'll get the sense of that as we talk about my, where I went to college [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland]--but, crab cakes and possibly followed by baby back ribs.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  What is your favorite time of year--season?
Speaker 2: It's really summer and into the fall.
Speaker 1: All right, and finally, your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm reminded of what my mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg] used to tell us is that, remind us that most major achievements come from those who are able to stand on the shoulders of giants and look forward.
Story_ID: 572022
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to go through some dates with you.  Let's begin by asking your date of birth.
Speaker 2: I was born January the 16th, 1933.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Henderson, North Carolina.
Story_ID: 572023
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to see how far back you can take us in your family tree.  You may have had your mother or your father just tell you about their mother and father, great-parent--great-grandparents.  Let's start on the maternal side with your mother's family tree.  First, give us your mother's full name.
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Rachel Jackson Gregg.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and her date of birth?
Speaker 2: It was March 31, the year 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, I'm going to ask you the same thing for your father.  His full name?
Speaker 2: His full name is Lucius Perry Gregg, Sr. [Lucius P. Gregg, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and his place of birth?
Speaker 2: Darlington, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're the second person having a father born in Darlington this week.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: And the date of birth?
Speaker 2: It was January 6, the year 1895.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, let's see how far back we can take you on your mother's side.  How much do you know about your grandparents on your mother's side, your mother's parents?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on my mother's side, her mother's name was Dora Watt [Dora Watt Jackson].
Speaker 1: D-O-R-A, W-A-T-T?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as far back as I can go, she was--she lived in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Was she born in Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, she was born in the South, but I'm not exactly sure of the location.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, she was a--
Speaker 1: Are you familiar with the date, or close?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not, no I'm not, when she was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was married to a man named William Jackson, so that's my grandfather on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He worked for the Illinois railroad [Illinois Central Railroad], and they were quick to remind me that his job was not as a steward, you know, riding the trains, but was working in the roundhouse.
Speaker 1: In the roundhouse, right.
Speaker 2: Yes, which at that time was regarded as somewhat of a prestigious thing for a black American at that particular time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, absolutely.  The place of birth for your grandfather, William Jackson--do you know that?
Speaker 2: I--what I know is that his last name was Brockington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I believe it was Darling- he also was born in Darlington, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Now, the--I'm talking about William Jackson.
Speaker 2: Oh, William Jackson?  No, I'm not aware of William Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay, or a date of birth?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not aware of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, I think you were just about ready to go on to your--William Jackson's father, right?  Or you were--
Speaker 2: No, I was going to talk about my father's father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.  Let's see how far back we can go on your mother's side.  Is that about as far back as you can go?
Speaker 2: Yes, just to my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, William Jackson.
Story_ID: 572024
Speaker 1: Now, let's go to your father [Lucius P. Gregg, Sr.].
Speaker 2: On my father's side, his father's name--I can only give you the last name.  It was Brockington.
Speaker 1: Brockington, okay.
Speaker 2: And I understand he was born in Darlington, South Carolina.  He was a minister, and he pastored a church in Darlington, I believe it was called Macedonia Baptist Church.  And he was pretty prominent in the community there, and I believe even today there's an elementary school in Darlington that's named the Brockington Elementary School [Brockington Elementary Magnet School for Science and Technology].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay.  Any idea on his date of birth?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And, do any particular stories come to memory that your father may have shared with you about his father?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  And you may get to that, but my father was really only with us until I was seven years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, he too- he brought us as a family--he brought us to Chicago [Illinois], and we as--my mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg] and three children [Gregg and his two sisters, Dorothy Gregg Tarr and Rose Gregg Cooper]--began to live with my grandmother [Dora Watt Jackson], that is, my mother's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my father then left (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me get these dates straight.  You came to Chicago around seven, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, nineteen forty f- 1941.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about the early memories however there in Darlington prior to that?  Any highlights that we should know about?
Speaker 2: Well, I was born in Henderson, so most of my remembrance goes--starts in Henderb- Henderson, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, we lived in the parsonage there, and my father was the minister of Shiloh Baptist Church [Henderson, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were there a few years.  My mother--
Speaker 1: So your father worked in the Illinois railroad [Illinois Central Railroad] roundhouse?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  Okay, my father's father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Mr. Brockington?
Speaker 2: My, my father's father was Brockington.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My mother's father--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay--
Speaker 2: --was the one that worked in the Illinois Central Railroad roundhouse.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.  That was William Jackson?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm getting it mixed up.  Okay, let's proceed, because you were thinking about your father's father, Mr. Brockington, who was a minister at Macedonia Baptist.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The--any highlights on how your mother and father met or any--you may not have any?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not really sure.  It may have been in college.  I know when we look at the timeline of the history of their lives, my father, he went to Georgia State College [Georgia State Industrial College for Colored Youth; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Spent a short time during World War I [WWI] in the infa- infantry.  Then he went on to Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] and then on to the divinity school at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Divinity School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On my mother's path, to the best I recall, she went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Now--we're talking about your father now, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Georgia State College?
Speaker 2: Georgia State College, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Shaw University.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And the University of Chicago?
Speaker 2: The divinity school, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we wanted to see how far you could go with Mr. Brockington, your grandfather.
Speaker 2: No, the, I can only recall that he was a minister and he pastored the Macedonia Baptist Church--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Darlington, South Carolina (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Darlington, right.
Story_ID: 572025
Speaker 1: Any mem- word that you've heard on what it was like for him, your father [Lucius P. Gregg, Sr.], growing up there in Darlington [South Carolina] prior to him going to Georgia State [Georgia State Industrial College for Colored Youth; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: No, that was not something they shared with us.
Speaker 1: Okay, how about your mother's growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: She started really--my first recollection based on what she tells me is that she started at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  First it was Columbus, Georgia, and then she got admitted into Spelman College.  Now, you know, we have to remind ourselves that in that period of time, many institutions that were considered colleges also offered pre-college education, and so I recall that my mother--hearing that my mother actually did seventh and eighth grades at Spelman and through high school before entering Spelman College at the college level.  But, somewhere after that, she met my father and that's when they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I was interested in a couple of things.  One, your mother would have been going to Spelman College in the--either the early 1920s or prior to that, am I correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your father would have gone to Georgia State College, maybe around 1910--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --nineteen fifteen [1915]?  Okay.  The--well--let's proceed with your father.  He went to Georgia State College.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I note that there's no memory of what it was like for him there.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  From there, he went to Shaw University--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --in North Carolina [Raleigh, North Carolina], and he had not met your mother at this time?
Speaker 2: I'm not really sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And so he was in North Carolina and from there, he went to divinity school at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Divinity School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he is--and he had not met your fa- your mother at that time?
Speaker 2: No, he had not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Following the path with your mother, she went to Spelman College and possibly did high school level work there at Spelman College.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And we are talking about sometime around--just prior to the 1920s.  Following Spelman College, do you have any recollection of where she went or what she was doing?
Speaker 2: No, my first recollection is, starts with Henderson [North Carolina] when she and my father were married, and I was born there in Henderson.
Story_ID: 572026
Speaker 1: You were born January 16, 1933 there in Henderson [North Carolina].  Your mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg] and your father [Lucius P. Gregg, Sr.] are married at that time.  Were you the first child?  Or are there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the middle child.  I had an--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your siblings?
Speaker 2: --an older sister and a younger sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Could you give us the name of your older sister?
Speaker 2: My older sister is named Dorothy.  Her current name is Tarr, T-A-R-R [Dorothy Gregg Tarr].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, approximately what, when is her birthday?  Was she born in Henderson also?
Speaker 2: I believe so.
Speaker 1: Okay, approx- her date--her birthday?
Speaker 2: I believe April 7, 1931.
Speaker 1: All right, and then you have a younger sister.  And her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Rose Gregg Cooper, C-O-O-P-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was she born in Henderson?
Speaker 2: Yes, I believe so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And her date of birth if you know it?
Speaker 2: October 16, 1935.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all of your siblings were fairly close together?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 572027
Speaker 1: Your earliest memories are being in Henderson, North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your mo- your mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg], did she work or was she just a homemaker, or?
Speaker 2: She spent the major part of her life being a pastor's wife.
Speaker 1: Being a pastor's wife, okay.
Speaker 2: And I, on the side, in addition to that, she ran a nursery school, and I do recall being one of the students in her nursery school (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Tell us about some of the earliest memories.  You remember being a student in your mother's nursery school.  Any highlights there we should know about?
Speaker 2: Not of the school per se, but I know where we lived was in the parsonage that was right across the road from the church itself [Shiloh Baptist Church, Henderson, North Carolina], and of course, typical of those churches, adjacent to the church was the church's big cemetery, so, and I do recall a lot of playing on the--I believe the address was 321 Arch Street--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --in Henderson.  The--I only recall a photograph that they would flash in front of me any time they thought I was thinking I was grown up (laughter).  Was when I was like two or three years old, I was on the front steps there, and all I had was a toothpick--not a toothpick, a toothbrush sticking out of my mouth.  The handle of a toothbrush was sticking out.  I don't know whether that was my favorite toy or something like that, but somebody had the nerve to take that picture, and I had to live with that for the rest of my life.  But, in the house itself, I do recall there were chickens in the back and a chicken farm, and so, and I think we had our own vegetable garden, so it was that kind of lifestyle that we c- that we used then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we're talking about maybe 1936, 1937, or later?
Speaker 2: Or a couple of years before that.  Thirty-three [1933] to--yes, '36 [1936], '37 [1937], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what about school?  What are your earliest memories of going to school there in Henderson?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that was strictly my nursery school period, okay.  But, before I started elementary school, my father [Lucius P. Gregg, Sr.] had accepted a church in Topeka, Kansas, and so we moved to Topeka, Kansas.
Speaker 1: Around thir- 1938?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, there we lived across the street from--not--we lived adjacent to the church, in a, in the parsonage, but across the street was the school, and I do not rec- I do not recall the name of the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we were only in Topeka, Kansas for a couple of years.
Story_ID: 572028
Speaker 1: The three siblings [Gregg and his sisters, Dorothy Gregg Tarr and Rose Gregg Cooper]--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of course, and your parents--the--any memories though of church life, where I'm sure you had to be there in Sunday school and church.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was from sunup to sunset.  I mean, you know, we'd start out in the morning at Sunday school, and then as we were younger, we would then go from there into what they call junior church, all right.  And, that's where all the kids went to church.  It was usually sep- it was clearly separate from the main auditorium.  And, then that lasted--I guess it also played the role of being babysitter, because that would last up until a few minutes before the big church emptied.  And, from there we'd go home, and there would usually be a big dinner, or maybe my father [Lucius P. Gregg, Sr.] had been invited to someone's house, where he would take us as a family to sit down and you know, they always--they served the pastor first (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: But, anyhow, I think my mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg] made sure that we got our share of it.  But then, right after that, in the early evening, we had to go back to church then to something called BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union of America], okay, and we were there until darkness, okay.  And then we'd--but, during this whole time, we had to stay dressed, we had to keep our shirt and tie on, and you know, our Sunday go to meeting clothes as they called it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, that was my recollection of Sunday.  It was always the thing.
Speaker 1: A daylong affair (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: No changes; no variations at all, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  I remember those days also.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 572029
Speaker 1: After two years--you only spent two years there in Topeka, Kansas.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where did your--you and your family go following that?
Speaker 2: We as a family--father [Lucius P. Gregg, Sr.], mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg], and the three of us as kids [Gregg and his sisters, Dorothy Gregg Tarr and Rose Gregg Cooper], traveled to Chicago [Illinois] to my mother's mother's house, Dora Watt's [Dora Watt Jackson] house, which was on the South Side of Chicago in the 30--3100 block of--next to what they call South Park [South Parkway], which later became King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive].  And maybe it was a little bit to our surprise, but as it turned out, we moved into my mother's mother's house, my grandmother's house, and the next morning my dad left and went to Darlington, South Carolina by himself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, the net effect was that my mother then became a female head of household, and she had three--
Speaker 1: Children.
Speaker 2: --children on her hands, and from that point on, my perceptions of her were those of a woman who was--who stood up to the task.  Could not get a teaching certificate in Chicago, and so just to survive, she started out doing domestic work on the North Side of Chicago, I guess up in the north suburbs.  But, then she was able to get a job in a retail store.  They had these specialty candy stores called Snyder's candies [Mrs. Snyder's Candy Shop, Chicago, Illinois].  And, that's where kind of the rich folks would go in at noonti- they would go shopping, and it was right in the Loop of Chicago, and they would come in on almost a daily basis or at least once a week on their regularly scheduled time, and have their ice cream sundae, and my mother worked behind the ice cream counter.  And that went on from--I'm going to recall around the mid-'40s [1940s] until she retired in--about ten years later.
Story_ID: 572030
Speaker 1: Your father [Lucius P. Gregg, Sr.] has just gone down to Darlington [South Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us the reason why, and your feelings in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The best we know is that he went down to, to be, to minister at a church in Darlington, to pastor a church in Darlington, and that really became the rest of his life, the major part of his life.  Now, given the fact that for all intents and purposes he and my mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg] had separated, and of course, we were living with my mother, just out of respect for her, we tended to limit all of our communication with him through our mother.  And we looked to her to tell us whatever she wanted to tell us about what he was doing in, in Darlington, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your grandmother [Dora Watt Jackson], or her gr- her mother, had moved to Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --from the South--
Speaker 2: Well she was in Chicago at the time we were brought to Chicago.  Interesting.  Her husband [William Jackson], of course, worked for the Illinois Central Railroad, and she worked in a local laundry where, in fact, she was very proud of the fact that she was promoted to the number one board in the laundry, which meant that they gave their best clients--they gave her the shirts to iron in that.  But, I say that in some detail to give an indication that this was the kind of hard work that they did in order to make it.  But, she was able to, with her husband, which would be on--my mother's parents, to buy a house there in the 3000 block of Calumet [Avenue], and what we found out later was that it belonged to the retail giant, Carson Pirie Scott [Carson Pirie Scott and Co.; Carson's].  And, my grandmother then, on my mother's side, lived there and, of course, we were able to move into that house.  But, rather than take advantage of all the house, we were--we limited ourselves to just the first floor.  And then there were renters who had the second floor, and then another renter that had the third floor.  But, that was the way in that environment that you tried--you had to cope--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --to make ends meet.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, on the first floor, there was you and your two siblings [Dorothy Gregg Tarr and Rose Gregg Cooper], your mother--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's it.
Speaker 1: --and your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I was raised in a house of four females, if you can say.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And no, no male image in the house you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we're talking 1939 now?  Or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 572031
Speaker 1: You're in elementary school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I don't know whether there are any highlights or teachers that you remember during that period (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  It was the Douglas Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois].  It was two or three blocks away.  I guess if you think of teachers, there were two teachers that stand out.  One was Mrs. Jackson [ph.] and one was Mrs. Jewel [ph.].  And, it's interesting.  I can't tell you how good a teacher they were, except that I liked them.
Speaker 1: And that's important, especially at an early age.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right, okay, and if you were fond of them, and of course, you know, when you're in that pre-high school period, you can develop this affection for your teachers.  Hopefully, you just keep it in terms of admiration, but they, they--we really liked them, and of course, they must have liked us, because--and they then used that to keep us focused on what it was that they wanted us to focus on.  But, Mrs. Jackson and Mrs. Jewel--and we stated that I graduated from elementary school, from that particular school, Douglas.  And at that time, elementary school went up to eighth grade.  We didn't have middle schools or junior high schools at that time, and so I stayed there until I graduated into high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you went up to eighth grade.  That would have taken us into World War II [WWII], and--
Speaker 2: Yes, 1946.
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-six [1946] was when you graduated from--?
Speaker 2: From elementary school, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that was Frederick Douglass elementary [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Yes [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  The--wanted to ask you, because your siblings were very, very close in age and so they were there at Frederick Douglass at the same time you were?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: One younger [Rose Gregg Cooper] and one a little bit older [Dorothy Gregg Tarr] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Nods head) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 572032
Speaker 1: What was it like in the neighborhood there, growing up there in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well there are two things that sort of stand out in my mind.  Being the only male in our household, my mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg] allow- allowed me to, with my bicycle, to get around locally and the only time that I got into trouble with her was that she had the rule that you gotta be on the front steps when the sun goes down--when the lights come on.  When the street lights come on, you've gotta be on the front steps, okay.  Not thirty minutes afterwards or anything like that.  And the one time I remember I got in the most trouble with her was when I came in late one time, maybe thirty minutes over.  And she refused to let me have my bicycle for a period of about a week or two, so, and I thought that was the worst thing that could have happened to me (laughter).  The sh- I was shamed with my friends and all that, but she wanted to get my attention.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: On my, on, on the side of my sisters [Dorothy Gregg Tarr and Rose Gregg Cooper], I didn't play with them.  I mean, my play as a boy--and I think my mother allowed me to do that, was out in the empty lots that were around the buildings in various places where we would rough and tumble doing whatever our form of football or softball, or something like that (unclear).  But, as far as my sisters were concerned, I didn't interact with them socially as kids, but I do know that they were allowed to go visit some of their friends the same age, you know, they're teenage kids, friends in nearby homes or apartments around there.  And all I remember, which I thought was a real pain, was they would have to call my mother and let them know when they were going to take the bus or streetcar that would come back to our house, and our house was always, say a block away from the streetcar stop.  And, my job was to be there to wait for them and escort them back home.
Speaker 1: Safely.
Speaker 2: Okay?  Yeah, safely.  And the one time I got into trouble was when they came and they got off the streetcar on 31st Street and Calumet [Avenue] and they waited f- they looked for me, and I wasn't there, and they waited--it must have been a few, few minutes, but there was, one of the stores on the corner was a tavern.  And so here they are at the age of thirteen, fourteen, fifteen years old standing there waiting for me.  And so, I guess in not knowing what to do, they decided to walk home on their own, and in order to walk home on their own, they had to walk by the laundry, and the laundry was a place that had a big area where the trucks came in and picked up the sheets and the linen and the personal laundry and so forth.  And it must have been late at night, and I wasn't there and they--and something happened there at the laundry that really ruffled them, and so they ended up running the rest of the half block to get home.  And then my mother found out that I wasn't there (laughter).  So anyhow, that was the second time that--and her reaction--and what I had to do--those two things kind of stayed with me.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Certainly Chicago was a much safer place than it was in later years, but even then, your mother did not want your sisters walking--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --unescorted home from that trolley stop.
Speaker 2: But even then, it was, you know, one of those (unclear) was, we were always trying to figure out which street was considered the bucket of blood, and 31st Street was not a--it, it had its problems, had its problems.  (Unclear)--yeah, go ahead, sorry.
Speaker 1: Can you remember any of your friends or acquaintances there in the neighborhood or at school who we might recognize by name today?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I--most of my friends then--.  My mother was very protective of us, and of course, my grandmother [Dora Watt Jackson] had retired, so she was in the house all the time.  And, we really couldn't, we really weren't allowed to have much time getting to know other kids our age personally.  I'm speaking personally as far as myself.  That closeness didn't, did not develop until I got into high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 572033
Speaker 1: World War II [WWII] is going on.  You are going through elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You graduate in 1946 [from Douglas Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are you--scholastically, how had you been doing in your studies?
Speaker 2: Very well.  I just--when I look back, I just can't recall, and maybe I attribute it to my mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg].
Speaker 1: And to those two teachers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Even today, I bless her for how she was able to get us off on a good start.  Scholas- scholastically, I did very, very well, in that particular setting.  Okay, and then I had to face another challenge at the college level, but anyhow in high school, I did very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, elementary school, but in--going into high school now, you're going to another school, and what is that school?
Speaker 2: Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: That's Wendell Phillips?
Speaker 2: Wendell Phillips.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The very famous--legendary--
Speaker 2: Legendary Wendell Phillips High School, yeah.  There were two black high schools on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  Wendell Phillips was all black and the other school that was all black was called DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, of course, the rivalry between those schools was just--people are still telling stories about either football or track or basketball or what have you.  But, Wendell Phillips was the high school I went to, and something happened, but I really got off to a good start.  I mean, I--not something happened.  My mother had this slogan that she would whisper in our ear and it became the most fearful, but guiding slogan that she would make.  She would whisper in my ear and sometimes she didn't know what I was doing in terms of school or what the event, and she'd just say, "Don't embarrass me, son, don't embarrass me."  It was always twice, okay, and I reminded her of that when she got eighty years old, in the last year of her life--the one thing I could recall.  And she started that, I know she was saying that when I was in high school, "Don't embarrass me son, don't embarrass me."  But, and, of course, we didn't know what that meant, and we'd get in a situation where we weren't sure as a kid, you know, fourteen or fifteen years old, what to do, and of course, in today's time, sometimes people will laugh and say well, if you, if you get into a dilemma and you have to decide which way to go, just ask yourself, what would Jesus do?  Okay.  Well, in my situation with my mother, we never got to that point because we always just had to ask first, you know, what did my mother mean by, "Don't embarrass me?"  And I think if we stayed within her bounds, okay, then we--we didn't worry about what Jesus would do (laughter).
Story_ID: 572034
Speaker 1: Some of the outstanding teachers that you remember, and you feel may have contributed to your success at Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], can you recall any?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily by name (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And now we are in what, forty- '46 [1946], '47 [1947]?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) I know the home, the home teacher you know who sort of was our coordinator for all the students, was named Mrs. Shea [ph.].  But, I think at that particular time, my fondness developed around the subjects--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --physics, chemistry and math.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And of course--
Speaker 1: Those were your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I w- I've just been very blessed for all of my schooling to have been able to--the comfort level I had in there, in the sciences and math, okay.  So, therefore, it was more the classes that I identified with in terms of what I liked as opposed to who the teachers were.  I know, I can recall what the chemistry lab looked like and what the room looked like in terms of physics and so forth, and in terms of math, but it was more the subject matter.  The fondness, the fondness went with the subject matter.  But then there was a, there was a major piece that really was, that really began to influence me, and that was the Junior ROTC [Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I took to that like a fish taking to water.  I really liked it.  I really liked it as a kid.  I started off as a corporal.  I ran across one certificate that showed that I was--signed by the principal that--and the board of education [Chicago Board of Education] that gave me--that promoted me to corporal in the Junior ROTC.  And I've ke- I've held on to that, because two or three years later, I was the lieutenant colonel commander of the entire unit, and we had a huge unit, and we c- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Approximately how many?
Speaker 2: I'm going to say two to three hundred kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, to this day, there are three or four of us who was a commander when I was--before me and who was the commander after me, and so we get together, it's a group of three or four, and we still sort of think back nostalgically on what those days were like.  But, we competed in terms of drill competition, and I believe, I can recall one or two citywide competitions where Phillips won.  And to be one of the two all black high schools in a city of thirty or some high schools, to bring home the trophy, was considered a real plus.
Speaker 1: That's what I wanted to ask you.  In Washington, D.C., the black schools competed among the black schools and the white schools competed among the whites, but in Chicago [Illinois], all of the high schools competed against one another.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: The all-black schools and the all-white--all-white schools were in that competition.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Which means the competition was even sharper.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 572035
Speaker 1: There were no, or none that you can think of, that partic- teachers that particularly motivated you at Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] that you can recall, that may have been responsible for you trying even harder in your studies, or any sort of motivation?
Speaker 2: No, my--the courses for me were not hard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, that's both good news and bad news.  It's good news in a sense that I didn't have much homework because I could learn enough and perform well enough that the teachers really just kind of made it a little bit easy for me.  In retrospect, as I got older, I realized that there was a bad news element to that.  And that was the material that we were being taught wasn't measuring up to the standards that were the curriculum and the material of the white schools, particularly those in the suburbs.  And, of course, when you get into college that's--really becomes your new competitive environment.
Speaker 1: So, to rephrase it, would you say that the material that you were being handed in the all-black school of Wendell Phillips was not up to the level that kids in white schools at the same grade level--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --were being challenged with?
Speaker 2: And that's the only way I feel comfortable putting it, and that is that, on a comparative basis--.  What they were offering us was sufficiently challenging and stimulating and so forth, but then when we looked citywide, we have to acknowledge that the curriculum wasn't exactly going to measure up--on the same par, now (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And that is the big part of the struggle, even today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 572036
Speaker 1: Just to go back to one more question there at Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Obviously, a lot of black students, outstanding students besides yourself came out of there.  While you were there at Wendell Phillips, are there any names that have gone on, like yourself, to achieve individual recognition nationally today?
Speaker 2: No.  There's, you know--it's a part of the gossip, but I've been told that Jesse Owens spent a short period of his high school period in, in Chicago [Illinois].  Most of the people that they talk about now were athletes like went on, in football or basketball, but not nationally noted.  It turns out now, and I was kind of surprised to find out about a few years ago, that I was the first one inducted into the Wendell Phillips hall of fame.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: That's quite an honor.
Speaker 2: You know, actually, you know when you really think about the South Side of Chicago at that particular time, it was coping with the problems of that mass migration coming from the South, of people looking for a better life and a job, and in many cases, they were men who would come and find a job, and then send money home to help the rest of their families that were still south.  And, I understand now from the, from the historians that well over 4 million blacks made that migration [Great Migration], both north and to the West.  And so, you end up with a lot of household relationships that don't have the benefit of long standing families or relatives.  And you have a lot of individual people that are trying to make it on their own where their real f- their extended family is really back in South Carolina or Georgia or what have you.  And, so you have that kind of lack of stability, or roots, if you can call it.  And, then of course, we had the World War II [WWII] G.I.s that were coming out of--and see they started coming around 1945, '46 [1946], and the [U.S.] military was downsizing, and they were coming into Chicago in droves trying to take advantage of the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], which in some cases would allow them to get a class or something and pay for their education, or it allowed them to get a few points on their employment application that might give them an edge in being selected as a postman or a policeman or some part of the government, the local government service.  I think I recall that if you were applying to the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], you get five additional points if you were a World War II veteran.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, you have the combination of that group coming in, and the group from the South, and it was--I think it provided quite a challenge in terms of the high schools, that they would accept these young kids, and those of us in that age--
Speaker 1: And the veterans in the same class--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: --in some cases.
Speaker 2: I remember our night school at Wendell Phillips, were people that in some cases they were forty or fifty years old--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --looking for that high school diploma.
Story_ID: 572037
Speaker 1: Racially, the, the way things were racially in the City of Chicago [Illinois] during that period, and we're talking about, '46 [1946], '47 [1947], '48 [1948], '49 [1949], '50 [1950], how did that impact you?  What do you remember most about that?  Did this affect you in any way?
Speaker 2: I think in a real sense, we were sh- we were--thanks to my mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg], we were sheltered.  We were not allowed to--there were certain things that, you know, we could go play over here, but not over here, we could go do this, go do that.  And I think what she did was to lay out a kind of a--she staked out a, sort of a terrain that she felt as though it would--we would not even be suspected of doing something wrong.  So, it wasn't--well, okay, let me adjust that just a little bit.  Before fifteen, before age fifteen, to help my mother, I became a paperboy.  And, I used to deliver the Chicago Sun-Times.  And, I did that, including once a week, I would have to go door to door and collect for the week.  And, I did that every--and I must have done that for a year, a year and a half.  When I became fifteen, I could get a license to work and I became a delivery boy for Burnett Flowers, which was down in--Wabash [Avenue] in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois].  And they provided flowers to all the nearby hotels, and if they had a celebrity living in the hotel or coming into the hotel, I would be required to deliver flowers to them.  And in some cases, I would leave the flower shop and I would be carrying just two packages for delivery.  It could be a dozen roses in one, and a bouquet in the other.  And in one case I remember Sonja Henie, the skater, was living at the Drake Hotel [Chicago, Illinois], and either she or her staff wanted her to have this bouquet of flowers delivered to her hotel room, and I was the one to do that.  And, of course, that meant I got on the bus, or I got on public transportation and then went over to the Drake, and when I got there, I didn't have to go in through the service entrance.  I just went in and went up.  And I asked for her room number, and they sent me up to her and, of course, I rang the doorbell and she came out and thanked me for the flowers, and down I came.  Now, I said all that because, in that sense, racially, maybe it was because of the job I was doing, I was in a position to go all over the city, and I never had any, any negative experience.  Now, you know, my job was over at six P.M.  I worked--I did it for two hours every day after school, from say four 'til six P.M.  So, I did not have any negative racial experience from that point of view (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 572038
Speaker 1: You are about to graduate from Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  You're preparing yourself for college.  What are your thoughts where you want to go to college, what you want to do?
Speaker 2: Well, academically, I was really at the top of my class.  Okay.  For a young boy coming up, I was--had the highest rank in the class.  Now, you know how high school ratings go, no boys can outperform the girls in high school.  You can always have five or six that are just so studious, more so than the boys, who still want to get out on the weekends and play rough and tumble football, or what have you.  And, and so, anyhow I understand I ranked about sixth or seventh in my class of a hundred or so.  And, I had the highest marks in the National Honor Society, I was president of the boys' service club, I was commander of the high school ROTC [Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps] as a lieutenant colonel, I got the Bausch and Lomb science award [Bausch and Lomb Honorary Science Award] for my class, so academically it was great.  But, what happened during my senior year was, down in the ROTC, in the Junior ROTC, Captain Duncan [Edward Duncan, Sr.] used to have other [U.S.] military officers come by for--to talk to us.
Speaker 1: He was the head of the Wendell Phillips ROTC (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The--he was the instructor, the ROTC instructor for us.  And this one occasion when we sat down to listen to the speaker, in walked this young second lieutenant Marine, okay, who happened to be black.  And, he walked in and started talking to us as young, you know, seventeen, eighteen year old kids.  And we were so fascinated by that, and he told us that the reserve unit that he was a part of met on the weekends at Navy Pier in Chicago [Illinois].  And so what we could do is we'd have a [U.S.] Marine Corps uniform and once a week we could put that uniform on and go down and be a part of the drills.  So, the drilling we were doing in high school could be continued after we graduated from high school and that was a very prophetic moment for me.
Story_ID: 572039
Speaker 1: The Junior ROTC [Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps], we're still in our senior year, and we're still going down and, on the weekends and wearing our uniform and of course, when we'd walk in the neighborhood with those uniforms on, I liked the fact that the girls liked (laughter) liked to see us in our uniform.  But, then two weeks after--just a month after high school graduation, President Truman [President Harry S. Truman] said, "We're going to Korea, and I'm activating all reserve units that are up to full strength."  I had applied to go to the University of Illinois, so that was really on my mind as a senior in high school.  I wanted to go to the University of Illinois.  My counselors, I think wanting to protect me and keep me from doing something that's so drastic where I'd make a mistake career wise, had schooled me on the fact that what I really ought to do is become a high school science teacher, and that should be what I should major in at University of Illinois.  And, of course, when I got activated in this reserve unit a couple of weeks after graduating from Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] that then changed the whole course of my life going forward.  And, but then I spent a year where I know my mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg] really didn't know--and maybe I'm getting ahead of you--but, if she was concerned that here I was going down a pretty positive path of going on to college and getting a bachelor's degree in college and becoming a teacher in the school system, all of a sudden now there I am getting on the train in Chicago [Illinois], heading out to San Diego [California] to go to boot camp, and then be prepared for Korea.
Speaker 2: Okay, I was going to ask you.  You were saying that was a major change, and explain that, little bit more detailed.
Speaker 1: Well, I think that there were so many unknowns, as to what that would mean.  You know, the [U.S.] military had really been downsized after World War II [WWII].  At that time, in World War II, I think the enemy was pretty well known, and there was a public consensus about--there was a lot of national support about the fact that what we were doing in World War II.  And all of a sudden, somehow the White House says, "We're going to Korea," and I suspect that the people who were my mother's age, if they were curious enough, they'd have to go running to the globe and looking at the map, and sort of, trying to figure out, where's Korea?  And without a real strong feeling of why are we doing this on it.  So, it wasn't that she had a son that was sort of going off to something that was going to be in the best interest of the country, it was just--maybe it was more of the unknowns.  And even for us, we really as foot soldiers in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], we really weren't sure about what the cause was.
Speaker 2: Okay.  On, on, on that, so this was not a conscious--you were uneasy about being a part of that group going to Korea?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was kind of feeling a little bit patriotic, you know.  You just didn't ask yourself, you know.  You were told to do this and you want to just, you were loyal, you know, as a Marine and you didn't ask--you know, most, most of the military force being so young, the young guys don't ask a lot of deep questions that you might ask twenty years later.
Speaker 2: Right.  A little more--
Speaker 1: But, you're more interested in performing.  And, of course for me, coming right out of high school and despite those academic awards that I came out of there with, I was off to something--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --quite different.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this was 1951?
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty [1950].
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950], okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty [1950].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 572040
Speaker 1: And then, of course, to my surprise--well, I really wasn't that knowledgeable, but anyhow, I can just tell what happened.  After I came out of boot camp, and they sent us off to cold weather training, and we're trying to show how, at the age of seventeen, we're trying to show how tough we are, that we can really cope with the challenges they were putting before us.  I went through cold weather training, and then, because of my size, I got special training as--with the heavy machine gun.  It was a water cooled rapid fire machine gun that would--you'd put on a tripod.  And, one person had to feed the bullets in--through on a belt, and another person was behind, and you had to have a certain size in order to carry that, that kind of stuff and be able to fall on the ground and put it up and set it up within a matter of a few seconds and start opening fire.  And the other thing they qualified me for was the flamethrower.  And for those who can think back as to what those two things meant, I wanted to perform well, but then when I think about it ten or twenty years later, the life expectancy of a person operating the heavy machine gun--you're making so much noise that you're immediately--and you've got tracer bullets that were red hot that you used to guide and make sure that you've got it aimed to the right person or the right foxhole or house or something, or the flamethrower, which if you open it up in the middle of the night, it just basically lights up exactly where you are.  The life expectancy of that person is less than a few minutes, because you're almost--you have to sacrifice yourself in order to perform, and the enemy immediately recognizes where you are and you basically tell them that, and they counter.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And here I was seventeen.  I wasn't thinking of that, but yet that was one of the parts of the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 2: Where did you take this training?
Speaker 1: San Diego [California], and also Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Camp Pendleton.  But then what happened was that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It sounds as if now you're having second thoughts about this whole thing.
Speaker 1: At seventeen, I was more interested in--I was with my buddies from Chicago [Illinois] and we were having too much fun being, being men.  You know, we had just left home under the supervision of our parents.  We were now out on our own, we could go and drink beer at age seventeen, eighteen years old, we could go into San Diego where the bars were, and sometimes the guys would fight with the sailors.  I mean, the sailors and the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], even though the Marines come under the [U.S.] Navy, there's always that little tension (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you were being men there at seventeen, or almost eighteen.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So I can understand how seventeen, eighteen year olds get into--are tempted to do something that they would not do if they're ten years older, what have you, because you just don't--you don't think, and I think society is willing--and the courts sort of say, well how old are you at seventeen?  Okay.  You just don't have that depth of judgment in terms of it.  But, anyhow, that, that was what I was being prepared for.
Story_ID: 572041
Speaker 1: Now, something happened, and [U.S.] Congress passed a law [Selective Service Act of 1948] that said that anyone going to Korea, they had to be at least eighteen years old.  So, they took the seventeen year olds, and we were sort of being held in abeyance.  We had been trained, we'd gone through cold weather training, we had the skills to operate some piece of equipment that they--weaponry that they wanted us to have, and yet they had to hold us for six months or so.  And so I got assigned, along with three or four of the rest of us from Chicago [Illinois], to the Marines supply depot in Barstow, California [Marine Corps Logistics Base Barstow], and--as an MP [military police].  Now, that didn't defeat us, because that meant we wore the uniforms at the gates, and you know how the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] are, and you know, you had, you had your pistol with you, and the MP, and you basically were--you had a lot of control over what went into that gate and out, and of course, we also had to protect the supply depot, which meant we had to take a jeep and drive around every hour or so to make sure that the, that the fence around the depot (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, was your unit completely black, or was it mixed?
Speaker 1: No.  That's a good point, thank you.  When Truman [President Harry S. Truman] decided to--that the reserve unit would be called on to active duty, if you were in the reserves, they didn't have a standard of integration, but if you were on active duty, he had a--Truman had already--President Truman had already required a complete integration of those that were in active ser- active duty service.  And, so when we moved from being an inactive reserve unit at Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois] just drilling on the weekends, we had to be more sensitive now to a totally integrated environment as an active thing.  So, as a result, when we went on to boot camp in San Diego [California] and then the cold weather training and then the special training and then into being an MP, that was all as a integrated unit for the Marines.
Speaker 2: Were there any incidents that you can recall doing--within those integrated units initially?
Speaker 1: No.  Not internally--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --not internally.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Maybe, maybe it was something about the Marine environment at that particular time, but no, no, no racial incidents--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --internally.
Story_ID: 572042
Speaker 1: But, I was on the bowling team, and they had a young black guy who was the chaplain's assistant.  He was the assistant to the base chaplain, and he was also on that bowling team.  And one day he happened to mention to me, "Why don't you apply for the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland]?"  I'm not really sure I understood what the significance of that was.  I took it as a compliment, and like any seventeen year old boy who has trouble writing letters home, particularly home--my usual letter, which my mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg] showed me later, was: "Dear Mom, I am fine.  I hope you are the same."  Every letter started with that.  Now, the question is, you've got the rest of the page and what are you going to say?  And, so you look for things to say, and I happened to say to her that, that, "Oh, by the way, the chaplain's assistant hap- mentioned to me that I should apply for the Naval Academy."  And that's as much as I--okay?  And then I went on to either talk about how's my, "How's Dorothy [Dorothy Gregg Tarr], how's Rose [Rose Gregg Cooper], how's--?"  And so forth.  Well, thirty days later, I get called by the base commander at Barstow, California [Marine Corps Logistics Base Barstow], and you know, you're in, you're in the barracks and maybe we were all laid out in our bunks and waiting--you know, it's a time period between our time being on guard at the gate.  And they came in and they said, "Private Gregg [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Lucius P. Gregg], the base commander wants to see you."  Oh.  That's usually a sign of bad news.  So, I get dressed real quick and I go down to--.  And he said, "I have orders here for you to report immediately to Newport, Rhode Island to take the exam--entrance exam for the Naval Academy."  My mother was able to, I guess when she got my letter, as I know now, she took it to--in Chicago [Illinois], you know, the political parties are highly organized in terms of precincts and precinct captains, and precinct captains get certain privileges and certain access and so forth.
Speaker 2: The Daley machine [Richard J. Daley] was in full swing.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) She took that to a guy who I was introduced to as our uncle, Uncle Will Ross [ph.], and I can never really trace for you, but you know, when you have a kind of southern environment, there were people that you call Auntie and people they call Uncle, and no one ever said, "Well, okay, you're connected through--," so forth, it was just something you didn't do.  And Will Ross called Congressman Dawson [William L. Dawson].  Congressman Dawson was the first black to be in charge of, to chair a committee in [U.S.] Congress.  And, of course, he team- he teamed with Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.].  And, of course, Powell, as we all remembered, was considered Mr. Outside, and Congressman Dawson was considered Mr. Inside.  Well, my mother went, and she didn't hear anything for about a week or so, and then all of a sudden he evidently had gotten in touch with the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.], and the Pentagon had then issued those orders.  Now, during that time I can think, they had re- they had called the high school principals at hi- at Wendell Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  One was named Maudelle Bousfield [Maudelle Brown Bousfield], who was pretty legendary in terms of public education for blacks in Chicago during that time.  And another one called was Virginia Lewis [Virginia F. Lewis], and she was also, she went on from being hi- the principal of Wendell Phillips to being one of the assistant superintendents in downtown Chicago for the system.  But the orders came--evidently their response to Congressman Dawson was strong enough, and he had not given any person his principal appointment.  Each congressman every year can have a principal appointee for both West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], Naval Academy and now today, more recently, the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado].  But evidently, it just worked like, it worked so quickly that from the time I wrote home to within--to my mother, just hap- just as a matter of happenstance--just saying that the chaplain's assistant had mentioned it, to thirty days later, I get the orders.
Story_ID: 572043
Speaker 1: And it was, "Report immediately."  Well, report immediately means you're to report within forty-eight or seventy-two hours, which meant that they gave me about twelve hours to--of course, everything is just in a foot locker, you know, type of deal.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, they gave me about twelve hours to pull everything together, to process out through payroll and finance, and be on the train heading toward--you know, [U.S.] military guys didn't fly in 1950, 1951.
Speaker 2: But you had to travel across country in that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Cross country to Newport, Rhode Island.  And the next phase of pressure that I was put under, and maybe the first most stringent form of pressure that I would experience in my life was, all of a sudden the publicity in Chicago [Illinois] wasn't that I was taking the exam and would have to qualify, it was, he's in, he's been admitted.  And so anyhow, I'm on the train coming from San Diego [California].  I get to Chicago, and they meet me, they greet me at the train station [Chicago Union Station] as I come off the train.  Of course, you always had to wear your uniform.
Speaker 2: And when you say they, you're talking about?
Speaker 1: The high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: The high school?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they had at least eight or ten of the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] officers there, with their swords that they wear as a part of their dre- and they were in cross swords (gesture), okay, and there I am coming up through the gate.  And their swords are crossed, and the photographers had already been--the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] was there, the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] was there, they're all taking photographs of it.  And my mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now these are daily, white newspapers.  Were there black newspapers there?
Speaker 1: This was the cover page of the Tribune the next day, with the cross swords, with me coming through and my mother kissing me on the cheek.
Speaker 2: This was, this was a hero's welcome.
Speaker 1: It was (laughter).
Speaker 2: Just because you had been accepted to the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But then, when the ear shattering calmed down, something struck me that said--maybe it was on the next train leaving Chicago heading toward Newport, Rhode Island, what if I don't make it?  You know, I've left all of those people, you know, everyone's celebrating (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a lot of pressure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then I get there and I realize that I only have thirty days.  The other soldiers and sailors who were there assembling to take the exam, some had been there as much as six months.
Speaker 2: Now, let me get this straightened out.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You were going to Newport, Rhode Island to take the exam there in order to see if you can qualify to go to the Naval Academy?
Speaker 1: I had the principal appointment from the congressman [William L. Dawson].  That principal appointment means all I have to do is pass the exam, and I'm automatically entered into the Naval Academy.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And the exam is held not in Annapolis [Maryland], but in Newport--
Speaker 1: Newport.
Speaker 2: --Rhode Island.
Speaker 1: Newport, Rhode Island was considered the prep school and I've got that, only a thirty day lead time.  And--
Speaker 2: Right.  To prepare and to take the exam?
Speaker 1: The exam.  Now, the guys that had been there six months or so, sometimes in class they would play cards, they would play Monopoly, they would pay a little attention to the school work, but by and large sometimes they would get in- involved in just talking and so forth.
Speaker 2: Now, did you arrive in time?
Speaker 1: I arrived, I processed in, you know, you go into the base commander's side office and you'd sign in, and you know, whatever office it is that takes care of personnel.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Now of that class (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) they said, "See you in thirty days."
Story_ID: 572044
Speaker 1: In that class, of that class, were you the only black?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  It turned out that I really wasn't.  There was another black there, but within two months after being admitted, I would be the only black in the class out of twelve hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there were twelve hundred people and they had to pass this exam to go to the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: There were two of you who were black?
Speaker 2: There were really three.
Speaker 1: There were three?
Speaker 2: I don't know where the third one was at that particular time (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the twelve hundred took that test?
Speaker 2: Well, twelve hundred passed the test.
Speaker 1: Oh, twelve hundred passed the test.
Speaker 2: Passed the test.
Speaker 1: Do you know how many took the test?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can tell you what it is today.  You know it's it's several, several thousand who take the test now, but--and of course I managed to--all I had to do was meet the minimum qualifications of the test.  But what--so we, twelve hundred went to the Naval Academy.  We all got on buses and different forms of transportation (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There in Newport [Rhode Island], and--
Speaker 2: (Nods head) We all gathered at the Naval Academy and we took the oath as plebes, you know, entering our freshman year.  I know that--I'm now told that--
Speaker 1: And there was only one, one black among the twelve hundred?
Speaker 2: Well, there were three of us when we signed in, in July.  When we started class in September, there was only one of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What happened to the other two, I really can't tell you.  Maybe, you know, some of them may have decided to leave on their own, but there may have been other reasons for them not to start when the school year started in September.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me set the timeline.  That--now, we're talking about September of 1950?
Speaker 2: One [1951].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-one [1951].
Speaker 2: One.  I had spent a year with the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay, okay.  So, now you are there.  You are one of the people who are--of twelve hundred, who passed and you're at the Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland.  What is your feeling? Scared?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Nervous, apprehensive?
Speaker 2: Yes and no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You can tell us when we come back.  We're going to change reels--
Speaker 2: Both of the above.
Speaker 1: --and I'll give you a chance.
Speaker 2: It was both, both of the above.
Speaker 1: Both--
Story_ID: 572045
Speaker 1: You're at the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy] there in Annapolis [Maryland].  I don't imagine you had been to Annapolis before, so, anything you can recall about being at the academy in those first few days, or coming off the campus into the town, or what Annapolis was like in those days, because we're talking about 1951.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And there's a revolutionary storm about to take place in this country.
Speaker 2: That's right, and you can feel the tension, you can feel the tension.  I guess the way I felt personally was, be careful, don't take chances right now.  We--most of our on campus stuff was very regimented.  Everybody had to take math, and you know, we had sort of a canned curriculum, and we started taking classes.  We had a couple hours free every weekend and--
Speaker 1: What would you do during those hours?
Speaker 2: Well, what I would do is--the black community was only about--
Speaker 1: There in Annapolis you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, five minute, ten minute walk from the time I walked out of the gates of the campus to the black community.  And, of course, the word had gotten around the black community that, okay, we've got--you know, there's one in the class.
Speaker 1: We've got one (laughter).
Speaker 2: And, interestingly, the first couple of blacks who had gone, been admitted to the Naval Academy, didn't really frequent the town in terms of--.  They had, they had girls coming down from Howard University [Washington, D.C.], some coming down from Morgan State [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] on the weekends, for their social activities.  They would have them live in the home of some doctor down at a (unclear) on the bay or some--and you know. And that's the way they would socialize.  But, I along with one or two others just felt some affinity to go into the black com- to walk into the black community.  And thinking of 1951--
Speaker 1: I need to interrupt you to ask--when you say one or two others--so at that time you were not the only black there?
Speaker 2: I was the only black in my class.
Speaker 1: Only black in your class?
Speaker 2: There was one in the class ahead of me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He still did not graduate out of his class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But, at that time I arrived, he was there in the class that was the year ahead of me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you two became friends of course and support for one another.
Speaker 2: Yes, we'd meet--would meet each other as we would walk, but by and large, he had his friends that he would greet, and I was sort of a new kid, and I didn't mind walking the streets and, and, you know, the uniform was really something that, that got a lot of attention.
Story_ID: 572046
Speaker 1: The black community was very small, but pretty well defined, and that was when I really got--began to develop my sensitivity to what this race issue was all about, because I was there right in the midst of it.  You know, we couldn't go to the theatres, we couldn't go to the restaurants, or you know public transportation--you know the blacks were sitting on the back of the bus.  So, I was--what I did was, I basically ignored the white community and instead spent my time interacting with the black community that was there.  It's, it's a little bit of a sad commentary, but it's one of those things where you're so welcomed and well received that--
Speaker 2: They were proud.  You were a hero, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They reached out to me and I in turn reached out to them, and it was my home away from home, and almost to the point where I really didn't have to greet--I really didn't have to worry about what I was missing.  Many of the families, they wanted me to meet their daughters, you know, and even the--a lot of the kids my own age really were always on speaking and, socially in terms of (unclear).  It was really the young kids that I, that later on in life it would turn was a start of a sense of motivation that then would become a kind of a driving force for me in terms of trying to stay focused on what I could achieve despite the adversity and--of other things that were going on around us.  And, of course, I got to know the young kids in high school.  There was an all-black high school called Bates High School [Wiley H. Bates High School, Annapolis, Maryland], and we got to know the teachers that were there, and some of them were single females, and so that, that always made us welcomed into that kind of environment.  But, it was, you know, my friends in Chicago [Illinois], I think they were split in terms of their--the mixed feelings about it.  The ones that everybody knew were the ones that celebrated my admission into the academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland].  Those that had second thoughts and really wondered about me, what would happen to me, they kept those feelings to themselves, and I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You said wondered, or did you mean worried?
Speaker 1: Worried, worried.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Or wondered what was how--what the future was all about, and would I survive.
Speaker 2: And how about your mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg] and your sisters [Dorothy Gregg Tarr and Rose Gregg Cooper]?
Speaker 1: She--(laughter) interestingly, she kept her feelings to herself, but it must have been she was concerned, because we had just moved from the South, basically, through Topeka, Kansas for two years and into Chicago, and, you know, five or six years later and all of a sudden there I am back south.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And it was, the temperature of racial feeling and hostility was really getting--boiling up to a breaking point.  Yeah, on the surface, you know, the blacks knew to sort of stay in their spot and not cause trouble so to speak, but little did we know that a few years later that bubble would burst, and all of a sudden the level of activism would really begin to take off.
Story_ID: 572047
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you about life on, at the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland].  Did you sense any animosity from your instructors there, or from any of the other personnel or from any of the other students that you were going to class with?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  I managed to sort of rise above, okay.  And I put that in contrast to the first black to graduate from the academy.  He came and he graduated two years before I arrived.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So in that sense (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Brown?  Is that?
Speaker 2: Wesley Brown [Wesley A. Brown].
Speaker 1: Wesley Brown.
Speaker 2: He came in 1945, he graduated in 1949.  I came in 1951 and graduated four years later in 1955.  But just that difference.  Now, was it timing that made the difference?  I don't know, but he really had a hard time.  None of the other classmates would room with him, and doing the book, the book that's out on him now, it's called 'Breaking the Color Line'--'Color Barrier' ['Breaking the Color Barrier: The U.S. Naval Academy's First Black Midshipmen and the Struggle for Racial Equality,' Robert J. Schneller, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And it was done by the naval historical society [Naval Historical Center; Naval History and Heritage Command].  It wasn't a freelance writer who looked as though he could get some money from a publisher.  And so the [U.S.] Navy went on about a two year--the historical society went on about a two year pursuit of collecting background information.  And some of the most insightful information they collected about--that really highlights that period that was right before me, was to get around and talk to his classmates and those that were a year or two ahead of him.  And none of the, none of his classmates wanted to really fraternize with him because the whites, the southerners, didn't want to be stigmatized by being a friend of his.  They didn't feel he should be there, okay, and that sentiment came out in the surveys when they talked to his classmates, you know, twenty, thirty, forty years later.  And the northerners didn't want to accept him because they felt as though this would be a bad mark on their image that would be from the s- from their southern classmates, and so he really had to make it on his own.  And by not having a classmate meant you didn't have anyone to study with, and like most (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's a terrible burden.
Speaker 2: --(nods head) most college situations, you know, you only learn probably--60, 70 percent of what you learn comes from the class, in the classroom, and the other part comes from your classmates by studying with them and doing the homework together and helping each other.  And usually you're lucky if one is good with math and science and the other one's good in English and humanities, and that was my situation that ended up--we balanced each other, we complimented each other in terms of what we were able to do.
Story_ID: 572048
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, for you it was different because your classmates welcomed you, or sat down with you, studied with you.  It was--what was--?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I--there were two real challenges that the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] presents.  One is the [U.S.] military environment and how you adopt and adapt and embrace the military environment, and the other one is academic, and either one can put you out of there.  As far as the military environment is concerned, I got--I was well received because I'd come out of the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had that kind of discipline in terms of how to march, how to keep my uniform, how to do this, how to say yes sir, no sir, et cetera. You know, and the kind of protocol that a young Marine is grilled, particularly in boot camp, and (unclear) and so forth.  So, the military side was, I would like to say, no challenge, but in cert- in many respects for the guys who had quote come off the farm, that's my classmates, they viewed it as a plus.  Academically though, I was able to witness, as I may have mentioned before, firsthand, the shortcomings of an inner city education when you're competing with the guys who have come out of high school, the suburban high schools around the country.  And so I started out my first year in the bottom fourth of my class, my class standing.  And, this is something they publish at the end of the year--
Speaker 1: Make public.
Speaker 2: --it's a computer printout (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, boy.
Speaker 2: And, they put it up on the bulletin board, of one thousand names.  And you go and look.  And, of course, first they do it alphabetically, so you go and look for your name and you see what your class rank was.  And, everybody can do that, okay, so it's a public item.  And I, I say that with some sense of pride when I go back to the academy now, like I do.  Well Bev [Gregg's wife, Beverly Ward Gregg] and I, we do it once or twice a year.  Because, then my first year performance gets added into the second year performance and to the third year performance and then into the--your senior year performance, and I ended up, cumulatively, in the top 10 percent of my class.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.
Speaker 2: In fact, in my last year, I got the highest mark on the electrical engineering exam, the highest mark of the one thousand in my class that took that same exam.  So, I remind the admissions people at Naval Academy that you can come in, and if you're put in the right environment, you can see this kind of progress between your entering year and when you graduate.
Story_ID: 572049
Speaker 1: As far as my classmates were concerned, you know, as far as extracurricular activities--.  Oh, in one sense, a classmate--there's a guy who came to me and said, "I'd like to be your roommate."  And the first year, you're basically assigned rooms by almost a random (gesture) you know.  But in your second year there, you pick and choose who your roommate is.
Speaker 2: And who was that person, what was his name?
Speaker 1: Well, (laughter) I'll use his name for the sake of this.  His name was Don Martin [Donald Martin].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was from Mont- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because that took a lot of courage, am I correct?
Speaker 1: He was fr- add to that, the fact that he was from Montgomery, Alabama.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Even more courage.
Speaker 1: We rode on the same crew team together, okay.  I opted not to play football.  I wasn't exactly sure, but it turns out now as I read the life story of other blacks who went to the Ivy League schools and some of them made the football team and were the captains of their team at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] or what have you, they were fine as long as their--the teams they competed against were in the North.  But, they always had a team in the South, whether it was Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], or whether it was Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] or whether it was Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] or what have you, and those schools would let them know, you come down and comple- compete with us for football, but they would leave the black players in the dormitory up north.  And that had to be a real hard thing for them to swallow, because in some cases they were the stars of their football team.  But, the schools went along with this, and that was it.  So, I would suspect with the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy] being in Maryland [Annapolis, Maryland], being in the South, the idea of making the team, and then once you make the football team, then the question is, who are you permitted to compete against with as part of the team?  So, for one reason or another I decided to go out for rowing, and of course, Navy was at that time was the national champion across the country.  We beat everybody in terms of rowing and went to the Olympics in '52 [1952 Summer Olympics, Helsinki, Finland], and we won the 8s and the 4s and the 2s, you know for--
Speaker 2: Were you on that Olympic team?
Speaker 1: I was the second team that would have gone.  No, no, but I--it was the quality of the coaching and quality of the (unclear)--well, one of the guys in--I was the stroke guy, which is the last guy on the team that--you're at the--everybody faces the stroke guy, and he sort of sets the pace.  And, I was allowed as a freshman to be the stroke guy.
Story_ID: 572050
Speaker 1: And one of the guys on the boat was the one that came to me, Don Martin [Donald Martin], and said, "How about if we roomed together when we come up for selecting our room assignments for our second year there?"  And, we really struck it off, I mean we really hit it off, we really hit it off.  He was good in the humanities, and I was good in math and science, and I'm only saying what he says now, and tells my wife [Beverly Ward Gregg] this and so forth, and we helped each other and probably collectively we--he says, you know, we both made it out because we able to, were able to help each other.
Speaker 2: Did you remain roommates throughout the remaining three years?
Speaker 1: Yes, but not as close as I now look back and, and wish we had maintained.  What surprised me, and he didn't tell me this until our last year, because there were times when his sister would come up to see him from Montgomery, Alabama and so forth.  So we had basically--our social life went socially, because mine was staying very, you know, was very close interaction with the black community [in Annapolis, Maryland].  What he tells me in the senior year was the first Thanksgiving that he went home to Montgomery, after we had roomed together, he mentioned to his family at the Thanksgiving table (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this would have been November of 1952, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He mentioned to his family that his roommate was black, or as he would say, a Negro.  His dad hit the ceiling, and as proof of his anger, wrote him out of the will.  He didn't tell me this until we were ready to graduate from, from the academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland].  This is three years later.  He kept that to himself, so he carried that kind of thing during that whole time that we were together.  But, it didn't interfere, I mean, we were very close and we you know that normal roommate razzle dazzle, kidding each other and so forth, type of closeness.
Speaker 2: It's probably fair to say that he also received a lot of grief from fellow cadets there at the academy--
Speaker 1: Well something was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But not, not for your ears, but--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 572051
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Interesting, going back to the first--Wesley Brown [Wesley A. Brown], who came out of there in 1949, what the naval historian found from talking around, talking you know twenty, thirty years later to his classmates, really almost fifty years--was that there were--some of the southerners got together--southerners who were like a year or two ahead, they could give him demerits.  If you got so many demerits because your shoes weren't shined enough, or your pants weren't pressed enough, and so forth, your uniform, you reach a certain number of demerits and you're out of there, just on terms of being mili- unsatisfactory for--you know, what they would expect of a naval officer.  And so those demerits could be given to you by those that are above you.  And they didn't have to account (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By you mean fellow cadets?
Speaker 1: Fellow cadets that were above you--seniors.  So in, if you're in your first or second year, anyone who was a year ahead of you or in their senior year could actually come, they could come around to your room when you weren't there and see if your bed was--your bedding, your bed cover had to be tight enough that they could drop a quarter on it, and it would have to bounce.  And if didn't they could write you up for not--.  I mean, it was really being a little bit mean, because you'd have to have it in for the person that you're--.  And anyone could do that to--particularly to any plebe, any freshman's room.  And, evidently there was some sentiment developing within his class, now kee- I'm sorry, let me come back to this.  Keep in mind that before Wesley Brown graduated, five other blacks had been admitted to the academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] over a seventy-five year period, and had never graduated, okay.  And so, what appeared to be in the making was that--and these are Wesley Brown's classmates (unclear)--that the southern guys were beginning to get together to say, he doesn't belong here, and it's our duty to make sure that we get him out of here, okay, except for one guy.  He was two years ahead of Wesley Brown, and his name was Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And he had the courage--
Speaker 1: And he went to them.  He went to this southern group where he knew he had heard that they allowed this kind of discussion when they put, when they got their heads together.  And, the Georgia peanut farmer went there and said, "I understand what you're trying to do, and I'm going to ask you not to do it, because I know what you're up to."  Which meant that Jimmy Carter was saying to them, I know what you're up to and if I go forward and report on this, then you guys will be in some kind of trouble on it.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And as a southerner, he was really going against--that took a lot of courage.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And he wasn't from one of the major cities of the South, you know, they expect--out of Atlanta [Georgia] or out of Nashville [Tennessee], or what--something like that but might not have be--.  No.  And, and this did not come out until this historian made the rounds and got four or five of Wesley Brown's classmates, or those who were a year or two ahead of him to verify--
Speaker 2: Do you remember the name of this historian on that?
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter), Schueller [sic. Robert J. Schneller, Jr.], Schueller, because he first started out to do a complete book on the blacks who had come through the academy, and so he wanted a biographical summary from me, and I managed to get it together.  But then after he got all this together, he said, "No, the first book has to be on Wesley Brown."  He said, "If there's another book--there will have to be a second book, but I don't think we ought to take that life and mix it in with all those that came through ten years later or fifteen years later," or what have you.
Story_ID: 572052
Speaker 1: So, I--you know Wesley Brown [Wesley A. Brown] and I have become very close friends, and even in his failing health, you know, we still--.  And once a year the superintendent has a select number of black graduates to come back to the academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland], usually every fall in September, October, and meet with him over two or three days to see what are they doing right, how do they--how can they be more competitive, what's the environment like, to give us older alumni a chance to talk to some of the young kids.  The midshipmen who are there, and just to reassure them that the path they're on is--there's gold at the end of that rainbow--it'll be pride, it'll be prestige, it may even be a little bit financial every once and a while.  But--
Speaker 2: This group that you talk to, is it mixed or is it--?
Speaker 1: No, it's all black.
Speaker 2: It's all black?
Speaker 1: Yes. It's called the minority outreach conference, and we sit there for two or three days and they give us updates as to how they're doing entrance wise, SAT scores, retention, any disciplinary problems, how are they handling them, how well they handle them.
Speaker 2: And Wesley Brown, even though in ill health, still attends?
Speaker 1: He comes, he comes.  I know he came in particular--well, they, we always have a dinner, and at the dinner we have a major speaker, and so about two or three years ago they asked me to be the major speaker and so Wesley had just come out of the hospital and he is, he said, "I came just so I could hear what you were going to say."  So, I'm putting his life in contrast to what I went through, and I was pretty well received.  I mean, the positive things I remember nowadays look very small and miniscule, but at the time they happened, it was serious stuff.  I--in 1953, Navy had such a good team that they were invited to play in the Sugar Bowl game in New Orleans [Louisiana] against the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi].  It happens over the holiday break, you know.  You get off a few days before Christmas and you come back a day or two after the holiday--after New Year's and my thought was, I'm going home to Chicago [Illinois], I've got to be with my mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg]--you know, I mean because she's going to make you sit beside her in church [Olivet Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] with the uniform on (laughter).
Story_ID: 572053
Speaker 1: We're in 1953, Navy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] has done very, very well.  They've been invited to the Sugar Bowl in New Orleans [Louisiana] and--New Orleans, and--to play the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it is 1953 of course, and this country is going through a little bit of change, but they're not there yet.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So tell me what it was like.  They invited you.  Did you accept that invitation?
Speaker 2: I welcomed it, but I chose not to go because I had to decide, do I go to New Orleans to be a part of that game, or what do I tell my mom [Rachel Jackson Gregg] in Chicago [Illinois] (laughter)?  That I will not be coming to sit beside her at Olivet Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] on the Sunday, or something like that.  And it was one of the proud moments in her life.  So, but, anyhow, I get this call that said the commandant wants to see you and, you know, usually he's a disciplinary guy at the academy, and I managed to sort of keep my composure and go up to see him.  And I walked in and he said, "Mr. Gregg [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Lucius P. Gregg], I just want to let you know we, we've talked to the Sugar Bowl authorities, and they have assured us that if you want to come down with the midshipmen, that you'll be allowed to sit with the midshipmen as opposed to in some segregated seat."  And, so he said, "I don't know what your plans are, but I just want to let you know that."  And, you know, this was the first example, and probably there are half a dozen of them, of someone who really had no reason to--.  But somehow, something prompted them to go out of their way to say, we're going to make sure that we don't have a problem here.  And, then of course, when we paraded, we, I was--.  They have a para- you know it's four to five thousand guys on a parade count, and everybody's marching in uniform and the band and all that at the parade field.  And they have seven or eight people that are in the brigade staff, with the brigade commander, and he stands up by the reviewing stand by himself and gives orders to the other four or five thousand, and they made sure that I was one of those on that brigade staff.  We--you know, there were little things like that that I guess collectively kept me inspired to--gave me that little extra shot of adrenaline that--
Speaker 1: And hope (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) would keep me going, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  They had said that you would not have to sit there during the game in segregated seating, which you certainly would have had to do if you were someone else, but since the midshipmen, I'm sorry, the cadets going to the Sugar Bowl--
Speaker 2: You can call them midshipmen.
Speaker 1: --would you usually room together?
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: Would--did they give you a guarantee that you would be able to go into integrated housing there, or would you have to go into one of the small hotels?
Speaker 2: Probably so.  I would say that during our summer cruises, you know, the classes are out in June, and then they don't--you're not back in class until September, and during the summer they--you go into various training experiences, and sometimes it's Norfolk, Virginia, sometimes it's--they take you off to see some active part of the [U.S.] military for your exposure, and I did not run into any--I was always just mixed in with the group on it.
Speaker 1: But your housing was on campus?
Speaker 2: On campus.
Speaker 1: It was always on campus?
Speaker 2: Always on campus.
Speaker 1: Government couldn't control that.
Speaker 2: But what would have happened in New Orleans, I don't know.  But, there're naval facilities there, and they're always looking to cut money, cut costs, and so I would suspect they would maximize the use of using barracks and dormitories at the naval places where they would not have to pay.
Story_ID: 572054
Speaker 1: Now, in your third year there, and you did have a white roommate, of course, Mr. Martin [Donald Martin], or Cadet Martin, Midshipman Martin I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: The--we have an historic decision coming up in the [U.S.] Supreme Court in 19--a year later in 1954 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, again, it's bubbling right under the surface that people are demanding certain rights, Afri- blacks are demanding those things.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: On campus there at the academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland], you saw little subtle changes by courageous men such as Jimmy Carter [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] had demonstrated, such as your roommate had demonstrated.  Were there other little things that you could see happening, making life a little bit better there at the academy, or outside?
Speaker 2: Well, what was happening is, I started getting closer to my senior year was that--it doesn't sound like that much of a compliment, but each class following me had two or three blacks in the class.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, the numbers were increasing, only a matter of only one or two, but considering the trend of before--keep in mind that I was the fourth black to graduate, and I was the first to graduate with what they call distinction, as an honor graduate.  Okay, on it.  And, but, those following--there were a couple of them in each class.  You know what, the biggest change I think, related to how the academy received the black community that, from town that would come onto the academy--there was a little, there was not that intense hostility that the black community had toward the academy.  They knew that they were not an active part of being a midshipman or the officer ranks and so forth, but by the same token, they needed the academy for their jobs.  And, then, even in a social sense, they knew they could come to the football games and to the baseball games and basketball games and it was not segregated seating.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now clearly, there was a sensitivity that the black community didn't--some black with his son or daughter or what have you, wife--would not go down and sit on the fifty yard line, but by the same token they were free to sit anywhere else they wanted as far--.  So, in that sense, the academy was, wanted, had a kind of open, no restriction type of deal.  That even included the concerts, musical concerts, and there's a historical study--I mean there's a story about a young lady who started off as a little girl coming over with her parents, and she went off to become a superb pianist in New York [New York], and part of that started out at the academy when she used to come and hear the--when her folks would bring her for that.  I would say there was nothing really that significant that happened, because it was ten years after I left before the superintendent challenged the chamber of commerce of Annapolis [Maryland] that said, if you deny service to any one of our midshipmen, you will be denying service to all midshipmen.  So, that went to the restaurant owners, to the theater owners, to the guys that manage the apartments, you know, where the young, where the white sailors and officers would rent their housing there.  And it was one of those--and once he did that, the doors opened.  The doors opened, and of course, about the same time, the first large number of blacks--let's say sixty or seventy, started coming in, entered per class.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So, it started slow.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: But then it--but once I guess they realized they were at a point where they had to get this thing in town, the town of Annapolis get--we've got to get that thing straight.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 572055
Speaker 1: Were there any other highlights that you can think of there in your third year or fourth year that might be important in the developing, or the developments that were going on there?  One, there were more blacks coming into the [U.S. military] service academy.  Of course, congress people--there were more blacks and white congress people who were willing to nominate a black.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well we ne- you never had--in the next--from 1955 to 1970, you never had more than a dozen--well, you never had more than a half dozen in each class, in any class.
Speaker 1: In each class.
Speaker 2: So, you know, we had broken the ice, but no one was really impressed by the extent of change.  It really wasn't until 1970 that it really opened up.  Now, when I went out in 1955, and I stayed in the service for another ten years, I--the secretary of the Navy invited me to come back to the academy as a senior guy, and become a part of what they call the academic advisory board of the academy, and there we were wrestling with really changing the framework of the academy.  Admiral Rickover [Hyman G. Rickover] insisted that the skills--the scientific background and training of the midshipmen coming out of the academy had to be equal to all of those coming out of the civilian ROTC programs [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  That was one thing.  Number two, all three academies, the superintendents of both West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], the Air Force [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado], and Annapolis [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland], would get together every three months, and they would share thoughts, and how are you handling this, and how are you handling that, and so forth.  And they all agreed that they've got to do something serious with regard to the recruitment of blacks.  And so, if you notice the admissions pattern timeline, that all of a sudden in the late '60s [1960s], or--before 1970, each academy had a precipitous increase in the number of blacks, and that's when they made a serious decision of saying we've got to--it's not going to happen if we just sit, sit still, we've got to do something about it.
Story_ID: 572056
Speaker 1: Now, I came on the academic advisory board in 1970, so I witnessed firsthand how they decided to admit the first class of females, okay.  It is not a coincidence that the year before 1976--well, I do know when we would go there and the superintendent would have us come to his house for dinner, and that's when he would really tell the things that are really troubling him, that allowed us to deal with them academically.  Now, this group was made up of the CEO of AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph Company; AT&T Inc.], John deButts [John D. deButts]; the president of TWA [Trans World Airlines] who's an alumnus [Forwood Wiser, Jr.]; the dean of sc- engineering at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]; the president of Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire], Dickey [John Sloan Dickey]; Admiral Kidd and--Admiral Ike Kidd [Isaac C. Kidd, Jr.]; and Admiral Carney [Robert Carney].  Carney took the Japanese sword at Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii].  I mean, these were guys of that stature, and we would meet, and they would, and I was one of them, okay.  And we would meet with the superintendent, and he'd say, "Look, let me tell you some things that are bothering me," because the next day we had to be in a public meeting, okay.  And we knew--I said things are heating up with regard to--we can no longer continue as an all-male, we've got to change, we're getting word from [U.S.] Congress, we're getting these calls from Congress, we're getting letters from Congress saying, "You guys can't keep doing this, and it's not in our best interest as congressmen to keep funding this kind of enterprise."
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, so, we had two years, or a short period before, they had decided to have a contractor come in and decide, okay, how do we change the bathrooms, how do we get--.  And they had a standing contract, and they'd update it every period as to--okay, we're not going to do it now.  In the next three to six months, give us your next bid, and how much is it going to cost, and so forth.  And so anyhow, to make a long story short, at one of the meetings where the three superintendents were together, they all three agreed that they were going to change.  And interestingly, each academy admitted fifty women.  They were not going to get involved in the kind of embarrassment that had hit some of the private [U.S.] military academies where they only admitted one female and the whole group of males then they would--.  Okay, and the kind of publicity with that so they admitted fifty.  Each academy admitted fifty, and they all came in at--and they all admitted fifty at the same time.  Okay, so as part of being on the academic advisory board, we had to strengthen and make sure that the--all subject matters were approved and accredited by the civilian education--college accrediting agencies to satisfy one prodder being Admiral Rickover [Hyman G. Rickover].  We had to increase the number of blacks, and that's when we brought--they started bringing in sixty or seventy.  We had to admit the first class of females, as many as fifty in a class, okay, and at the same time, we had to make sure that we had a level of retention that was satisfactory, that would not be an embarrassment.  It was a very profound time for me to be a part of that academic advisory discussion, and to participate in that, on it.  So, it turns out now, some fifteen hundred blacks have graduated from the academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland].  Some of them, some of them have gone as far as to be, to get four star admirals.  The commander [Joseph Paul Reason] of the Atlantic Fleet [U.S. Atlantic Fleet; U.S. Fleet Forces Command] just retired.  He was a four star admiral that came out of the academy in the class of 1970.  So, what I was somewhat pleased at is the fact that I was part of that small group that would be viewed as the vanguard of what would then become a movement that would continue to grow.  It started slow, it began to increase, and now with a little bit of effort, they continue to admit sixty, seventy blacks and at the same time, they admit sixty or seventy females in, in each class.
Story_ID: 572057
Speaker 1: Let me take, take you back because we've gotten ahead of ourselves.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You're about to graduate.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: We're talking about 1955?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That was the summer of 1955.  You're in the top 10 percent of your class.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you've been accorded certain honors.  Which direction does your career take now?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: We've skipped over all of that stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah I--
Speaker 1: I just wanted to bring you back.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I chose to go Air Force.  At the time, there was no Air Force Academy, and there was an understanding within the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] that one fourth of the graduating class of the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland], one fourth of the graduating class of West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] could opt to take their commissions in the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have to confess just a little bit that--well, obviously, I wanted to fly.  I'd had the experience of a few flights on and off an aircraft carrier.  (Laughter) I kind of had a feeling--
Speaker 1: You mean solo?
Speaker 2: As a midshipmen, as a midshipmen.  No, no, no, as a midshipman, I'm sorry, flying in the back seat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  They would--they did a number of things to give us some sense of orientation and excitement as midshipmen that would help us make our career decisions.  And there was a time when, after your second year, okay, they exposed you to the aviation part of the [U.S.] Navy.  But, there was not really one thing that--okay, there were two other aspe- elements too.  Brigadier General Benjamin Davis--okay, there was a colonel in the Air Force named Benjamin Davis, Jr. [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.], and he got promoted to brigadier general, and this was at a time when the Navy was--really had the lion's share of their blacks as stewards, serving meals and working in the kitchens.  And I looked at those two things in contrast, and I said, I'm not sure I want to stay in for twenty or thirty years, but there's a difference.  That's telling you something.  But, the other element of that is that it turned out that from my studying, I had a .25 myopia (gesture).  It may sound like a small number, but when you're getting your physical exam to go and fly, okay, that kind of shortcoming in one eye is enough to hold you back.  Okay.  It doesn't permanently disqualify you, but at least for the time being.  And, the Navy said, we want you to go to sea for five or six years, get away from the studies, go to sea for five or six years, and maybe your eye will improve, the left eye.  The Air Force said, we're willing to take a chance, so they took me to Bolling Air Force Base [Joint Base Anacostia-Bolling, Washington, D.C.].  They took me to a flight surgeon at Bolling, and the flight surgeon tested me, and he said, "Yeah, you've got a .25 myopia, but let me tell you what I want to do.  I want to test you again in two months.  Now you go back and study."  And I say this--I've said this to at least twenty, thirty people in my life.  You're right handed and you tend to favor your right side when you read, and you've been in an intensive reading environment here for four years at the academy, and most right handed people notice that when they read, if the book is not in front of them, the only way they can still read is if it's to the right.  But, a right handed person--that's, that's, that makes them feel a little bit uncomfortable, so you tend to favor one side, and as a result the left eye had gotten a little lazy.  And he said, "I want you to cover your right eye.  I want you to read with just your left eye.  Do some long distance focusing out your dormitory room for a month or two, and then come back and let me examine you."  And, sure enough, it was gone.  And, so the Air Force basically said, we will admit you right into pilot training, immediately upon graduation.  So--
Speaker 1: And what year was that?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955].
Speaker 1: That was 1955?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, you are graduating from the Naval Academy--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you, two months later the Air Force is accepting you into the U.S. Air Force?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 572058
Speaker 1: Tell us what it was like going into that training.
Speaker 2: Ah.  Okay, it was in Missouri and Oklahoma, six months in one training base in Missouri and another one in Oklahoma (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which one?  In Missouri, what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Malden, Mis- Malden Air Base in Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Then in Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: Enid, Oklahoma, Vance Air Force Base in Enid, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--in retrospect, as I--we roll the clock forward, and we look back, I excel.  I mean, I did very well, I did very well.  I ended up graduating near the top of my class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as a result, I had a high preference number as to what I would do once I got my wings.  I knew because of my sitting height, I was too tall to fly jet fighters, because they have a limit of thirty-eight inches sitting height, and I was a little over thirty-eight inches, and the spine was a little too long.  In other words, if you get subjected to ejecting, well the longer the spine, the more difficult the pain would be.  And so, they recommended I go multi engine, and as a result, I opted for the military air command, as it's now called, flying the VIP flights, transatlantic flights from the East Coast to Europe, once a week.  And as a young guy at age twenty-two, twenty-three years old--okay, a bachelor, once a week either to Paris [France] or to Frankfurt [Germany] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us what the VIP flights are.
Speaker 2: The VIP flights are families and your more senior people, officers and their families, and even the regular enlisted people, but we--a lot of, a lot of family and children.  We basically were the [U.S.] military airline.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in fact, we flew the same equipment that the TWAs [Trans World Airlines] and the Pan Ams [Pan American World Airways] were flying out of New York City [New York, New York] on the same routes, and in fact, we used to sort of compete with each other.  If we both took off like that, and I could hear them call in, or they would hear us call in, we would sort of kid each other a little bit on the way over, "When d- are you expect this?"  And so forth, "Where are you landing?"  And all that.  But we did once a week to--over and back once a week--to either Paris or to Frankfurt, or to Madrid, Spain, or to--we had in England a field outside of London, sometimes in Prestwick, Scotland, and every once in a while, we would get a requirement to go into the Middle East, Morocco or something.  I know the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] had to do a thing in the Middle East there.  We flew the Hungarian airlift [Operation Safe Haven] when we airlifted the equivalent of a major city out of Hungary as they were trying to escape the Russian tanks.  The--it was very demanding flying.  I only did for--it was pilot training for one year and then I only did it for three years after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I flew about 150 flights, transatlantic flights, over and back, and I amassed five thousand hours in the cockpit.  To a pilot it's considered very demanding.
Story_ID: 572059
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And in some conditions when we had to fly in Europe it was, it was very enlightening, in a sense that in some cases, we took off under what they call zero-zero conditions.  It was even conditions worse than what the airlines would--commercial airlines would fly.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Zero-zero meant that you'd taxi out to the end of the runway, you'd park, and you're in heavy fog or heavy rain.  And the tower, in deciding on whether to give you a clearance for takeoff or not, would call you and say, "When you get lined up, tell us when you see four runway lights."  And we would sit there, between pilot and copilot and we would count the runway lights, and all of a sudden, if it lifted just enough, so we saw, we could say, "We see four runway lights" and they'd say "You're clear to go."  Now, those were mission critical flights.  Those were the flights you had to go.  Now, those flights were--and what we also mean by zero-zero is you could get off, but you couldn't come back and land, so your landing had to be at another, at a nearby airfield.  And, at the age of twenty-five, I flew copilot for two years, and then the [U.S.] Air Force did an experiment of saying let's try and move some first lieutenants--previously, you had to be captain or major, or above--let's move first lieutenants over to left seat--they picked ten of us across the nation, and I was the only black, and I had my own crew at the age of twenty-five flying.
Story_ID: 572060
Speaker 1: And, where we left off last time was you were flying 24/7 on VIP flights for the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: You were in the Air Force and flying those VIP flights around the world.  Let's continue there, and how long you did that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I may have mentioned that they really--as young guys, they were experimenting, and the Air Force designated ten to--they were going to experiment with becoming--elevate them from right seat copilots over to left seat as first lieutenants.  And so at the age of twenty-five I had my own crew.  Well, they really worked us young guys, particularly those of us who were single.  I mean, there was a time when I was asked to fly a couple days before Christmas to go to Paris [France], and then I came back a day after Christmas, and then they asked me to go and fly to Paris, you know, the day before New Year's, and so I was in Paris again for New Year's Eve and come back.  And, but, it was still work, it was a lot of work.  A lot of work on the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You would rather have been home with your family or your mom [Rachel Jackson Gregg]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a single guy, okay, at age twenty-five, so the married guys didn't have any heartache, I mean, they didn't feel sorry for us (laughter).  But, anyhow, that's the, that was the environment that we were in, you know.  But there was one flight--there was one flight I took that really caught my eye and began to be a precursor for what would change my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 572061
Speaker 1: I'm sitting in Paris [France], and I can tell you it was the first week of October of 1957.  I mean, every time the, the anniversary comes up in national and global--international magazines, it just reminds me.  I'm sitting there and because I was certified as a French translator for the [U.S.] Navy back when I was at the academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland], I wanted to remain a little bit fluent in French, so when I'm sitting there in Paris, I would try and read the French newspaper to see how much I could get through it.  I came down into the hotel, I came down into the lobby, waiting to join up with my own crew, and I picked up the Paris newspaper, and I'm just going to sit there with a cup of coffee, waiting for the rest of us to assemble because we were scheduled to go out to the field and take another flight back to the states.  I picked up the newspaper, and the headlines read: "Russians Launch Sputnik [Sputnik 1]."  And the second headline said: "U.S. Sends Troops to Little Rock [Arkansas]."  Same day, same headline.  And, little did I realize then, that that was so prophetic that it was going to really affect my life in varying ways from that point on.  Sputnik kind of made the Pentagon nervous.  Some people can be dramatic and say it scared the daylights out of the Pentagon.  But, I'll say, just say they were unnerved by that, and they wanted a group of us younger pilots, or younger officers, to go to graduate school.  And so I was selected to go to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Went to MIT, we're right in the midst, in the graduate program of aeronautics and astronautics.  We're right in the midst of a lot of change.  Things were changing so fast in terms of what we knew about space flight and aeronautics and high speed supersonic hypersonic flight.  But, we didn't have any books, and so most of our classroom material was that old purple mimeographed stuff that they would run off on the mimeograph machine.  And they'd run off enough copies so they'd give it out to the students, and that was how we learn- we studied for the next course.  MIT had been selected to design the Pentagon's guidance system for twelve of the first fifteen missile--ballistic missile guidance systems that they were going--.  So MIT was really in the lead in terms of technology.  But they didn't have--the things were changing.  In fact, things were changing so fast that one of the--a reporter asked one of the professors, "We see you keep asking the same questions on the final exam.  Are you worried that the students will cheat if they know that that's the question?"  And, he said, kind of laughingly, "No, no, I'm not worried about that because our answers keep changing."  I mean, that was the pace at which we were going.  In fact, you know, before I left, we had another professor who was talking to us, and we--he had about ten minutes left in the class, not enough to start the next lecture.  And, so he said, "I've got to hold you for another ten minutes.  Let me tell you about this new form of computing we're working on, and it's called digital."  Here I am in this program.  I had Buzz Aldrin, the astronaut who went to the moon on one side of me as a young officer.  I had Sheila Widnall as the only woman in our class, but she went on to become secretary of the Air Force, and so this is a very demanding group that we were in.  And, we saw him go to the blackboard to write and show us the spelling of the word, digital.  We immediately grabbed our notebooks and started writing down.  And I can sh- and I'm looking for my notebook to show the day I wrote down the first spelling of the word digital.  But, it kind of signaled how--where we were, and then how fast things were going to change.  I went from there, and then when I graduated and got the master's [degree], I was assigned to Washington [D.C.], to the Office of Aerospace Research [U.S. Air Force Office of Aerospace Research] and the Office of Scientific Research [U.S. Air Force Office of Scientific Research].
Speaker 2: Now, you entered that course at MIT in late '57 [1957]?  Or--
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959], actually in 1959.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I flew for three or four years--four years.
Speaker 2: After that?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And, then MIT in 1959?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, and that course that you were taking with Buzz and Sheila, was that a year, two year--
Speaker 1: It's a two year program.
Speaker 2: Two year program, okay.  And, you were out of that program, you were assigned to Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 572062
Speaker 1: Here we are 1959, early '60 [1960], and you're in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What is that assignment like?
Speaker 2: It--I ha- as a young officer, I was assigned, I was given thirty projects, research projects, that we were funding at var- the leading universities and corporations around the country, whether it was GE [General Electric], or whether it was North American Aviation or whether--those that were really focusing on the more advanced form of technology that was important to us in terms of the aerospace.  And I you know you can imagine, I was twenty-seven years old and I had all this responsibility, but I learned a lot.  I learned a lot.  I you know instead of these guys trying to snow us because we were young, and most of them were twice our age in the leading universities, they said, "No, we're going to make sure you understand exactly what we're trying to do because when we're not in the room, you have to represent and defend what it is we're trying to do, and why it's important."  And, so I had them, and from a technology point of view, they were mentors for me, in terms of, in terms of technology.
Speaker 1: Give us an example of some of these thirty projects that were being farmed out (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, well the Cold War was escalating.  This was ari- this the early '60s [1960s].  We're at a point now where we're going to stare the Russians down, or they were going to stare us down.
Speaker 1: We also have a brand new president at that time--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].
Speaker 2: And he--
Speaker 1: He had challenged the nation.
Speaker 2: He challenged the nation, and in fact, you know, one of the things that people bemoan nowadays is that we need another challenge like that.  This challenge pulled together public edu- K through twelve systems [kindergarten to twelfth grade], high school systems, colleges and universities, industries, the research institutes and so forth.  And, this challenge was, we'll get to the moon.  We as a nation should try to land a man on the moon by the end of this decade, of the '60s [1960s].  And, history shows we did it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now, we did that, although with Sputnik [Sputnik 1], with the Sputnik satellite orbiting the earth with its beep, beep, beep, beep, beep signal, they were ahead of us.  But it shows how and--it shows how we as a nation could mobilize the scientific and technical talent that could finally beat them to the moon, and of course, Buzz Aldrin was one of the guys that sat next to me, and, and of course he, he was on the first flight (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In that MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] class?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Classes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 572063
Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of some of those pro- thirty projects?  And if they're classified, obviously I know you can't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, at some point.  But, I can tell you that, we were talking then--supersonic flight was clearly within reach, and we had pretty much figured out exactly how we need to, how we could do that, not only in the design of the vehicle, but also as it gets through supersonic, the way it's controlled.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The next level, though, was hypersonic, and now you're getting into for the missiles, like when they launch from the launch pad.  The shockwave, this, the sonic shockwave is so severe, and yet it was at a point where we were within reach of actually performing at that level.  We really were concerned about how, how rapidly the vehicle, the structure, whether it was an airplane or whether it was a missile, would heat up when it went hypersonic.  And so a lot of my stuff had to do with the flow of air at hypersonic over the, over the wind coils and also the temperature gradients and how they heated up.  Another part of my responsibility got into the whole orbital dynamics of space, and once you get in--how do you control the satellite, how do you maneuver it and so forth, in an air where it's really, you're in a 100 percent vacuum.  So, you don't have the air as a matter of control, and so you have to control it only by the rockets and how you do that.  It was very intense, and as you mentioned, a lot of it was classified.  When our assignors would come back from international conferences that, like in London [England] that also the Russians came, and they presented papers, they were debriefed by our intelligence.  We had to organize those debriefings by saying, if the Russians can do this, does that mean they can do this other thing, too.  And so, it's a very, a very, it's a very moving time.
Speaker 1: Okay, how long were you assigned to the Washington, D.C. area on these thirty projects?
Speaker 2: I was there for four years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that takes you up to 1964, let's say?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], yes, uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-five [1965]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 572064
Speaker 1: You were then reassigned someplace?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yes, I was reassigned, really reassigned, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five [1965]--I graduate from the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] in '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm reaching the ten year point in 1965.  I'm at a point in terms of the way the [U.S.] military guys really think that you're at the ten year point.  If you're going to leave, you got to leave before ten years.  If you stay one or two years beyond ten years, you might as well go for the twenty years, and retire.  You've got too much invested, okay, to get out in year twelve, thirteen or what have you.  And, so I was recruited to Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].  I was of- well, I was made an offer from Northwestern University outside of Chicago [Illinois]--and you know I grew up in Chicago--to be associate dean of sciences and to be a member of the faculty and to run their, what they call their office of research coordination, which was a part of the president's staff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I talked with my wife [Gregg's first wife, Doris Jefferson Gregg] about it.  At the same time, to be very candid, Vietnam was becoming very frustrating for a lot of the pilots that were in Vietnam, and so there was always a possibility that the [U.S.] Air Force might say, "Mr. Gregg [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Lucius P. Gregg], we're--Captain Gregg, Lieu- we're short on pilots.  We wa- we like the stuff you're doing in scientific research, but we're really going to replace your position with a civilian, and we're going to put--send you over to Vietnam for a year or two."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, my wife agreed with me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before, before we--
Story_ID: 572065
Speaker 1: We've skipped over a little part, and that is, you've met somebody in your life, because we--you were a bachelor back in those VIP flying days.
Speaker 2: Actually, it's in 1959.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959], before I went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], the month or two before I went to MIT, okay.
Speaker 1: You met someone?
Speaker 2: Yes, I met a young lady in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], because I was flying out of New Jersey on the transatlantic runs.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: A lady named Doris Jefferson [Doris Jefferson Gregg], formerly Doris Jefferson.  She was a schoolteacher, part of a long standing family in Philadelphia.  And, she would come into my life and be my companion for twenty years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1959 you met?  And--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you get married that same year?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We actually met in 1958 while I was still doing the transatlantic stuff, and then we dated for about a year, and then we got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  You also had a child during that period.
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, while I was at MIT.  And we--she was expecting and it was going to be in the month of January of 1960.  All right, we talked about it, and we knew the date that she was expected to deliver.  Now, as part of the MIT coursework, we were expected to go out to the air base at least once a month and put in a couple hours to keep our fluency in, keep our flying proficiency.  And, so she was expected to deliver at the end of January.  So, I said okay, let me get in the airplane, and I'm going, I'm going to go out and get my January flying commitment out of the day--out of the way in the first week of January.  So, I ran out to the air base and got an airplane and got up in the air, and once I got up in the air, I got a call from the tower, and they said, "Lieutenant Gregg [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Lucius P. Gregg]."  And I said, "Yes?"  And they said, "Your wife just called to say she's on--," (laughter) "she's on her way to the hospital."  And I knew that she had to get into a taxi, and she said she scared the daylights out of the taxi driver, because he kept looking in the mirror staring back and he's saying, "Are you going to be okay, are you going to be okay, are you going to be okay?"  And, anyhow, it all went very successfully, but she had--but it was about a twenty minute taxi ride, very fast, to go to Chelsea Naval Hospital [Naval Hospital Boston, Chelsea, Massachusetts].  And that's where we had our account, because we were in the [U.S.] military, okay.
Story_ID: 572066
Speaker 1: I was taking a ser- they had asked me to take a sergeant who was on a hardship leave because his mother was ill in Springfield [Massachusetts].  And, so I had to take off from the Boston [Massachusetts] area.  I said, "Yes, I will take him and drop him off in Springfield."  And then, I would just go ahead and put in my time, flying around and making some landings and so forth before the end of my flying commitment, and then head on back to Boston, and I would be set then for the rest of the month.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All of a sudden, once we took off, and we're heading over to Springfield, we're on final approach going into Springfield, and that's when the call came in.  And here I am with this--
Speaker 2: Now we are talking about Springfield, Illinois, right?
Speaker 1: No, Springfield, Massachusetts.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, Springfield, Massachusetts.  Okay.
Speaker 1: There's an air base there called Westover Air Force Base [Westover Air Reserve Base, Massachusetts].  And, and his mother lived there in Springfield, so the sergeant really wanted to get to see his mother.  And what he was doing is, he was just jumping on one flight after another, he was hitchhiking, which in the [U.S.] military is pretty acceptable, do--where you can go from coast to coast without the--you just get on the next plane going that happens to be going your way.  Anyhow, to make a long story short, I had to--I immediately landed the plane, opened the door.  The sergeant jumped out, closed the door, turned around, rushed right back to the [U.S.] Air Force base outside of Boston and drove as fast as I could to get to Chelsea Naval Hospital [Naval Hospital Boston, Chelsea, Massachusetts].  They just told me that she was on her way because they could give me no other information.  I managed to get to Naval Hospital, I walked in, and as soon as I walked in, they said "Congratulations, you have a boy."  (Laughter) And, so I walked into her room, and she looked up to me and she said, "You'll never forget this for the rest of your life."  (Laughter) And so, it's one of those stories that the ladies tell, I mean, they tell, and there's no defense, you know.  She came early, her delivery was early, and I thought you know the best laid plans, I could go ahead and get that flying commitment out the way, get back home and be with her for, you know, like ten, twelve days before she was expecting to deliver.
Speaker 2: And what is the name of that boy, and date of birth?
Speaker 1: Well, it's not very creative, okay, but he's--his name is the same as mine, Lucius Perry Gregg, III [Lucius P. Gregg, III].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And his date of birth?
Speaker 1: January 6--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --nineteen sixty [1960].
Speaker 2: Okay, and it's--January 6.  I just need to get that information down.  The--now was your wife [Gregg's first wife, Doris Jefferson Gregg] still teaching school during this period?
Speaker 1: Yes, and actually she was back to teaching after about three or four months, yeah, after her delivery.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you continued your studies at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 572067
Speaker 1: Now we'll come up to the present where we jump back and we're at 1965.  You're at the ten year mark?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, you have an important decision to make.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is that decision?
Speaker 2: That decision was not to continue as a uniform in the [U.S.] Air Force, as an officer of the Air Force.  And, that's when I got the offer from the Chicago [Illinois] area at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] to come and become a part of the faculty and the president's office as associate dean of sciences.
Speaker 1: Okay, and of course, that really is taking you back home?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And, so you accept that position?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, so--
Speaker 2: So, we were discharged from the Air Force, and I immediately became a member of the faculty at Northwestern.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was it like there, and what were those duties like, that you had?
Speaker 2: Well, you know we were at a point where things were really heating up at Northwestern and there was the ten year period before that that the whole issue of race was becoming a very prominent factor in everybody's mind.
Speaker 1: Throughout the country, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I mean, the year I graduated in 1955 from the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland], Emmett Till was killed.  Okay.  The [U.S.] Supreme Court, school board, you know, Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] happened at that time.  Rosa Parks decided in 1955 not to sit on the back of the bus.  That escalated there into the Montgomery Bus Boycott and, you know, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] emerged, going right up to the early '60s [1960s]--the black power, the Freedom Riders, a lot of lynching taking place, right on up to the March on Washington--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and so forth.  So I get to North- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, there had been a change in administrations, our young president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated--
Speaker 2: We got a young president, and he began to show that maybe there's a positive role that the federal government can play, okay, that would improve the lot and improve the life of those who were protesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And oh--to the consternation of many of the people that were in the South at that time.  But, you know the North was not a, it was not a promised land, and there was a period there, heading up to 1965, and after that, that the whole notion of racial sensitivity was going to stick with me.  I was going to hold it kind of deeply, and it would affect a number of things.  But, I did start at Northwestern.  There were only a handful of blacks that were--maybe there were one or two, that were on the faculty.  Up until '65 [1965], Northwestern had never invited--had never admitted any blacks except those that were on football scholarships (laughter), okay.  And so that year that I arrived, that was the first year that they admitted some three dozen blacks, half of them out of Chicago on, and they admitted them on academic criteria.  That was the first time that they had.  Previously, they had all been athletes okay--fi- a handful of them had been athletes.  So, these kids arrived there in the mid-'60s [1960s] and things were beginning to--.  Everything worked out well, but you know, they brought with them a whole new era of sensitivities that the university had to adjust to, and of course, it stood them in good stead from that point on.
Story_ID: 572068
Speaker 1: Okay, it's 1965.  The--Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] has asked you to come in and work with them.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Northwestern, the school itself, is doing a number of things against a backdrop of turmoil in the country--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --because of the race issue.  Can you remember some of the people who started coming to the school, both as teachers and students there?
Speaker 2: The--many of the students who came at that time were very active as students, and particularly after they graduated, as they brought a lot of youth into the Civil Rights Movement.  Many of them achieved as scholars--many of them, so it covered the whole spectrum.  I can't exactly recall the--a couple of them by name right now, but that was the climate you know.  I spent a major part of my time doing the things that Northwestern needed in terms of testifying before [U.S.] Congress on the needs in science and research.  The, the--I became very active--I helped them expand their research, their funding research--the grants and contracts, they were being funded by outside agencies and the government.  And then I was appointed to the board of the National Accelerator Lab [National Accelerator Laboratory; Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Illinois], which was just getting funding from Washington [D.C.].  There was an initial board, the founding board, was made up of fifteen people across the country, and I was the one for Northwestern, University of Illinois and University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And of course, this was a $250 million facility that they were going to build just thirty miles west of Chicago [Illinois], and the big concern, particularly by many of the equal rights groups, was would they have the right complement of minorities as a part of that.
Story_ID: 572069
Speaker 1: But on the student issue, in terms of the activism, we have to remember that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed in April of 1968, so that's two or three years after I got to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  But the protests started both before as well as after.  Many people think that it was his assassination that triggered the protests, no, many of the students were raising issues for the university to deal with even in the year or two before King.  And I mean, these were the prominent schools, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Boston [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] and Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], and U- University of Illinois, the--oh, out west, and of course, it also included the students at Northwestern.  It was right after King was killed that the students at Northwestern--in fact, it was a month or two after--they decided to take over the administration building, and it was int- not interesting, but the sensitivity there is that in that building were all the financial records of the university, and that's where, as they jokingly say, that's where all the checks were written, so they knew that they had a very sensitive part of the university's operation.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The president wanted to deal with this, and so he pulled together five--he pulled together ten of the major players--the dean of the graduate school, and several others--and he had one or two blacks on that--one or two, there were two of us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, I was one, and the other black was a professor in the sociology department named Walter Wallace [Walter L. Wallace].  We came together to negotiate with the kids, and it was a very sensitive and engaging period.  And it was three days later Northwestern settled, but the way it settled was, the thing that got--was very sensitive to people, was the response from the university started off by saying, "Northwestern admits that for most of its history, it has been a racist institution."  I have to tell you that that caused the alumni--it was one of the most sensitive parts of the alumni, okay, when they got that.  But for others--The Christian Science Monitor declared this was Northwestern's shining hour, and The Christian Science Monitor had never used Northwestern's name in any of their previous reporting.  It also turned out, there was a kind of wakeup call for many of the rich alumni, and for the next two years, okay, Northwestern's fundraising would double the amount that they would receive.  In fact, I remember one year--I'm trying to think of the--it was a prominent Chicagoan, very wealthy who ca- the word got around that he just showed up in the president's office, unannounced, with his lawyer, and of course, everybody was very nervous.  Now, this was like a month or two after we'd just settled.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And all the sensitivities were very--I mean, the skin was very sensitive, okay.  Almost any issue that would come up, people were very nervous about it.  And, anyhow, he walked in, and the president, oh--he walked into the president's office with his lawyer and he said, "J. Roscoe?"  'Cause the president's name was J. Roscoe Miller, "I know you've been after me for some money.  I'll tell you what.  I've got my lawyer here and before we leave, I'm going to write a check for $2 million, and leave it on your desk," and he turned and walked away.
Story_ID: 572070
Speaker 1: After the alumni put aside the sensitivities that they had--that had arisen in their minds and their perceptions of what roles the students had, the rest of the alumni started anteing up.  Now, it wasn't the rest--you know, you can't wait for public opinion to all of a sudden take over, but it's those su- those silent leaders who step forward when they feel as though, that a university is trying to do the right thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the fundraising just really took off for the next six months, in terms of the grants that were given to them.  It was--from that point on, I believe it's fair to say that Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], including the doubling of research, the students they were able to admit and so forth, the quality of the students--it raised the stature of that university to be one of the, well within the top twenty leaders of--in the university world across the country.
Speaker 2: Academically?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  It got to a point that it could recruit--it could go head to head against--you know, a kid from New York who got an offer from one of the Ivy League schools, and would also get an offer from Northwestern, same kid, same credentials.  Northwestern then knew what was the likelihood that that kid would opt for Northwestern as opposed to the Ivy League.
Speaker 2: The--what--did the president, President Miller [J. Roscoe Miller], have the full support of the faculty at that time or just prior to that, because he was making a very bold move--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --and I'm wondering about the support.  Was it 50-50, was it overwhelmingly in favor of him making that move, or overwhelmingly opposed to him making that move?
Speaker 1: Well, he wanted--it was interesting--he wanted the negotiations to be made and completed by a team of his faculty and senior administrators, but he wasn't one of those.  So, his report to the alumni and to the faculty is that, "Your colleagues have decided this, and I have reason to try and make this work."  But he, his name was not personally on it.  My name was on it, Walter Wallace's [Walter L. Wallace] name was on it--there were ten of us that had to sign that document and as far as acceptance in terms of the impact on the faculty, he was able to sort of be the messenger to communicate what the faculty had decided and agreed on for the students.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, in order for any dissidence within the faculty to really try and challenge it, the president had sort of put himself on the sidelines and said, "Okay.  What you're doing is, you're really pulling the rug out from under your colleagues on this."  And, it worked very well from a negotiation point of view.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, it was--it began to develop as something that the entire faculty, or most of the faculty, could embrace.  But, you know, as any major changes like this occur, you're never going to get the whole group.
Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 572071
Speaker 1: How long did you stay at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was there for four years.  I stayed there until 1969.  During that time, I, I was selected as one of the ten outstanding young men of Chicago [Illinois], and I think that was in 1966.  We raised the profile of Northwestern in, during that period, but it was a four year period.  I was considered one of the Young Turks.  We had a thirty year old--thirty-some year old who was the director of admissions, another thirty year old who was the director of financial aid--when I say thirty, thirty-five years old--another one was head of planning, and there were about four or five of us, and we were all in our mid-thirties, and so a lot of the old guys considered us the Young Turks, but I think we can all look back and say, you know, we had an impact on that institution, and it--.  The Medill School of Journalism [Medill School of Journalism, Media, Integrated Marketing Communications, Evanston, Illinois], the School of Speech [Northwestern University School of Speech; Northwestern University School of Communication, Evanston, Illinois], all of that construction of the new landfill out on Lake Michigan all came about during that period, and so, we had fun.  It was challenging though.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Okay, so you're at Northwestern until 1969?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, you--tell us what, what--.  Oh, are there anymore highlights there at Northwestern that we need to get in?
Speaker 2: No, it's just that the activism outside and the environment--and we were always concerned about how would that impact our major activity in terms of an educational institutional.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And of course, with the protests before, and then King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination and then--I think, collectively, they say 128 cities rioted right after the King assassination.  It was a very troubling time for us, and it really caused us to wonder--well, it caused the university to be more of an outreach into the community.  Even Evanston, Illinois, which is where the university is located, had its issues of open housing, school busing.  It had an all-black hospital [Community Hospital of Evanston, Evanston, Illinois] of only--that only had fifty beds in it, but that was because the blacks in the town could not go to the primary hospital.  So, even the northern communities, both large and small, had to deal with the whole--this whole issue of discrimination.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, we got caught up in it.
Story_ID: 572072
Speaker 1: Now we're in 1969, and you're ready to--well, you, you--1969 and you decide to leave.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us what happened.
Speaker 2: I--one of the things I did at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] was to write a multidisciplinary proposal that embraced a collection of scientists from various academic disciplines and engineers, and made that proposal to the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation [New York, New York], Northwestern--and it was for $5 million.  Northwestern did not get the 5 million, but because I had written the proposal and pulled together the team of scientists and engineers to work as--as part of the proposal, I got recruited by the Sloan Foundation to come to New York [New York] and join their staff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I accepted.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I accepted.
Speaker 1: So, you and your family are now moving to New York--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --back to the East Coast?
Speaker 2: Yes, New York City, New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I joined Sloan because they said that in addition to what they were doing in science and engineering and technology, you know, the hard stuff of science and engineering, they were going to expand the amount of money they were giving out to what they called access of blacks to the professions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For about twenty years, old man Sloan [Alfred P. Sloan, Jr.], who was the founder [sic.] of General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], was concerned about blacks getting into the major medical schools in the country.  And so, he had, he [sic.] had founded this group called National Medical Fellowships [National Medical Fellowships, Inc.] and so, for almost all blacks who went to the major medical schools in the country, they got their initial scholarship from National Medical Fellowships, which was the money from Mr. Sloan.  They expanded that to the M.B.A. programs.  So, we had about a dozen of the major M.B.A. programs, graduate business programs, come together as a group, and Sloan funded them 6 million [dollars] or 8, 10 million a year.  And then, of course, I had to ask, in my usual bias, what about engineering?  When will you make money available--?  You know, we need minorities and blacks to come into the profession of engineering, my, my discipline.  And, so it turned out I was only there three years, at Sloan.  But before I left, the president made a commitment that within the next twelve months they would announce $15 million in scholarships for blacks to go to, go to the engineering schools.  And what we have to remember is, that this was in a period--this was a period of the '70s [1970s], this was the beginning period of the '70s [1970s] where the expansion of blacks in higher education really began to take off; it tripled.  Okay, I bel- I think we got up to a point of some eight hundred thousand blacks in higher education, and that was about a threefold increase over the number that had been at the beginning of the decade.  And, also it turned out that with Sloan's money in engineering, it expanded the number of blacks going to engineering schools by a factor of five.  It got up to eleven thousand blacks in eng- freshmen, eleven thousand freshmen entering engineering programs across the country.
Speaker 1: In 1969 or 1970?
Speaker 2: Well, this is the period of the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Seventies [1970s], okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, it jumps a little bit ahead of where we are in our discussion, but this was a very optimistic period for blacks in higher education.  So the wellspring of many of the, many of the black males and females who are now at the professional levels, whether it's law, M.B.A., medicine, or what have you, more than likely they entered colleges or universities in the early '70s [1970s] on it.  And, so as a result, we sort of feel as though we were a little bit in the vanguard, okay, of being able to really open up.  But, before we celebrate, okay, before we celebrate, there're problems on the horizon.  And, it turns out that once we reached a certain level of minorities and blacks matriculating and going into colleges and universities, okay, the pool size of those at the pre-college level, in the K through twelve [kindergarten to twelfth grade], was not expanding.  And so, as a result, okay, that growth then leveled off, and in fact, later on, that growth would begin to slowly diminish.  Now, some people will attribute that to the political environment changing.
Speaker 1: Right.  And the challenges to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --to those programs.
Story_ID: 572073
Speaker 1: Let's go to 1970.  You are prepared, or you have left the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Which direction is your career going?
Speaker 2: I went back to Chicago [Illinois].  I got an offer.  When I received the award as--in 1966 as one of the ten outstanding young men of Chicago, there was a chairman of the board at First National Bank of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] that saw--that came to that luncheon because one of his soon to be presidents of First National Bank, was one of the s- one of the ten.  So, the chairman came and he saw me, and he turned to the guy at HR, and he said, "I want to meet that man."  And so, I was called after that, called up to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  Now the chairman of the First National Bank was also vice chairman of the board at Northwestern.  So, he was a little bit in a sensitive situation.  But, I got invited down to meet him and we had a lunch, just he and I, and at the end of that lunch--I'm sorry--it was he and I and the guy from human resources.  And, he turned to the guy from human resources, and says, "If Mr. Gregg [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Lucius P. Gregg] wants to come and join the bank anytime over the next five years, we have a position for him."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So (laughter), so anyhow, here I am at the Sloan Foundation, and I got a call from the bank that said, "We'd like to talk to you." And so it's a chance for me to go back to Chicago, where I'd spent my time at Northwestern, but this time I was going back to Chicago as a vice president at First National Bank of Chicago.  I was the only black who was a vice president.  You know I--the pattern here just--I was very fortunate because I was being offered a position to be a part of institutions that were major players, they were the major platforms within their ins- industry, and I was turning out to be a role model.  It was becoming clear to me that people were looking to me as a kind of a role model.  And that, that wasn't lost on me, and to come back to Chicago as, as the top black in banking was something that I took very seriously.  I--they made it worth- they make it worthwhile financially for you, oh, sure, but you know, there's a point where you look for something more than that.
Story_ID: 572074
Speaker 1: So, in 1970, you are the top black in banking in the City of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What are some of your duties then?  What are some of the highlights of what you're doing?
Speaker 2: Well, they brought me in as president of a very short lived company called University Finance Corporation [First Chicago University Finance Corporation].  And our purpose was to make large block loans to colleges and universities, and so the universities would then take that money and make, and give it out to students a thousand dollars, fifteen hundred dollars per student.  So stu- these were--they actually changed that into student loans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But our job was to capitalize their loan programs at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], at University of Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--you just name it we were--.  So--
Speaker 1: Now, at some of the black colleges [HBCUs] also?
Speaker 2: Not initially.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, not initially.  The--what I'd done at Sloan [Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, New York, New York] though, when I talked about access to blacks in professions, we made a special trip to Howard for--and made grants for both the medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and the M.B.A. program [Howard University School of Business, Washington, D.C.].  We made a special trip to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], you know, and a special trip to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] in terms of--
Speaker 1: Just those schools?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, moving the clock back forward again--that initial group, we went to the leading major institutions that said this is the way we can commit loan programs to students who dep- who need loans in order to come in.  We can give them so much scholarship grant money, we can offer them so much in terms of a work study, a work job, but we will also have to add a little bit at the end in terms of a loan.  And, when we write them, when we write them a letter saying you're hereby admitted, we can also say, and oh by the way, this is your financial aid package to pay for your expenses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Previously, if the ins- if the universities did not have that control, then they would have to go ahead and admit the person and then say, "Oh, by the way, go to your local banker and see if he will make a loan to you so you can cover the costs of our tuition, room and board."  And the major universities did not like that.  Of course, they happened to be some of the more expensive ones.  So that was what--but that only lasted about a year or two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was less than two years.  And what happened was, the government decided to start playing that role, and it was called--it was an organization called Sallie Mae [SLM Corporation].
Speaker 1: Sallie Mae.
Speaker 2: And Sallie Mae started--and Sallie Mae stood for the Student Loan Marketing Association.  And, they played the role of funding, and of course, their cost of money, the government's cost of money, is always cheaper than a non-government organization's cost of money.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But, they moved me there in the bank, they moved me over into public finance.
Speaker 1: Now, this was '72 [1972], '71 [1971]?
Speaker 2: Yes, 1972.
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972], okay.
Speaker 2: And it was in that position then that I became very active in the environment around the bank, the environment, the, and the--and as part of that, I was brought up to be the chief of staff to a tough CEO named Bob Abboud [A. Robert Abboud].  Bob Abboud was voted by Fortune magazine to be one of the toughest CEOs in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He wasn't number one, but he was number two.  I mean, he was elected that by other CEOs for saying, who's the best CEO in the country?  And, then, of course, one other question--who is the hardest CEO in the country?  And so, but, I went up and I was his chief of staff for a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where did, where did First National rank in the total banking picture?
Speaker 2: It was one of the top ten.
Speaker 1: One--in the top ten.
Speaker 2: When you look at the structure of banking in the country, four or five of them are in New York City [New York, New York], two are in Chicago, and then three of them are out here in California.  And, basically, those ten institutions have control over about 80 percent of the banking assets in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, there are fifteen thousand banks and here are ten of them that basically have the lion's share of the money that changes hands in the country in banking.  So, in that sense, whatever First Chicago--whatever First National Bank of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] did, it would be felt--
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: --throughout the industry.
Story_ID: 572075
Speaker 1: You are now chief of staff to Bob Abboud [A. Robert Abboud] who heads up First National [First National Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and Sallie Mae [SLM Corporation] has just come into being, against the backdrop of a changing or what is to be a changing Chicago [Illinois] political scene.  Let's go into that.
Speaker 2: Yes, Bob Abboud was a very activist type CEO.  He really felt, that wanted to be a part of anything, change that happened to, within the City of Chicago.  And every time the mayor got elected, you know, a big part of his reelection money came from what they called the Committee of 100 [Chicago, Illinois], which were the major corporation in the city that would come together.  And they took a vested interest in maint- in assuring a very stable political environment and, of course, for Chicago, it had to be a Democratic environment on it.  So we were very active in it.  To--so I was on the mayor's committee on, mayor's council on economic advisors, the governor's Illinois urban development organization.  You know, I was very active in that.  And, but it was also a time when I could do some, help bring about some change that was affiliated with the city, but not actually within the city.  So I was the one that integrated the Economic Club of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I integrated the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations [Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, Illinois].  The one that was special and required special effort was I integrated the University Club of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  Now, to integrate, you had to have three sponsors.  That was written in their bylaws.  If three members of the university recommended your name, that name would be accepted.  And unless something surprising, they found out, you were then brought in as a member.  You were given full fledged membership at the University Club of Chicago.  I was sponsored by three people.  The president of the bank decided to take me on as his, the person he was gonna recommend, and he got two of his colleagues to endorse.  And so he was my sponsor.  I remember he got a call, he called me back about a month later, and he said, "Lu [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Lucius P. Gregg], I'm sorry, but you gotta be willing to go along with us on this.  They're gonna require that you have six members sign your application.  And so that's gonna mean that you've gotta go, we've gotta go all around and visit actually six people and be interviewed.  And as a result of that, for them to endorse and sponsor you."  So he said, "Look, please don't ask me to explain that.  You're well aware of what brings these issues about."  Well, anyhow, to make a long story short, yes--
Speaker 1: You agreed?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I swallowed hard, went around to the six interviewers and they endorsed my application.  And that immediately caused, integrated the University Club of Chicago.  Once those doors opened, then there were other blacks that came in and--after that, and one after the other after the other.  So it, for both the University Club and the Economic Club and the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations, they began to have more and more of a diverse group, albeit small, but they began to expand from that point on.
Story_ID: 572076
Speaker 1: My, the other part of my activity beyond the local scene was continuing my interest in colleges and universities and so I was on the board of--at Rust College in Holly Springs, Mississippi.  I was on the board of Roosevelt University in Chicago [Illinois].  On the larger university level, I--both colleges--I became a part of the, I accepted to be a part of the visiting committee at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in aeronautics and astronautics.  Now, that's a group of some fifteen of their, what they consider prominent people.  And the visiting committee that I was on was a visiting committee that would come and review the programs, the education and research programs of the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, which happened to have been my department that I graduated from.  And those recommendations were being made to board of overseers at MIT.  But in addition to that, because of my role with the National Accelerator Lab [National Accelerator Laboratory; Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory] in Weston that I, Weston, Illinois, that I mentioned earlier, I was asked to be a part of the visiting committee at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in physics.  Okay, and then the other I'd like to mention is Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana].  During this period, I became, I elevated to be chairman of board of visitors of Tulane University.  Now, why Tulane, you know?  It's a far--it's New Orleans [Louisiana], people don't normally think of it in the, you know, when they think of just the leading institutions.  But Tulane had made a decision.  And this is what prompted me to become, decide to be a--come a part of the board of visitors.
Story_ID: 572077
Speaker 1: Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana], when it was founded, its charter said that this institution would exist for white males only.  In fact, they used the word, white boys, okay.  And while it was chartered decades before, Tulane realized that many of the leading colleges and universities were diversifying.  They were bringing in more and more minority students as part of their freshman classes.  And Tulane wanted to be a part of that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and not be viewed like some of their other associates in the South as having some restrictions, like the state universities, for example, and what Autherine Lucy ran into in, at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] or James Meredith at University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi] or [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault, what she ran into at University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia].  And Tulane wanted to make a statement, but they couldn't because of their, the founding charter.  And so Tulane decided to sue their own founding charter.  And so they filed a lawsuit challenging their own articles of incorporation, their own founding charter.
Speaker 2: This was while you were chairman of the trustees--
Speaker 1: It happened right before me.
Speaker 2: Just before you, okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And the court ruled that that part of Tulane's charter was unconstitutional and therefore void.  And as a result of that, Tulane then began to open up and began to admit minorities as a part of their freshman class.  But the part that was also added in there--
Speaker 2: Now, let me get a year for that.  Would that be seventy--what year, '73 [1973] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was the early part of the '70s [1970s] when it, for Tulane, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, not a problem.  I just--okay.
Speaker 1: Now, I came aboard in '75 [1975]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and I was chairman up through '79 [1979].  And the board of visitors was very prominent.  They had Roger Mudd, the TV news anchor as a part, Michael DeBakey, the heart surgeon was a member of that board of visitors and we'd come together once or twice a year and meet with the president [Francis Sheldon Hackney].  Now, they had already gotten the court ruling, favorable, and then, of course, our discussion was, okay, what do we now do to sustain this momentum, this progress that has been made?  And they wanted some of the prominent alumni like Michael DeBakey and Roger Mudd and so forth so that they could send the message out to the rest of their alumni that these are, this is a position that your other prominent colleagues, alumni, have taken, that we're on the right course.  The, many of the leaders of institutional change find that the best, the best way of creating change is to have a group that comes together, a group that is clearly respected by the external environment and ask them to help deliberate and make a recommendation to you as the leader of the organization.  And then your job then is to take that message forward and say this is what your distinguished colleagues have said that we ought to do.  And as a result, I mean Tulane is today a--
Speaker 2: Very progressive (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) very successful.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Okay, you are on, you're chair of that board up through 1979?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 572078
Speaker 1: Where does your career lead you?  Nineteen seventy-nine [1979], you are still married to Doris--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Jefferson [Doris Jefferson Gregg]?  You have one son [Lucius P. Gregg, III]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It takes me back to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had gotten involved in the development of corporate strategy, how do you--.  In the mid-'70s [1970s], while I was still at the bank, First National Bank [First National Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I had a chance to go and spend three months at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] at the Advanced Management Program.  How do you design corporate strategy?  How do you implement corporate strategy?  And, of course, I finished that program and came back to the bank, and that's what I did for, on several occasions, as the bank wanted to either enter a new part of banking that was new, that it had not been a part of before or it was already, they're a part of it, but he [A. Robert Abboud] wanted to expand its position within that level of financial activity.
Speaker 1: So you would lead the corporate strategy?
Speaker 2: Yes, develop the corporate strategy.
Speaker 1: Develop--
Speaker 2: The company that came after me was Bristol-Myers, later known as Bristol-Myers Squibb.  It's a leading pharmaceutical company.  One can always ask, how does that follow on the heels of the [U.S.] military technology and banking?  But I have to admit that it was, the idea of running the strategic planning operation for ten major pharmaceutical divisions, that were going head to head against the Mercks [Merck and Co., Inc.] and the Lillys [Eli Lilly and Company] and the Johnson and Johnsons [Johnson and Johnson Products; Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.].  Bristol-Myers was number one in terms of cancer drugs.  It was number one in terms--number two in terms of antibiotics in the country and so forth.  And so it was one of the leaders within the pharmaceutical industry.
Speaker 1: And your position there?
Speaker 2: Was vice president for strategic planning.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my job was to write the guidelines that the divisions would use to come in every year, once a year and have their day before the chairman and lay out how they saw their company.  What were they gonna do to build their company over the next three to five years?  And my job was to write the guidelines that they would follow and then evaluate their response on that.
Story_ID: 572079
Speaker 1: Any highlights while there at Bristol-Myers [Bristol-Myers Squibb]?
Speaker 2: Not really, and that's, you know, I really, from a, I really had made a shift from a very activist period where, which I was, which was invol- which I was involved in as far as First National Bank of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  Also at the bank, I was a member of the National Academy of Sciences [Washington, D.C.] programs of, not the academy itself, but they had several advisory committees, and I became a part of the commission on human resources.  I was given a chance to chair the committee on minorities in science.  I chaired that committee at the academy for five years.  We were able to survey, the government was concerned about--this is a little bit before I got to Bristol-Myers now.  We were able to write to the deans of the graduate schools in the country, particularly those that awarded Ph.D.'s.  And the government was concerned about the fact that the government's advisory committees did not have minority participation, as members of the advisory committees that would help the government make decisions on who gets what grants and who gets this and who gets that and so forth.  And so my committee was able to send that survey out and we got responses that showed that we had 180, no, I'm sorry.  We had 580 minorities with Ph.D.'s in the sciences, and if we just look at the African Americans, okay, they were out there and had already received their Ph.D.'s.  There were forty-some, forty blacks with Ph.D.'s in engineering, another thirty-five with Ph.D.'s in math, some forty with Ph.D.'s in physics, chemistry about that twice that number.  And so we were to take those names and pass them out to those government agencies that really award the major share of government money in terms of research and service and things like that.  And that, that was the beginning of a number of blacks playing a role in decision making on how the government spends its money.  So I continued that activity into Bristol-Myers.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: It was something where I would have to go to, I was always available on call, but, oh, I'd say every two months or so, we'd have a meeting in Washington [D.C.] at the National Academy of Sciences.  And we would sort of get a progress report as to how our strategies were working.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was the beginning of opening the doors.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 572080
Speaker 1: You stayed at Bristol-Myers [Bristol-Myers Squibb] for how long?
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Four years, and that brings us up to 1984, 1985.
Speaker 2: Eighty--yes, '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983], okay.  Good to know, and in 1983, what direction did your career turn?
Speaker 2: I'm only smiling because some of the changes don't make sense, but because of the, because of the visibility I was in, I was always being court- sort of recruited.  And so one block away was the headquarters of Citibank [Citibank, N.A.].  And I was attracted to go back to banking.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I became a vice president for national public affairs at Citibank in '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what were your duties there as vice president of public affairs?
Speaker 2: The, I got really actively involved in speeches.  I was a part of what they called the war machine.  Citibank won't admit to this, but internally, we had a thing called the war machine.  The structure of banking in the country was that banks could not participate in what they called interstate banking.  It was called the Glass-Steagall Act [Banking Act of 1933].  And so if you were incorporated and your headquarters was in New York, okay, yeah, you could lend money outside of New York, the State of New York, but you couldn't handle checking accounts and savings accounts or money market accounts of people in Texas or in California or in Florida or what have you.  And so you were restricted to that particular state.  And Citibank had made the decision that it felt it was in its own best interests and that of its in- stockholders to do everything it can to expand outside of the state that it was domiciled in and go into all of the major markets.  Now, it turns out that if you were commu- if you were an investor, if you were a builder--if you were building an apartment complex in Missouri or as it turned out, in Washington, D.C. or any, or commercial shopping center, and you wanted to go to a bank that could make available to you one loan that would cover all of your needs, $100 million that you would need, or the $40 million you would need to finish that, you couldn't get that out of the local banks, and local banks were too small.  And so you'd have, you'd end up getting a piece of it from this local bank and another piece from this one, and we used to call it tin cupping.  You'd get your tin cup out and you'd make the rounds in hopes at the end of the rounds you've got whatever you need.
Speaker 1: Yeah, enough money.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what they would do instead though, is that developer, whether it's apartment buildings he was building or office towers or what have you, he would come to New York, okay.  And the major institutions in either New York, Chicago [Illinois] or California would go ahead and commit.  And they were large enough they could make that kind of loan, just one loan, they could make, you know, over the consternation of the local banks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And so all of a sudden that's, so you could lend money out of the state that you were in, whether it was Chicago--I mean New York or Illinois or California--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but you couldn't take money in.  Okay, now--
Story_ID: 572081
Speaker 1: What happened was that Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] wanted to establish a banking network in Washington, D.C., and they asked me to be the lobbyist.  And so I went down and met with the city council [Council of the District of Columbia].  The only way we could come in is the city council had to rewrite their banking laws that would give us an exception that allow us to come in and accept the banking network.  And so my job as a lobbyist was to go and make the case to the city council in Washington, D.C.  The chairman of that council was [HistoryMaker] Charlene Drew Jarvis, and it was a very engaging lobbying activity.  I had a little team that was suppor- you know, of assistance.  They were backing me up.  Now, as part of the war machine in Citibank, the general counsel, their job was to file any lawsuit that they thought would cause them to allow, would allow them to pre- become a part of the banking.  The government relations people at Citibank would stroke the state legislators to see if they could get the change.  My job was to work the editorial boards of the major--we had forty cities identified.  Twelve of them I had PR [public relations] agencies in each of those twelve cities and their job was to look for opportunities that we could begin to influence public opinion, but in addition to that, my job was to lobby for D.C.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, the local banks hated us for coming there and picking D.C. as a place we wanted to--.  I, my job, I announced a, I remember a city council meeting here I announced a commitment of investing $100 million in D.C. to four of its most disadvantaged neighborhoods, $100 million.  That was about three or four times the size that any local bank in D.C. would be able to commit.  It was a shock.  And the local banks declared war on us.  I believe there was one, one summer in that period where my name appeared (laughter) in The Washington Post at least two dozen times where the local banks were making accusations against us, and, of course, the target, the lightning rod of those accusations was me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my name.  It was mean, it was tough.  It turns out though that the savings and loans were also having trouble in Washington.  And so Citibank was able to come in and buy one of the failing savings and loans.  And as a result, it immediately was anointed with a fifteen branch network that then became, first, it was called Citicorp Savings [Citicorp Savings Company] and then after a couple of years, it became, called Citibank.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let me go to, now, you stayed at Citibank from 1983 until--
Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987].
Speaker 2: Eighty-seven, 1987.  And City of Washington was going through, close to bankruptcy that--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --which had to be bought back, and.
Story_ID: 572082
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987], where did you go?
Speaker 2: I ran into a prominent journalist named Jim Hoge [James F. Hoge, Jr.].  Jim Hoge was, Jim Hoge and I were about the same age.  We came up in Chicago [Illinois].  He was editor of the Chicago Sun-Times, and there I was at the bank [First National Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  Chicago had a way of the young, the young guys, you can call them the Young Turks who were in their late thirties, maybe early forties.  You know, you had the older group of the Daleys [Richard J. Daley] and the old machine guys.  But what, the feeling in Chicago was that those guys were not gonna run the city forever and so that age group, that generation group that was in the forties, that was right under them, they ought to get to know each other because at some point, things were gonna, the baton would get passed to them.  Well, Jim Hoge was one of the guys that would meet and have lunch.  It was a group.  I can't think of the name of it right now, but there were about thirty or forty of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And usually it was a group that was about half black, half white.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now you would have these meetings in Chicago, right?
Speaker 2: In Chicago.
Speaker 1: But you were really stationed in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: All right, but what had happened then was, no, I, while I lobbied in Washington, my base was in New York City [New York, New York], and I would travel to Washington and lobby.  And I'd go and lobby a day or two at a time and then come back to New York and so forth.  And I met, I ran into Jim Hoge, okay, in New York.
Story_ID: 572083
Speaker 1: You're based in New York [New York], although you're doing most of your lobbying work in Washington, D.C.--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for Citibank [Citibank, N.A.].  And then you run into Jim Hoge [James F. Hoge, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ran into Jim on the streets of--on Park Avenue in the streets of Manhattan [New York], and he said, "Hey, come on and help me move this newspaper along, it's the New York Daily News."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  "Come on and sit next to me because we want to do some interesting things."  And, I had been at Citibank for four years, and we had managed to accomplish whatever we wanted to do in terms of getting a branching network in Washington, D.C. so I went with, I went over to--and became vice president for public affairs.
Speaker 1: You left Citibank?
Speaker 2: Left, and--
Speaker 1: Would that be 1987?
Speaker 2: That would be '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you went to the New York Daily News as?
Speaker 2: Vice president of public affairs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I--my office was right next to Jim Hoge as publisher, he was the publisher.  And, it was a very short stay, but we were able to do some pretty important things.  I started for him a thing called the publisher's forum that would take one of the big rooms in the, in the, in the New York Daily News building and invite in the leaders to sit in a kind of a roundtable and debate a very prominent issue.  And, the issue would be of suffi- sufficient public importance that it would be car- carried by the newspapers, with Jim Hogue as the moderator.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, we started the publisher's forum, and we picked schools--the public schools, and we had schools and parents and we had the leaders of parent organizations.  Schools and drugs was another topic, and the one that was very colorful was schools and churches.  And, one of the hardest problems we had in New York City [New York, New York] was how do you pick the forty most prominent religious leaders in that church that cov- as far as the religious institutions were concerned, that covered the entire spectrum, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You had to have your contingent of Catholics, but you also had to have the Armenians and the Greeks and the Tur- .  And they came in their colorful outfits, and it was a very captivating type discussion, but a very engaging discussion because the opportunity was if they could go back and challenge their congregations to get involved in the schools, that would make a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well that--anyhow, we did about four or five of those, but then something else was happening that caught our eye.
Story_ID: 572084
Speaker 1: Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] had made a very f- limited attempt in 1984 to become the Democratic nominee for president, and here we were coming up against 1988.  He had managed to get people's attention by this organization that he called the Rainbow Coalition [National Rainbow Coalition; Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois].  He was really beginning to raise some issues that really raised his voice to be more effective than what it was in 1984.  And he was getting ready to come into the, the New York primary, and I asked Jim Hoge [James F. Hoge, Jr.], I said, "What if we, what if we sponsored a New York Daily News sponsored forum, a debate, in Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], and we'll have the three prominent candidates, okay, Michael Dukakis, okay, Jesse Jackson, and Al Gore."  Okay.  He said, "Okay, see what you can do."  So, the Garden, Madison Square Garden gave us a date that they would be available.  I talked to PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] and WNET [WNET-TV], the New York [New York] public station agreed that they would cover it as far a- and broadcast it over the PBS network.  Jesse Jackson, of course, agreed.  I also then got in touch with Al Gore.  And Al Gore--mm--okay, yes.  Al Gore's a low profile kind of response, but yes, count on him, they would be there.  But the guy that gave us a little bit of trouble was Michael Dukakis.  He wasn't sure--I mean thi- his appointment people, not Dukakis himself.  This comes from the staff.  They weren't sure he would be available--there might be other conflicts, you're begi- so you're beginning to get a delaying action.  And, we didn't break the logjam open on that until a note from the publisher of the New York Daily News, okay, probably the second most influential newspaper in New York, second only to The New York Times--the publisher wrote a note to the Dukakis staff that said, "Fine, we're going to go ahead with the debate in Madison Square Garden, and we'll just put a chair--," (laughter) "on the stage.  It'll have Michael Dukakis' name on it, and it'll be empty, and we're going to have a national broadcast on this."  Well, anyhow, we finally got a--well, not surprisingly, we immediately got a response that said, "Oh, he happens to be available."  We had that debate, and to make a long story short, Jesse Jackson got a number of delegates out of the New York contingent, and of course, while--he went into the Democratic nomination in the middle of the year in 1988, and he had some twelve hundred more--twelve hundred some candidates pledge to vote for him twelve hundred, and he only needed two thousand that would ensure him.  So, we came that close to Jesse--for having a black as a candidate for presidency on the Democratic ticket.
Story_ID: 572085
Speaker 1: Before we leave that, I wanted to set the stage for what it was like, because the Daily News [New York Daily News] had a contingent of black columnists and black writers at that time.  They were setting a very--fairly liberal, progressive tone, I should say, in New York [New York].  Could you just talk about that, just a little?  And a back- still, against that background of the country--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --itself being still in turmoil--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Very much so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) from a number of things, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know we--if you take that period, the late '80s [1980s], and let's just pick 1988 as a point in time.  We, we have been going through about ten years of where the politics, whether it was Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] or whether it was Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]---we're leading into George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], okay.  There was only a short period of time from '76 [1976] to '80 [1980] that we had Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], but that was so brief.  But previous to that, it was a very conservative voice in terms of our national voice in terms of what was coming out of Washington [D.C.] in terms of the White House.  And, as a result, we really were up against this thing--whole notion of reverse discrimination.  Reverse discrimination--
Speaker 1: That was the discussion on the Bakke case [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978]?
Speaker 2: Yes, reverse discrimination and then, of course, when Reagan came into office, he really lit the fire under this notion of reverse racism.  And, that got fueled in a lot of debates on it.  And, so, many of the writers that we had at the Daily News were against that--
Speaker 1: Earl--Earl Caldwell?
Speaker 2: Yes, and a young kid named Bob Herbert, Bob Herbert.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, I got to know Bob, because he was a young guy, you know, and he was writing his articles, and I noticed that there was always a flavor in his articles that would seem to get your attention.  And--
Speaker 1: Was--is it fair to say that at that time, the New York Daily News may have been more progressive than any other newspaper--arguably than any other newspaper--but maybe The New York Times--?
Speaker 2: I would say that's a fair statement.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I would agree to that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it might have been more liberal on local issues, whereas The New York Times, of course, you can't ignore their position in terms of national and international issues, but as far as local issues in New York that would affect the New York area, this was the--the New York Daily News really played an important--.  It was called the truck driver's newspaper, because the vast majority of the news in it always had a photograph.  And having gotten a lot of its growth back in the migration from Europe, Ellis Island [New York, New York], okay, that the first paper that many of the immigrants would read would--they would sign up and they would buy the New York Daily News, because if they could, if they could understand the caption under the photograph, that was enough to--many of them began to develop just their first step of fluency in English by reading the New York Daily News.  And it accepted the fact that its primary role would be, as they called it, will be the truck driver's newspaper.  It was the one thing that all truck drivers and cabdrivers had in the front seat as they were sitting.  They were doing--in many cases, they couldn't speak much English, but that was the beginning of it.
Story_ID: 572086
Speaker 1: Now, your friend, Jim Hoge [James F. Hoge, Jr.], let's see if we can give him some credit on this New York Daily News being--moving toward being very progressive.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was, it be- the paper became a kind of a grooming place for many of the young reporters that were up and coming.  Now, we have to accept the fact that the publisher's role is separate from the editor.  The editor really runs the news portion of the newspaper.  But it's the publisher that runs interference with the stockholders.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, when things are going well, you know, most stockholders--and at that time the New York Daily News was owned by the Tribune [Tribune Company; Tribune Media Company, Chicago, Illinois], which is not regarded at that time was being that much in sync with the liberal tone of the Daily News.  But, it was--Jim Hoge was the interface between a major newspaper in New York [New York], able to perform a very socially conscious position, message, okay, messenger--to an ownership that was not exactly the same--.  Now, the other thing that Jim Hoge had going for him was, he was chairman of the Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize] board.  He was a--I guess you could say he was a blue ribbon type guy, but he also had a very sensitive streak that had to do with social consciousness.  I was, I was able to write some of his speeches, and he was able to go forth into the communities and--when he was asked to speak, and he was able to take positions that not only was a position that the position challenged the audience, but, also it was the messenger carrying that message that was also--would add to the impact--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --of it.
Story_ID: 572087
Speaker 1: How long did you stay there at the New York Daily News?
Speaker 2: I was only there for eighteen months.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was one of the most difficult decisions that I have made.  But, during the last ten, fifteen years, I would get calls every once and a while from a guy named Pendleton James [E. Pendleton James].  Pendleton James ran the White House personnel, office of personnel [Office of Presidential Personnel], he was in charge of that.  And he did that for--
Speaker 1: For Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]?
Speaker 2: Reagan.  And, he did it for the first term, and at the end of four years, he did not--he opted not to stay for the second term.  But during that four year period, he had developed so many contacts that he was able to come out and set up his own executive recruiting agency under his name, Pendleton James Associates, in New York City [New York, New York].  But, in order to fill some of his search assignments for executives, every once in a while he would call me and he'd say, "Lu [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Lucius P. Gregg], I'm looking for somebody in Chicago [Illinois], and--," and he would give me the characteristics.  And I would say, "Oh, well, let me think about it, I'll get back to you."  And I'd call back a day or two later, and I'd say, "You know, I would think you ought to call So and So and So and So, and those are the only two names I can think of."  And so, we went around the track four or five times like that, and it turned out that my can- my re- my persons I recommended, he had a hit rate of--not only were they interested in considering the job, but the corporation was interested in having them.  So, Pendleton James thought I was either very lucky or what have you.  You know, if I played the horses, I think he'd want to go with me and see what I was betting on the horses.  But, I got a call from--I'd only been at the New York Daily News for close to eighteen months--and I get this call from Pendleton James, and he says, "I've got a search assignment I'd like to talk with you about."  And, I said, "Okay, why don't you describe it to me and I'll--if I can think of somebody, I'll get the name to you."  And he said, "No, this is--this is for you."  And I went through the machinations of saying, "Pen, I've only been here for eighteen months, I'm sitting next to a guy I really admire [James F. Hoge, Jr.], I nev- there's no way I could consider."  He said, "Okay, would you at least have lunch--," 'cause this is a company that comes into town once in a while, and, "would you at least have lunch with a representative of the company?"  And so, okay, how can you say no to just having lunch, you know.  You can always turn it down later.
Story_ID: 572088
Speaker 1: So, anyhow, it turned out that a month or two later, pers- the guy from Hughes, the Howard Hughes organization called Hughes Aircraft [Hughes Aircraft Company], the later, recently called Hughes Electronics [Hughes Electronics Corporation], was coming in, and they were looking for a VP to run their corporate communications.  That's a very sensitive position within a corporation because you actually influence what the chairman says, you--the message that goes out to investors, the message that goes out to customers, the message that goes out to the press--and sometimes that alone can be a little bit contentious--and the message that goes out to employees.  And, most CEOs really lean on you to keep that house in order, or at least keep it from getting out of control.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Anyhow, I was visited by a guy named Al Hollingsworth [ph.].  Came to New York [New York], had lunch with me.  He says, "What do we have to do to get you to come to California?"  I said, "I've never, I've never lived in California.  I've had contracts with agencies in California--and oh, by the way, I've only been here for eighteen months at the New York Daily News."  He said, "Well, you know, let's, let's you and I talk.  And then can I just give you a call later on, in a few days and follow up?"  Well, a couple days later, he gave me a call, and he put an offer before me on the phone.  He said, "I'm ready to sign this and put it in writing.  It's a letter to you, and let me tell you what's in it."  And he went step by step by step by step.  Now, Hughes had its own corporate jets.  It was owned by General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], and so therefore, all executives had a chance to drive General Motors cars, and at my level, it was Cadillacs, okay.  The privileges were just--you know given the fact that it came out of the Howard Hughes legacy, even though it was a major innovative technology company, it didn't shrink in terms of benefits on it.  Anyhow, they laid it out to me, I took it home and I thought about it.  And, you know, one other thing they always tell you in this search business is, if you do not have to accept an offer, always turn down your first one, because you don't know--they always have some wiggle room, they can always make some response, and you can see what the response is going to be.  Well, they got my--I told them I wasn't really sure, and as of right now, I could not accept it.  They came back a week later and they put a bonus on it, a signing bonus (laughter).  I had only heard of signing bonuses with athletes.  But, this is the beginning of signing bonuses for executives.  Okay.  And, they put on a signing bonus as part of the package.  If you signed, okay--we will hand you a check on the day you signed off, and they gave me the amount.  Well, anyhow, I said, "Okay, can I get back to you tomorrow or the next day?"  And anyhow, I laid the groundwork for accepting it.  But, they needed me to think about coming out, you know, right away, to run their--to be a vice president for corporate communications.  I accepted that, I accepted that in 1989.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You remember the exact date?
Speaker 1: It was (laughter) you're being technical, are you?  Okay, it was December 31, it was December 31 of 1988, and the reason was, I wanted to be--before moving from New York to Los Angeles [California], I wanted to be covered on their payroll, I wanted to be covered as a--to cover the risks of moving in terms of life insurance and any other--medical--anything that would happen in terms of the move.  So, I asked them to predate, okay by one day, so that's why I was able to say the start date at Hughes was December 31 of 1988, even though I didn't show up here to work until January the 3rd.  But, I knew there was going to be about a three day break between the time I knew I had to sign out of--resign from the New York Daily News, and I wanted to make sure that the day I signed out from the New York Daily News, I'd already signed into--I had that kind of overlap and that kind of protection.  So, anyhow, that's how I know it was December 31 of '88 [1988], and I started the first week of January here at, at Hughes.
Story_ID: 572089
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It turns out that as I look back, Hughes [Hughes Electronics Corporation] represented a whole history of my experiences coming together into one place.  At that time, 80 percent of New York's--well, let me change that.  Hughes had about $5 billion in sales.  This is in the mid-'80s [1980s].  It was under a Howard Hughes foundation, so it played no--it was regarded as a nonprofit organization, taking in $5 billion in sales and paying no taxes (laughter) okay.  And I believe, just using my terminology, the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] said "Time out, time out" because we were up against Lockheed [Lockheed Corporation; Lockheed Martin], TRW [TRW Inc.], McDonnell Douglas, you name it, they were all--Boeing [The Boeing Company], they were all competing with us--Raytheon [Raytheon Company]--they were all competing with us on a head to head basis, okay.  But we ha- they paid taxes, but we didn't have to pay, and as a result, what we would make on a contract okay as--normally, you would say you pay in taxes--Hughes would take that money and fund it back into research, and so as a result, Hughes had this war chest of new technologies in terms of research that, that it was hard for these companies that had to pay taxes in.  So, $5 billion in sales and paying no taxes, okay, on it.  But, anyhow, that was Hughes, that was Hughes, and it was quite a, it was quite a step, but we really got some things going there.
Speaker 2: And, just a highlight or two from your Hughes experience.
Speaker 1: Well, it was one of the more active periods of my life.  Okay.  I was responsible for helping shape the external environment.  I was also here--outside tensions continued to increase.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Hughes--I mean, we won a lot I mean with--you know, as far as General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] owning us, they really left us alone, and let us run the organization.  Every once in a while we'd have to send a message to give them a heads up in Detroit [Michigan] that we were going to take some position, and so forth.  But the Pentagon loved us, and we were really the leader in terms of airborne radar.  We built the nation's air defense system nationwide, including going up into Canada and protecting us--protecting the country from any assault from the Russians coming in over the, over the, over the North Pole.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The missiles, the satellites, even including leading up to a new satellite called DirecTV.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we were really in the forefront in terms of that going on.
Story_ID: 572090
Speaker 1: You had just been hired now by Hughes Aircraft [Hughes Electronics Corporation], and wanted to get into some of your duties that you were facing.  But, I think before we go there, let's go back a little ways, because I think we both skipped over your being appointed to the Corporation for Public Broadcasting board.  Let's talk about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I used the word public broadcasting, but it really divides into two parts, okay.  There was a time when, in the mid-'70s [1970s] when I was really confirmed by the [U.S.] Senate and became a member of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting board, and it was in that capacity that I became vice chairman, I was vice chairman for two years and, not to drop a name, but Sharon Rockefeller [Sharon Percy Rockefeller] replaced me as vice chair (laughter), okay.  And we did some very in- we did some very important things.  We were the first coast to coast broadcasting entity to go satellite, and all the public television and public radio stations all of a sudden became--it was a satellite network as opposed to re- req- relying on cable and the terrestrial environment.  And, that was one of the things.  We actually were able to do the groundwork in terms of laying the groundwork for the beginning of 'MacNeil/Lehrer' ['The MacNeil/Lehrer News Hour'; 'PBS NewsHour'], and 'MacNeil/Lehrer' would become a prominent news source and analyst of news on it.  And, I was chair of the public--the program committee on that board, and we started the beginning of that called 'People and Places '76' [ph.], and it was being--it was a joint venture between the New York [New York] station, WNET [WNET-TV], and WETA [WETA-TV, Washington, D.C.], and that, of course, they moved a year later into 'MacNeil/Lehrer'--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --on it.  The--it was--that's what--I'm just trying to think of a couple other things that we did, but that was the most prominent part of what we did at the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.  In 1980, I could have been--I was called and said, "Would you like to be reappointed?  If so the president needs to submit your name again to Con- to the Senate and have--to be confirmed."  And at the time they were calling--they were really calling--Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was president, and I opted not to be reappointed.  So, I got a call in 1980 from Jay Iselin [John Jay Iselin] who was running WNET that said, "The day you step down from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, I've got a slot for you on the WNET board."  And he immediately brought me in on the board to chair the program committee of WNET.  And of course b- WNET was sort of the blue ribbon--always up against Boston [WGBH-TV, Boston, Massachusetts], but it was a major player, and in terms of primetime television programs, WNET was very proud of the fact that they sort of--they lead the other public television stations.  WETA, of course, was very prominent in terms of the national scene, in ter- particularly with respect to politics, and of course, Boston, in terms of the arts--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and culture. But, by and large, the New York station, WNET, was proud of the fact that they were a major player.  So, I did that for--until 1988, until I came to Hughes--from '80 [1980] to '88 [1988].  So, my period in public--at what I call public television, speaking broadly, was really two parts.  The first part was five years as, on the board of the corporation in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the other segment was eight years as--on the board of WNET.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.
Story_ID: 572091
Speaker 1: Now, you're at Hughes [Hughes Electronics Corporation] and you're learning the ropes and beginning to do work as their corporate communications--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --vice president of corporate, was it?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were some of your duties there, or some of the highlights there, should say?
Speaker 2: All press releases had to be approved by us, okay.  All speeches, major speeches, had to be approved by us.  Messages to investors, messages to customers, advertising--we did the corporate advertising--and then, of course, any messages to employees.  So, when we talk about messages to clients, Hughes has invested technology in systems operating in some thirty-nine nations around the world, and so it has very much of an international position in terms of technology.  On the national level, of course, it was the major producer of electronics for the Pentagon for DOD [U.S. Department of Defense].  And, then coming on down, it was doing a number of things with regard to the state level.  But, by and large, 80 percent of its stuff was military related.  And, of course, having come out of the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] as a background and spent ten years as a--flying for the [U.S.] Air Force--that military dimension as well as the technology starting with MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the satellites at MIT--that all came together--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at Hughes.
Speaker 1: And we're in the '90s [1990s] now.
Speaker 2: In the '90s [1990s].
Story_ID: 572092
Speaker 1: We're still on what I would call a tinderbox with regard to--
Speaker 2: Race rela- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the racial situation, the racial environment.  And, unfortunately, all we needed was something like the Rodney King incident where there were five policemen with billy clubs that--
Speaker 2: And that date, do you remember that?
Speaker 1: April of '92 [1992], April of '92 [1992].  And we all sat and watched TV in the evening--news--because there was a civilian who happened to have a video camera, and he taped the whole thing, and that was all over the news, both locally, nationally, and internationally.  And that was the beginning of it.  It would be--was it three or four days of fires burning, the police in their so called frustration arrested seventeen thousand citizens, fifty fatalities in that period of time, the neighborhoods were really on fire.
Speaker 2: President of the United States [President George Herbert Walker Bush] comes out, the mayor [Tom Bradley], but the Corporate America, especially Corporate America located here in Los Angeles [California], came out to join.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, and you know, we at Hughes [Hughes Electronics Corporation] had reasons not to be overshadowed.  Hughes had sixty thousand employees.  It's viewed as a high-tech workforce--thirty thousand lived and worked right in the Southern California area, primarily in Los Angeles, and this was happening in their home, and in many cases, for many of them, it was their neighborhoods that were burning, and their homes that were burning.  So, we called General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] and within a matter of a day or two, we were holding a press conference and there were fifty vans, fifty new vans coming into town being handed over to the revitalization effort in terms of it--and, you know, courtesy of Hughes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, but the vans actually came from General Motors.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And we became--we pa- we played a very active part of that scene.
Story_ID: 572093
Speaker 1: The other piece of that, though, at Hughes [Hughes Electronics Corporation] was that I was a part of the--what they call the office of the chairman.  The office of the chairman was about eight--six or eight people that met with the chairman once a week.  And, it was the general counsel, it was the head of personnel, it was any of their, the top executives--the ch- head treasurer, the chief financial officer, and so forth.  And I was one of them in there with them.  And I really--it was the capstone of really being a part of the way major decisions are made at the CEO level--and the CEO--I'll call it the inner circle.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we had to evaluate and assess and discuss and have a voice in all of the major decisions that were affecting the company.  Turns out--and we went through--the guy who hired me in was Mal Currie [Malcolm R. Currie] was the--spent a time as the number two guy in the Pentagon, but he was followed by a guy named Mike Armstrong [C. Michael Armstrong].  Mike Armstrong had been at IBM [International Business Machines Corporation]--he was, he ran IBM Europe.  He was the number three guy at IBM and he took the position to come out to Hughes to be CEO.  And, I didn't know at the time that he came from New York out here.  Even though he ran Europe, he ran it from New York City [New York, New York].  I thought he was going to come with his own PR [public relations], his communications guy out of New York.  And he came, and the first day he landed, no one knew he was going to be announced.  We brought him in on the company's corporate jet, helicoptered him into Marina del Rey [California], got him up into an apartment right--not far from here, and I was the first one he was, he wanted to meet.  And I was chauffeured in and I met with him, and what he wanted to know was my plan.  And I'd already had a chance to talk that one through.  Moving ahead, during the next few years, the next three or four years, I was able to write for him and lead the writing of some fifty-five--you ask me, why fifty--fifty-five major speeches that he not only wanted to deliver, but he also wanted to have copies of those speeches.  And I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now what position did he come in as, because we didn't mention that?
Speaker 1: CEO.
Speaker 2: CEO.
Speaker 1: He was CEO.
Speaker 2: Of Hughes, right.
Speaker 1: And he had an understanding with General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] in Detroit [Michigan] that he was going to be given free rein for running Hughes.  Now, this is an institution of sixty thousand employees, and we're not counting the extra thirty thousand that then reported in under what they call Delco Electronics [Delco Electronics Division].  But that, too, was a part of it.  Well--fifty-five speeches.  A number of them, some of them were international, and of course, my job was to meet with him and discuss not only the speaking opportunity, but also what our message was going to be.  And, then we would go away and they would do draft, we'd do draft number one, and then we'd come and meet with him and then we could do draft number two, and so forth.  But I got the very important understanding--I developed an understanding of what influence you can have on the mind and the message of the CEO.  As I mentioned, he was an activist type.  He got international awards and national awards.  He was man of the year by several publications, and so forth.  But, it also gave me that experience of--in communications that was much deeper and more intense than I'd, than I'd had before.
Story_ID: 572094
Speaker 1: In the meantime, the reason this was important, because politically the climate was not working in our favor.  The reverse discrimination and reverse racism--I think we got to a point where--I think at a time--during that time, not I think, I actually know--during the time when the enrollment in colleges and universities increased by an additional 1 million, the enrollment of blacks began to decrease, particularly of black males.  Okay.  One fourth of all the black males were under some form of legal supervision, either probation, in jail, or what have you.  It was a time when, taking the pulse of the public at large, only 15 percent of the whites felt as though the federal government had any responsibility for the quality of life that blacks were experiencing.  Basically, it was a time where there was benign neglect, they were turning their back.  In the meantime, we were trying to keep a diverse workforce coming, recruiting from the colleges and universities, and one of the things that we did at Hughes [Hughes Electronics Corporation] was, we established a partnership with ten of the HBCUs, the historically black colleges and universities.  Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was one, Morgan State [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] was one, South Carolina State [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] was another, so, and that's where we would have our technical people go over and supplement their faculty and bring a level of technology and appreciation for science and a capability to teach science there that in many cases, it would not--their program would not have been accredited on it.
Speaker 2: Were it not for these--
Speaker 1: These additional--
Speaker 2: --Hughes employees coming in and teaching?
Speaker 1: Coming in as adjunct professors.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Let me ask you, did you work at all during those years with Peter Ueberroth, who had a special role here in the city?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Bernard Kinsey?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Well, Peter, because of his long standing, starting at the '84 Olympics [1984 Summer Olympics, Los Angeles, California], and of course, he still has maintained that level of influence--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --within the city.  And, of course, Bernard Kinsey was elected as--to head up the re- the revitalization effort.
Story_ID: 572095
Speaker 1: Well, let's move, move on.  We're in the '90s [1990s], mid-'90s [1990s], and guess toward the closing '90s [1990s] and a tragedy strikes your family, Doris [Gregg's first wife, Doris Jefferson Gregg].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, that happened, not intentionally, but I sort of passed by that ten years before that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: It was 1990.
Speaker 1: Nineteen--
Speaker 2: Ah, I'm sorry, I'm sorry--she should forgive me.  It was the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I was a single guy for about four or five years, okay.  And then I had a chance to meet, you know, meet my--
Speaker 1: And that's where I want to go.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was widowed for--I mean after a twenty year beautiful marriage, I never--I learned to appreciate the importance of having a person, a side--a person really as not only your first mate, but in many cases, your, the person who will sort of keep your eyes, and so forth like that.  She was such a great person, and this is a tribute to my son [Lucius P. Gregg, III], also.  When he came out of high school in his senior year, he had gone--he had raised to such prominence at Evanston Township High School [Evanston, Illinois].  He was very successful academically, and he was nationally ranked as a tennis player, and before Christmas of the senior year when he's going to graduate, six months later in June, he had in his hand, written acceptances of admission to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--all four.  I've kept a copy of those letters to this day, 'cause--so that if he ever feels somehow overwhelmed--just don't let it get to you, because all he has to do is just--he opted for Harvard.  The person who was most important in bringing that about was my wife, Doris.  Okay.  She just made sure that he was properly motivated and involved in all of the positive reinforcing activities during all of his schooling.  In many cases, I was flying off to Washington [D.C.]--I was going here, there, National Academy of Sciences, out to the National Accelerator [National Accelerator Laboratory; Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory] board you know in western Illinois, meeting with the press I mean without--.  I was always home except for a few days a month, couple days a month.  But, this is the importance of having somebody like that.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 572096
Speaker 1: But, after a few years, another light came into your life.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Want to tell us about it?
Speaker 2: Well, there are two different stories, I mean depending upon--you know, people will say, "How did you guys meet?"  You know, and her version is different from my version.  But anyhow--
Speaker 1: We want your vision.
Speaker 2: --the one we agreed, the one we agreed to is, I was with the CEO [C. Michael Armstrong].  He's going to give a speech that we had crafted for him, called the state of the company [Hughes Electronics Corporation], you know, it's the State of Union--okay.  Well, most active CEOs will deliver a speech once a year to their employees the state of the company.  And we were giving a speech down in the Disneyland area [Anaheim, California], and so we had rented the hall it was--all of the top people were going to be there.  And of course, being his speech sidekick, we helicoptered down.  We got in the company helicopter here and went out to Fullerton [Fullerton Municipal Airport, Fullerton, California], landed, got the, it was sort of caravan of vehicles that took us into the hotel, and who should be responsible for all the security, okay, was going to be--(laughter) was soon to be my new wife.
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Her name was Beverly, yes.  She was known as Beverly Carmichael, but she has now taken on the name Beverly Gregg [Beverly Ward Gregg].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  But we dated there for a couple of years, and then we tied the knot.
Speaker 1: Fair to say love at first sight?
Speaker 2: Well, okay, now this is where you get--yes, yes, yes.  In my view, but you know it's one of those things where when you're mature, you never let on obviously to the other person okay as to what your reactions are.  But in some cases, in a guarded way, you don't let on to yourself, and you go into some kind of a little bit denial, and so forth, but yet it turns out that through one thing or another, we ended up talking, and then talking ended up having lunch, and so forth, and so it began to grow from that point on.  But, I suspect, coming back to your point on love at first sight, there had to be an element of that.  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 2: On both sides.
Story_ID: 572097
Speaker 1: And, came a time you retired from Hughes [Hughes Electronics Corporation].
Speaker 2: Yes, I retired in '99 [1999].  I was actually at Hughes for ten years.  That was longer than an- other than the air- military--the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] and the [U.S.] Air Force--I was in the Air Force for ten years, Hughes was ten, and they made it a very--they really laid out the red carpet in terms of the retirement, so.
Speaker 1: And did Beverly [Beverly Ward Gregg] retire at the same time or?
Speaker 2: No, no, she's a little younger than me, so she's still working, she's still working, and so she will retire, she promises me, within a couple of years, and that way we'll get a chance to do more traveling than we're able to do now.
Speaker 1: The two of you enjoy one of the joys of--boating.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  There--well, boating is one, and then we have a passion--I hope you'll give me a chance to speak about our passion--but I've, you know, it may not surprise you, but the imprint of the Naval Academy--I was able to get a certificate to skipper the forty-four foot yawls at the academy.  And there were only about fifteen or twenty guys in each class that were able to--that would get that license, and I was one of them.  And, of course, that immediately made me popular with the rest of my classmates, because then I could get the sailboat, the forty-four footer, and they could bring dates, so it could be half a dozen of them with their dates, and we'd go out cruising.  Well, that made such an indelible imprint on me of being on the water, that during the entire, let's say, fifty years that transpired from that point up to just the last day or two--last year or two, I've had a boat for most of that time.  In fact, I have to keep reminding myself, for thirty-five of the fifty years, I've had a boat, and it's always been a motorboat, and it's--most of that time, it's been--I started with a forty-eight, and then a fifty-seven and now I have a sixty-one footer.
Story_ID: 572098
Speaker 1: Very quickly, because we only have a couple of minutes, but, how would you like to be remembered by your friends and acquaintances and family?
Speaker 2: Well, let me see if I can state it briefly.  My journey has been unexpected, okay.  It has been influenced by a number of people who have spoken well of me and done something favorably that allowed me to take advantage of an opportunity that I would not have been able to take advantage of myself.  And then when I look back--and of course, that has allowed me to be part of a major platform, whether it's in banking or whether it's in the [U.S.] military or in the area of technology.  And, as a result, I've become a role model as a result of that.  Part of that is because I owe it to the people that came in to aid me.  As I look forward, I have the sensitivity that this country is in for a wakeup call.  You know, thinking back, the last forty or fifty years has been coined the American Century.  In the beginning part of the century, we were not a player.  London [England] and Europe were the major decision makers.  And all of a sudden at the end of the century, everything that happens in the world, the first thing they want to know is what does the United States think about it, what does America think about it?  And, we've become very pivotal part of that.  I've either witnessed it or participated in it from the military point of view as far a- or in the technology point of view, in terms of satellites and what have you.  When you look ahead, we're at a point where--the National Academy [National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C.] calls it a gathering storm.  I look upon it as a kind of a sleeping time bomb.  The population, the baby boomers, that really helped fuel the growth and the emergence of power this country, is retiring.  Half of them will retire by the end of the next decade, 30 percent will retire by the end of the next just four or five years, and many of them are technology trained, and then if you look at those who are coming in as their replacement--
Story_ID: 572099
Speaker 1: Well, I've had some, I've had some time to think about this, and what has it all been about, and very clearly, the journey I've been able to travel has been clearly unexpected.  There were doors that were opened that would have never opened before, et cetera.  And in many cases, they were opened because some very important people, or influential people, made decisions that helped me, that I would not have been able to get through those doors by myself.  It turns out that across the whole range of experiences, they've all been--I've had an opportunity to work for major influential voices in their industries, and as a result, I've become a role model.  You know, it was my mother [Rachel Jackson Gregg] that said, "Do not embarrass me, son, do not embarrass me," but that was good enough for the early days, and what came into place after that, were these young kids who would see me in my Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] uniform and would--and then there were those who saw me as a young pilot with my own crew, and then there were those that saw me at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] at a time when there was a lot of soul searching going on, and as blacks began to work their way into opportunities in higher education.  And, then, of course, that went on and on in different places.  And I feel as though I've been very fortunate to have been in that position.  I guess I would call it the vanguard.  I--you know, when you're in a vanguard position--when something happens that you think is important, you really don't know whether it's a passing rain shower, you know, it's here today but it'll be gone tomorrow.  Or whether you're part of a groundwork that's being laid that's going to move--evolve into something that's going to be very meaningful to affect the quality of our life.  So, I've been fortunate in that respect, that there haven't been rain showers, but it's--things have happened that other doors have begun to open more and more, and many of the major players today got some of their initial experiences about the ten years following us.  And, there were a few of us that were there earlier.
Story_ID: 572100
Speaker 1: What troubles me is, as I think about it, and this will lead to something that I, that my wife [Beverly Ward Gregg] and I are doing, is that we as a nation have become very dominant in terms of the world.  Now, we agonize about whether we're leveraging our power in the right way, but nevertheless, the power is there.  It's the power of technology, it's the power of the military, it's the power of finance, it's the power of communications, and so forth.  And but we--America has had its century.  Historians will tell you that most nations only have one century, and the question in our mind is whether the last century has been the American Century.  Clearly, there is a consensus that it was America's rise to power was the last century.  But, you know, the Greeks had their century, the Romans had their century--Europe, in 1900 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm going to pull you back to that legacy question.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Yes.
Speaker 2: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 1: My legacy would be to play a lead role, to have some influence on the way the young people take an interest in science and technology.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we had that initial rise, but it's been an adverse--adversarial environment since that time.  Now, we've been able to hold it in terms of the interest of young people coming into science and technology--we've been able to hold it at a certain--at the level at which we were able to achieve, but it hasn't been easy.
Speaker 2: Right.  And you and your--go ahead (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, what has happened is that pool size has not increased.
Story_ID: 572101
Speaker 1: You and your wife, Beverly [Beverly Ward Gregg]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --have done something about this.
Speaker 2: Yes.  You know, when you retire, you have to think how you're going to spend your time.  And, she and I have agreed to create a foundation, funded as much as we can with our own money, and use that foundation to really begin to publicize America's rise in terms of this technology leadership.  Now, there's a little bit of a motive there, ulterior motive, because everyone recognizes that the patent system and the Wall Street and private capital--and we go through that whole list of the colleges and universities--but what it gets back to is the attitude and the image that young people have about science and technology.  And what's happened is that there's a very declining interest in appreciating the importance of not only the value of technology, but the excitement and benefits of being a part of it.  When you innovate, when you create an invention or you create, okay--the sense of appreciation is something that is very hard to explain, but it's there and, of course, other benefits will come from that point on.  And, so, what's happening is that the young people--our job is to--what we did--we've done over the last four or five years is to encourage mentors, role models, to get before young people and talk about the excitement of science and technology.  And, you know, interestingly enough, the students in high schools resonate to that.
Speaker 1: You were going to explain about what you and your wife--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, what we did was, we created an organization, and we made it broad because we didn't know exactly what direction we would take, even though we--there were a lot of indications and we knew what the heart of the problem was, and we created a foundation called, the Foundation for the Study of America's Technology Leadership [Marina del Rey, California].  And, initially, the first couple years we looked at--well, was it the educational system, was it the patents, was it the financials, was it the banking world, was it the--was it our research institutions, et cetera.  And it turns out, and no matter how you look at it, the issue is a human capital issue and the crux of that is the interest of young people to come into technology and into science and the--keeping that pipeline open.
Story_ID: 572102
Speaker 1: So, this foundation that you and your wife [Beverly Ward Gregg] have--?
Speaker 2: And so we--one of the things that we've done is we founded an organization in cooperation with the [U.S.] Department of Commerce in Washington [D.C.], where we have undertaken a thing we call the Student Technology Roundtable, and we've done it three times so far.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, that's where we have two or three very prominent, one time four or five prominent senior inventors and scientists who had recently received the White House Medal of Technology [National Medal of Technology; National Medal of Technology and Innovation] agree to come and be a part of our roundtable.  And by the same token, we had a num- the same handful of young people who were still just in high school, who had just won some national competition, whether it was the Intel science competition [Intel Science Talent Search; Regeneron Science Talent Search], or previously known as the Westinghouse science fair [Westinghouse Science Talent Search], the discovery--science for young people--I mean for junior high school people, or it was--whether it was the Internet, science.  And so, we'd have five of the seniors and five of the young people on there to talk about the excitement of whatever the project was that they received their award.  And to some people's surprise, but later, not to our surprise, we had three hundred kids from the Washington area, half of them from high schools in D.C., and the other half split between Virginia and Maryland, coming in.  And, they'd all come into the Carnegie Institution auditorium [Carnegie Institution for Science, Washington, D.C.], and Carnegie wanted this to happen, and made their auditorium available for free.  And, there would be at least a two to three hour discussion.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there an address that someone wanted to get more information, they could write to, or--
Speaker 2: Well, right now, we're a little bit on hold because we need the government's role in this, and candidly, because of the international situation, there's been a little bit of a pullback in terms of the funding available for them to play their role.  And what I mean by their role is they only had to come up with maybe a fourth or a third of the money.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But when that disappeared, we weren't able to step in and cover their part, and so we only kept it going--we had to stop and put a pause.  Where our hope is that the new administration--
Speaker 1: Will do something.
Speaker 2: There's a new climate.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: There's a new climate for young kids, and really taking this No Child Left Behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001], and taking it seriously.
Story_ID: 572103
Speaker 1: On my right is my son [Lucius P. Gregg, III].  He's wearing an MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] jersey, but he really is a graduate of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And, on the left, on the other end is Beverly's daughter, her name is Essence Carmichael.  And, the middle one is Lucius Perry Gregg, IV [Lucius P. Gregg, IV].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you tell us about this one?
Speaker 1: This is our second Student Technology Roundtable that is underwritten by the foundation that Beverly [Beverly Ward Gregg] and I have created, the Foundation for the Study of America's Technology Leadership [Marina del Rey, California].  And, we have there the senior inventors who had just received their awards from the White House, the National Medal of Technology [National Medal of Technology and Innovation].  And then we have the young high school kids who had won the Intel science competitions [Intel Science Talent Search; Regeneron Science Talent Search].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is our--a series of citations that I've been fortunate to receive from Who's Who [Marquis Who's Who].  The one on the left is 'Who's Who in Science and Engineering,' and the one on the right is 'Who's Who in Finance and Business.'  The one in science and engineering came about from the work I've done in technology and also Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].  And the one on the right is from my activities in banking, both Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] and First National Bank of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  These are the other two awards I received from Who's Who, and the one on the left is 'Who's Who in America.'  The thing that's unique about that is that I received the first listing there when I was only thirty-three years old and have remained a part of that every year since that time.  And, the one on the right is 'Who's Who in the World.'
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, all right.  Ready.
Speaker 1: This is an announcement of an event that's put on by the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC], and it really cites the members of the board of directors, and it's an event that Negro Ensemble Company is putting on, which is the twentieth birthday celebration.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Tell us about this.
Speaker 1: This is Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], the officer group.  When I was there, we had a major ROTC program [Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and these are the leading guys of that group.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And where are you?
Speaker 1: I'm the number two guy right in the middle there, in the second row, right there.  Yeah.  And the next year, I became--I moved up to the commander spot there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is just an indication of the group of guys in my class at the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland].  As you can see, I was in the top row.  I'm four people in from the left side.  But, as far as the class is concerned, I was one of a thousand.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is Donald E. Martin [Donald Martin], who came to the Naval Academy from Montgomery, Alabama, and if you can imagine in 1951, 1952, he asked to be my roommate at the Naval Academy, and it was a courtesy that the blacks who had gone before me did not have.  One or two had to live by--had to room by themselves.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, ready.
Speaker 2: This is the Chicago train station [Chicago Union Station, Chicago, Illinois].  I had been admitted to our--invited to take the entrance exam to enter the Naval Academy, and I'm in my [U.S.] military--I'm in my [U.S.] Marine Corps uniform.  And, when I had to change trains from San Diego [California] to Newport, Rhode Island and change trains in Chicago [Illinois], they greeted me when I came off the trains with cross swords, you know, in a ceremonial sense.  And the woman who's giving me a kiss is my mom [Rachel Jackson Gregg].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is the graduation photo from the Naval Academy.  The difference--the one thing that's important here is that--and they show the board--it has a star which would indicate that I was graduating as an honor student with distinction.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Where is the star, oh, on your epaulet?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready.
Speaker 2: This is--I was in pilot training, in the [U.S.] Air Force.  I had graduated from the Naval Academy, and I was there with our four students in our little group with our training instructor.  The photos were taken at Vance Air Force Base in Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, I'm ready.
Speaker 2: This is an honor I received at--in Chicago.  I was a part of the staff at Northwestern University, and the reason for the dog is because the guy in the middle is a blind judge in Chicago [Burton A. Kolman], and he had received the award for being a part of the court system, for being a judge.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is one of my activities related--when I was at First National Bank of Chicago.  I had the opportunity to assist several universities, and one of them I chose was Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] where I was on the board of trustees.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Ready.
Speaker 2: This is the opening website of the foundation that Beverly and I created and funded, called the Foundation for the Study of America's Technology Leadership.  It's on hold right now, but it's--we expect to reactivate it very quickly.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next, okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This was when I was at the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, and I'm talking to Jay Iselin [John Jay Iselin], who was the president of the New York [New York] public television station, WNET [WNET-TV].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is the only picture I have of my dad [Lucius P. Gregg, Sr.].  I apologize for the quality, but he's the one that got us started, and, but he was--he went back to Darlington, South Carolina and my mother stayed in Chicago.  He went back to Darlington to continue his ministry.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, this is the lady of my life, my mother.  And she got me started and I would say this picture was taken around--she had passed her teens, so it must have been 1920, 1925.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Ready.
Speaker 2: This is one of the rare photos that only my sister keeps that she's proud of.  This is my sister on the left, Dorothy [Dorothy Gregg Tarr], the older one, and my younger sister on the right, Rose [Rose Gregg Cooper].  And, the reason I say that is because it shows me in white pants (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is my graduation photo at the Naval Academy.  I'd just received my diploma and my commission in the Air Force as a lieutenant.  My mother came out from Chicago and my two sisters, Rose being the younger one on the left, and Dorothy being the older one on the right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready.
Speaker 2: This is my mom and the three of us as kids, Dorothy, Rose and with me in the middle.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is the love of my life, Beverly.  We--I was just sort of recovering at that--no--that's--.  This is the love of my life, Beverly.  And we've been married since the early 1990s.
